Cell Biology Protocols

Cell Biology Protocols. Edited by J. Robin Harris, John Graham, David Rickwood
 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-84758-1

Cell Biology Protocols
Editors
J. Robin Harris
Institute of Zoology,
Johannes Gutenberg-Universität, Mainz, Germany

John Graham
JG Research Consultancy, Upton, Wirral, UK

David Rickwood
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Essex, Colchester, UK

Copyright  2006

John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester,
West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England
Telephone (+44) 1243 779777

Email (for orders and customer service enquiries): cs-books@wiley.co.uk
Visit our Home Page on www.wiley.com
All Rights Reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except under
the terms of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of a licence issued by the Copyright
Licensing Agency Ltd, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP, UK, without the permission in writing of
the Publisher. Requests to the Publisher should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons
Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex PO19 8SQ, England, or emailed to
permreq@wiley.co.uk, or faxed to (+44) 1243 770620.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names
and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their
respective owners. The Publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter
covered. It is sold on the understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If
professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be
sought.
Other Wiley Editorial Offices
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, USA
Jossey-Bass, 989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741, USA
Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH, Boschstr. 12, D-69469 Weinheim, Germany
John Wiley & Sons Australia Ltd, 42 McDougall Street, Milton, Queensland 4064, Australia
John Wiley & Sons (Asia) Pte Ltd, 2 Clementi Loop #02-01, Jin Xing Distripark, Singapore 129809
John Wiley & Sons Canada Ltd, 22 Worcester Road, Etobicoke, Ontario, Canada M9W 1L1
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears
in print may not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Cell biology protocols / editors, J. Robin Harris, John Graham, David Rickwood.
p. cm.
ISBN-13: 978-0-470-84758-1
ISBN-10: 0-470-84758-1
1. Cytology – Laboratory manuals. I. Harris, James R. II. Graham, J. M. (John M.),
1943- III. Rickwood, D. (David)
QH583.2.C47 2005
571.6078 – dc22
2005029713
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN-13: 978-0-470-84758-1
ISBN-10: 0-470-84758-1
Typeset in 10.5/12.5pt Times by Laserwords Private Limited, Chennai, India
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Antony Rowe Ltd, Chippenham, Wiltshire
This book is printed on acid-free paper responsibly manufactured from sustainable forestry
in which at least two trees are planted for each one used for paper production.

Contents
Preface
List of Contributors
1 Basic Light Microscopy
Minnie O’Farrell
Introduction
Key components of the compound microscope
Techniques of microscopy
Protocols
1.1 Setting up the microscope for bright field microscopy
1.2 Setting Köhler illumination
1.3 Focusing procedure
1.4 Setting up the microscope for phase contrast microscopy
1.5 Setting up the microscope for epifluorescence
1.6 Poly-L-lysine coating
References

2 Basic Electron Microscopy
J. Robin Harris
Introduction
EM methods available
Protocols
2.1 Preparation of carbon-formvar, continuous carbon and holey carbon support films
2.2 The ‘droplet’ negative staining procedure (using continuous carbon, formvar–carbon
and holey carbon support films)
2.3 Immunonegative staining
2.4 The negative staining-carbon film technique: cell and organelle cleavage
2.5 Preparation of unstained and negatively stained vitrified specimens
2.6 Metal shadowing of biological specimens
2.7 A routine schedule for tissue processing and resin embedding
2.8 Agarose encapsulation for cell and organelle suspensions
2.9 Routine staining of thin sections for electron microscopy
2.10 Post-embedding indirect immunolabelling of thin sections
2.11 Imaging the nuclear matrix and cytoskeleton by embedment-free electron microscopy
Jeffrey A. Nickerson and Jean Underwood
References

xi
xiii
1
1
2
6
7
8
9
11
14
18
19

21
21
22
25
27
29
31
33
35
37
39
40
42
44
50

vi

3

CONTENTS

Cell Culture
Anne Wilson and John Graham

51

Cells: isolation and analysis
Anne Wilson
Mechanical disaggregation of tissue

51

Protocols
3.1 Tissue disaggregation by mechanical mincing or chopping
3.2 Tissue disaggregation by warm trypsinization
3.3 Cold trypsinization
3.4 Disaggregation using collagenase or dispase
Anne Wilson
3.5 Recovery of cells from effusions
Anne Wilson
3.6 Removal of red blood cells by snap lysis
3.7 Removal of red blood cells and dead cells using isopycnic centrifugation
Anne Wilson
3.8 Quantitation of cell counts and viability
Anne Wilson
3.9 Recovery of cells from monolayer cultures
Anne Wilson
3.10 Freezing cells
3.11 Thawing cells
John Graham
3.12 Purification of human PBMCs on a density barrier
3.13 Purification of human PBMCs using a mixer technique
3.14 Purification of human PBMCs using a barrier flotation technique
References

4

Isolation and Functional Analysis of Organelles
John Graham
Introduction
Homogenization
Differential centrifugation
Density gradient centrifugation
Nuclei and nuclear components
Mitochondria
Lysosomes
Peroxisomes
Rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
Golgi membranes
Plasma membrane
Chloroplasts
Protocols
4.1 Isolation of nuclei from mammalian liver in an iodixanol gradient (with notes on
cultured cells)
4.2 Isolation of metaphase chromosomes

52
54
56
58
60
63
64
65
67
71
74
76
80
82
83
84

87
88
88
90
91
92
93
94
94
95
96
96
97

98
100

CONTENTS

4.3 Isolation of the nuclear envelope
4.4 Nuclear pore complex isolation
J. Robin Harris
4.5 Preparation of nuclear matrix
4.6 Preparation of nucleoli
4.7 Isolation of a heavy mitochondrial fraction from rat liver by differential
centrifugation
4.8 Preparation of a light mitochondrial fraction from tissues and cultured cells
4.9 Purification of yeast mitochondria in a discontinuous Nycodenz gradient
4.10 Purification of mitochondria from mammalian liver or cultured cells in a
median-loaded discontinuous Nycodenz gradient
4.11 Succinate–INT reductase assay
4.12 Isolation of lysosomes in a discontinuous Nycodenz gradient
4.13 β-Galactosidase (spectrophotometric assay)
4.14 β-Galactosidase (fluorometric assay)
4.15 Isolation of mammalian peroxisomes in an iodixanol gradient
4.16 Catalase assay
4.17 Analysis of major organelles in a preformed iodixanol gradient
4.18 Separation of smooth and rough ER in preformed sucrose gradients
4.19 Separation of smooth and rough ER in a self-generated iodixanol gradient
4.20 NADPH-cytochrome c reductase assay
4.21 Glucose-6-phosphatase assay
4.22 RNA analysis
4.23 Isolation of Golgi membranes from liver
4.24 Assay of UDP-galactose galactosyl transferase
4.25 Purification of human erythrocyte ‘ghosts’
4.26 Isolation of plasma membrane sheets from rat liver
4.27 Assay for 5 -nucleotidase
4.28 Assay for alkaline phosphodiesterase
4.29 Assay for ouabain-sensitive Na+ /K+ -ATPase
4.30 Isolation of chloroplasts from green leaves or pea seedlings
4.31 Measurement of chloroplast chlorophyll
4.32 Assessment of chloroplast integrity

5 Fractionation of Subcellular Membranes in Studies on Membrane
Trafficking and Cell Signalling
John Graham
Introduction
Methods available
Plasma membrane domains
Analysis of membrane compartments in the endoplasmic reticulum–Golgi–plasma
membrane pathway
Separation of membrane vesicles from cytosolic proteins
Endocytosis
Protocols
5.1 Separation of basolateral and bile canalicular plasma membrane domains from
mammalian liver in sucrose gradients

vii
102
104
106
107
108
110
112
114
116
117
119
120
121
123
124
127
129
131
132
133
134
136
137
139
141
143
144
145
147
148

153
154
154
155
156
157
158

160

viii

CONTENTS

5.2
5.3

Isolation of rat liver sinusoidal domain using antibody-bound beads
Fractionation of apical and basolateral domains from Caco-2 cells in a sucrose
gradient
5.4 Fractionation of apical and basolateral domains from MDCK cells in an iodixanol
gradient
5.5 Isolation of lipid rafts
5.6 Isolation of caveolae
5.7 Analysis of Golgi and ER subfractions from cultured cells using discontinuous
sucrose–D2 O density gradients
5.8 Analysis of Golgi, ER, ERGIC and other membrane compartments from cultured cells
using continuous iodixanol density gradients
5.9 Analysis of Golgi, ER, TGN and other membrane compartments in sedimentation
velocity iodixanol density gradients (continuous or discontinuous)
5.10 SDS–PAGE of membrane proteins
5.11 Semi-dry blotting
5.12 Detection of blotted proteins by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL)
5.13 Separation of membranes and cytosolic fractions from (a) mammalian cells and (b)
bacteria
5.14 Analysis of early and recycling endosomes in preformed iodixanol gradients;
endocytosis of transferrin in transfected MDCK cells
5.15 Analysis of clathrin-coated vesicle processing in self-generated iodixanol gradients;
endocytosis of asialoglycoprotein by rat liver
5.16 Polysucrose–Nycodenz gradients for the analysis of dense endosome–lysosome
events in mammalian liver
References

6

In Vitro Techniques
Edited by J. Robin Harris
Introduction
Protocols
Nuclear components
6.1 Nucleosome assembly coupled to DNA repair synthesis using a human cell free system
Geneviève Almouzni and Doris Kirschner
6.2 Single labelling of nascent DNA with halogenated thymidine analogues
Daniela Dimitrova
6.3 Double labelling of DNA with different halogenated thymidine analogues
6.4 Simultaneous immunostaining of proteins and halogen-dU-substituted DNA
6.5 Uncovering the nuclear matrix in cultured cells
Jeffrey A. Nickerson, Jean Underwood and Stefan Wagner
6.6 Nuclear matrix–lamin interactions: in vitro blot overlay assay
Barbara Korbei and Roland Foisner
6.7 Nuclear matrix–lamin interactions: in vitro nuclear reassembly assay
6.8 Preparation of Xenopus laevis egg extracts and immunodepletion
Tobias C. Walther
6.9 Nuclear assembly in vitro and immunofluorescence
Martin Hetzer
6.10 Nucleocytoplasmic transport measurements using isolated Xenopus oocyte nuclei
Reiner Peters
6.11 Transport measurements in microarrays of nuclear envelope patches by optical single
transporter recording
Reiner Peters

162
163
165
167
170
172
174
177
180
182
183
185
188
191
194
196

201
203

204
210
214
217
220
228
230
234
237
240

244

CONTENTS

Cells and membrane systems
6.12 Cell permeabilization with Streptolysin O
Ivan Walev
6.13 Nanocapsules: a new vehicle for intracellular delivery of drugs
Anton I. P. M. de Kroon, Rutger W. H. M. Staffhorst, Ben de Kruijff and Koert N. J.
Burger
6.14 A rapid screen for determination of the protective role of antioxidant proteins in
yeast
Luis Eduardo Soares Netto
6.15 In vitro assessment of neuronal apoptosis
Eric Bertrand
6.16 The mitochondrial permeability transition: PT and m loss determined in cells or
isolated mitochondria with confocal laser imaging
Judie B. Alimonti and Arnold H. Greenberg
6.17 The mitochondrial permeability transition: measuring PT and m loss in isolated
mitochondria with Rh123 in a fluorometer
Judie B. Alimonti and Arnold H. Greenberg
6.18 The mitochondrial permeability transition: measuring PT and m loss in cells and
isolated mitochondria on the FACS
Judie B. Alimonti and Arnold H. Greenberg
6.19 Measuring cytochrome c release in isolated mitochondria by Western blot analysis
Judie B. Alimonti and Arnold H. Greenberg
6.20 Protein import into isolated mitochondria
Judie B. Alimonti and Arnold H. Greenberg
6.21 Formation of ternary SNARE complexes in vitro
Jinnan Xiao, Anuradha Pradhan and Yuechueng Liu
6.22 In vitro reconstitution of liver endoplasmic reticulum
Jacques Paiement and Robin Young
6.23 Asymmetric incorporation of glycolipids into membranes and detection of lipid
flip-flop movement
Félix M. Goñi, Ana-Victoria Villar, F.-Xabier Contreras and Alicia Alonso
6.24 Purification of clathrin-coated vesicles from rat brains
Brian J. Peter and Ian G. Mills
6.25 Reconstitution of endocytic intermediates on a lipid monolayer
Brian J. Peter and Matthew K. Higgins
6.26 Golgi membrane tubule formation
William J. Brown, K. Chambers and A. Doody
6.27 Tight junction assembly
C. Yan Cheng and Dolores D. Mruk
6.28 Reconstitution of the major light-harvesting chlorophyll a/b complex into liposomes
Chunhong Yang, Helmut Kirchhoff, Winfried Haase, Stephanie Boggasch and Harald
Paulsen
6.29 Reconstitution of photosystem 2 into liposomes
Julie Benesova, Sven-T. Liffers and Matthias Rögner
6.30 Golgi–vimentin interaction in vitro and in vivo
Ya-sheng Gao and Elizabeth Sztul
Cytoskeletal and fibrillar systems
6.31 Microtubule peroxisome interaction
Meinolf Thiemann and H. Dariush Fahimi
6.32 Detection of cytomatrix proteins by immunogold embedment-free electron
microscopy
Robert Gniadecki and Barbara Gajkowska

ix

248
250

255
259

265

268

270
271
272
274
277

280
286
288
293
296
300

305
307

313

317

x

CONTENTS

6.33 Tubulin assembly induced by taxol and other microtubule assembly promoters
Susan L. Bane
6.34 Vimentin production, purification, assembly and study by EPR
John F. Hess, John C. Voss and Paul G. FitzGerald
6.35 Neurofilament assembly
Shin-ichi Hisanaga and Takahiro Sasaki
6.36 α-Synuclein fibril formation induced by tubulin
Kenji Uéda and Shin-ichi Hisanaga
6.37 Amyloid-β fibril formation in vitro
J. Robin Harris
6.38 Soluble Aβ1 – 42 peptide induces tau hyperphosphorylation in vitro
Terrence Town and Jun Tan
6.39 Anti-sense peptides
Nathaniel G. N. Milton
6.40 Interactions between amyloid-β and enzymes
Nathaniel G. N. Milton
6.41 Amyloid-β phosphorylation
Nathaniel G. N. Milton
6.42 Smitin–myosin II coassembly arrays in vitro
Richard Chi and Thomas C. S. Keller III
6.43 Assembly/disassembly of myosin filaments in the presence of EF-hand
calcium-binding protein S100A4 in vitro
Marina Kriajevska, Igor Bronstein and Eugene Lukanidin
6.44 Collagen fibril assembly in vitro
David F. Holmes and Karl E. Kadler

7

Selected Reference Data for Cell and Molecular Biology
David Rickwood
Chemical safety information
Centrifugation data
Radioisotope data

Index

326
331
337
342
345
348
353
359
364
369

372
375

379
379
386
388

391

Preface
Cell biology is a rapidly expanding discipline that is dependent upon continual technical
development. We have attempted to compile an exciting and broadly useful cell biology
techniques book, containing tried-and-tested procedures as well as newly established
ones. Thus, this book contains an extensive series of routine and up-to-date protocols of value for those studying diverse aspects of present-day cell biology. The book
commences with the presentation of several essential light microscopical procedures and
leads on to the basic procedures required for producing a range of different cellular, subcellular and macromolecular specimens for transmission electron microscopical study.
Then follows a chapter dealing with cell culture and cell separation procedures that are
widely used to provide starting material for cellular research. The numerous techniques
needed to study subcellular organelles and isolated cellular membranes are presented
in the next two chapters, thereby providing the main thrust of the book. A series of
44 more specialist techniques used for in vitro studies and reassembly approaches in
cell biology appear in the next chapter, each contributed by authors knowledgeable and
experienced in their field of study. Finally, a reference chapter contains useful information on chemical hazard/safety aspects, centrifugation and radioisotopes. The book has
a strong practical content and is directed to those at all levels who perform research in
cell biology.
J. Robin Harris
John Graham
David Rickwood
June, 2005

List of Contributors
Judie B. Alimonti
Special Pathogens Program, National
Microbiology Laboratory, H2380, 1015
Arlington Ave. Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada, R3E 3R2

Koert N.J. Burger
Department of Biochemical Physiology,
Institute of Biomembranes, Room W210,
Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The
Netherlands

Geneviéve Almouzni
Institut Curie, CNRS, UMR 218, Section
Recherche, 26 rue Ulm, F-75248 Paris 05,
France

K. Chambers
Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell
Biology Sections, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA

Alicia Alonso
Universidad del Pais Vasco, EHU,
CSIC, Unidad Biofis, Aptdo 644,
E-48080, Spain

C. Yan Cheng
Population Council, Center of Biomedical
Research, 1230 York Avenue, New York
NY 10021, USA

Susan L. Bane
Department of Chemistry, SUNY,
Binghamton, NY 13902-6016, USA
Julie Benesova
Lehrstuhl für Biochemie der Pflanzen,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, D-447780
Bochum, Germany
Eric Bertrand
Novartis Pharma AG, CH-4002,
Switzerland
Stephanie Boggasch
Institut für Allgemeine Botanik des
Johannes-Gutenberg-Universität,
Müllerweg 6, D-55099 Mainz, Germany
Igor Bronstein
BBSRC Institute for Animal Health, High
Street, Crompton RG20 7NN, UK
William J. Brown
Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell
Biology Sections, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA

Richard Chi
Department of Biological Science, Florida
State University, Tallahassee, FL
32306-4370, USA
Anton I.P.M. de Kroon
Department Biochemistry of Membranes,
Centre for Biomembranes and Lipid
Enzymology, Institute of Biomembranes,
Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The
Netherlands
Ben de Kruijff
Department Biochemistry of Membranes,
Centre for Biomembranes and Lipid
Enzymology, Institute of Biomembranes,
Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The
Netherlands
Daniela S. Dimitrova
Center for Single Molecule Biophysics
and Department of Microbiology, 304
Sherman Hall, SUNY at Buffalo, Buffalo,
NY 14214, USA

xiv

LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

A. Doody
Biochemistry, Molecular and Cell
Biology Sections, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
H. Dariush Fahimi
Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
University of Heidelberg, INF 307,
Neuenheimer Feld 307, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany
Paul G. Fitzgerald
Department of Cell Biology and Human
Anatomy, School of Medicine, 1 Shields
Avenue, Davis, CA 95616-8643, USA
Roland Foisner
Department of Molecular Cell Biology,
Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Vienna
Biocenter, University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr
Gasse 9/3, A-1030 Vienna, Austria
Barbara Gajkowska
The Laboratory of Cell Ultrastructure,
Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw,
Poland
Ya-sheng Gao
Department of Pathology, Duke
University Medical Center, Box No.
3020, Rm 225, Jones Bldg, Durham, NC
27, USA
Robert Gniadecki
University of Copenhagen, Bispebjerg
Hospital, Department of Dermatology
D92, Bispebjerg Bakke 23, DK-2400
Copenhagen NV, Denmark
Félix M. Goñi
Universidad del Paı́s Vasco, EHU, CSIC,
Unidad Biofis, Aptdo 644, E-48080, Spain
John Graham
JG Research Consultancy, 34 Meadway,
Upton Wirral CH49 6IQ, UK
Arnold H. Greenberg†
University of Manitoba, Department of
Medical Microbiology, 539-730 William
Avenue, Winnipeg, MB, R3E OV9,
Canada
†deceased

J. Robin Harris
Institute of Zoology, University of Mainz,
D-55099 Mainz, Germany
John F. Hess
Department of Cell Biology and Human
Anatomy, School of Medicine, 1 Shields
Avenue, Davis, CA 95616-8643, USA
Martin Hetzer
Molecular and Cell Biology Laboratory,
The Salk Institute for Biological Studies,
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla,
CA 92037, USA
Matthew K. Higgins
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology,
Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK
Shin-ichi Hisanaga
Department of Biology, Tokyo
Metropolitan University, Graduate School
of Science, Hachioji, Tokyo 1920397,
Japan
David F. Holmes
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Matrix
Research, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Manchester, Stopford
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester MI3
9PT, UK
Karl E. Kadler
Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Matrix
Research, School of Biological Sciences,
University of Manchester, Stopford
Building, Oxford Road, Manchester MI3
9PT, UK
Thomas C.S. Keller
Department of Biological Sciences,
Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
32306-4370, USA
Helmut Kirchhoff
Institut für Botanik, Westfälische
Wilhelms-Universität Münster,
Schlossplatz 2, D-48149 Münster,
Germany
Doris Kirschner
Institut Carie, 26 rue d’Ulm, 75248 Paris
Cedex 05, France

LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

Barbara Korbei
Department of Molecular Cell Biology,
Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Vienna
Biocenter, University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr
Gasse 9/3, A-1030 Vienna, Austria
Marina Kriajevska
University of Leicester, Clinical Sciences
Unit, Leicester General Hospital,
Gwendolen Road, Leicester LE5
4PW, UK

xv

Jeffrey A. Nickerson
Department of Cell Biology, School of
Medicine, University of Massachusetts,
55 Lake Avenue N., Worcester, MA
01655, USA
Minnie O’Farrell
Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Essex, Wivenhoe Park,
Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK

Sven-T. Liffers
Lehrstuhl für Biochemie der Pflanzen,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, D-447780
Bochum, Germany

Jacques Paiement
Département de Pathologie et Biologie
Cellulaire, Université de Montréal N-813,
Pavilion Principal, 2900
Edouard-Montpetit, Montréal, Québec
H3T 1J4, Canada

Yuechueng Liu
Department of Pathology, University of
Oklahoma Health Services Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA

Harald Paulsen
Institut für Allgemeine Botanik der
Johannes-Gutenberg-Universität,
Müllerweg 6, D-55099 Mainz, Germany

Eugene Lukanidin
Danish Center Society, Institute of Cancer
Biology, Department of Molecular Cancer
Biology, Strandblvd 49, 4-3, DK-2100
Copenhagen, Denmark

Brian J. Peter
McMahon Laboratory, Neurobiology
Division, MRC-LMB, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK

Ian G. Mills
Dept. of Neurobiology, MRC Laboratory
of Molecular Biology, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK
Nathaniel G.N. Milton
Department of Molecular Pathology &
Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Free
Hospital Campus, Rowland Hill Street,
London NW3 2PF, UK
Dolores D. Mruk
Population Council, Center of Biomedical
Research, 1230 York Avenue, New York,
NY10021, USA
Luis Eduardo Soares Netto
Departamento de Biologia, Instituto de
Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo,
Rua do Matão, 277; Sala 327, Cidade
Universitária, CEP 05508-900, São
Paulo-SP, Brazil

Reiner Peters
Institut für Medizinische Physik und
Biophysik, Universität Münster,
Robert-Koch-Straße 31, D-48149
Münster, Germany
Anuradha Pradhan
Department of Pathology, University of
Oklahoma Health Services Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA
David Rickwood
Department of Biological Sciences,
University of Essex, Colchester, UK
Matthias Rögner
Lehrstuhl für Biochemie der Pflanzen,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, D-447780
Bochum, Germany
T. Sasaki
Department of Biology, Tokyo
Metropolitan University, Graduate School
of Science, Hachioji, Tokyo 1920364,
Japan

xvi

LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS

Rutger W.H.M. Staffhorst
Department Biochemistry of Membranes,
Centre for Biomembranes and Lipid
Enzymology, Institute of Biomembranes,
Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The
Netherlands
Elizabeth Sztul
Department of Cell Biology, University
of Alabama, McCullum Bldg, Rm 668,
1530 S. 3rd Avenue, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA
Jun Tan
The Roskamp Institute, University of
South Florida, 3515 E. Fletcher Avenue,
Tampa, FL 33613, USA
Meinolf Thiemann
Graffinity Pharmaceuticals AG, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 518-519, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany
Terrence Town
Yale University School of Medicine and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, 310
Cedar St., PO Box 208011, New Haven,
CT 06520-8011, USA
Kenji Uéda
Department of Biology, Tokyo
Metropolitan University, Graduate School
of Science, Hachioji, Tokyo 1920364,
Japan
Jean Underwood
Department of Cell Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake
Avenue, Worcester, MA 01655, USA
Ana-Victoria Villar
Universidad del Paı́s Vasco, EHU, CSIC,
Unidad Biofis, Aptdo 644, E-48080, Spain

John C. Voss
Department of Biological Chemistry,
School of Medicine, 1 Shields Avenue,
Davis, CA 95616-8643, USA
Stefan Wagner
Department of Cell Biology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake
Avenue, Worcester, MA 01655, USA
Ivan Walev
Institute for Medical Microbiology and
Hygiene, University of Mainz, Hochhaus
Augustusplatz, D-55131 Mainz, Germany
Tobias C. Walther
EMBL, Gene Expression Programme,
Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg,
Germany
Anne Wilson
Woodbine Terrace, Stanton, Ashbourne
Derbyshire DE6 2DA
F.-Xabier Contreras
Universidad del Pais Vasco, EHU, CSIC,
Unidad Biofis, Aptdo 644,
E-48080, Spain
Jinnan Xiao
Department of Pathology, University of
Oklahoma Health Services Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA
Chunhong Yang
Institut für Allgemeine Botanik der
Johannes-Gutenberg-Universität,
Müllerweg 6, D-55099 Mainz, Germany
Robin Young
Département de Pathologie et Biologie
Cellulaire, Université de Montréal N-813,
Pavilion Principal, 2900
Edouard-Montpetit, Montréal, Québec
H3T 1J4, Canada

1
Basic Light Microscopy
Minnie O’Farrell

Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol

1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6

Setting up the microscope for bright field microscopy
Setting Köhler illumination
Focusing procedure
Setting up the microscope for phase contrast microscopy
Setting up the microscope for epifluorescence
Poly-L-lysine coating

7
8
9
11
14
18

Introduction
Light microscopy is an indispensable technique for cell and molecular biologists to
study cellular structures and biological processes in both living and fixed cells. This
chapter provides an overview of light microscopy, describes the important parts of the
microscope and goes on to explain how to set up a standard research microscope for
bright field and phase contrast microscopy. There is also a short section on confocal
microscopy. More comprehensive descriptions of the different forms of light microscopy
are found elsewhere [1–4].
Microscopes are instruments that produce an enlarged image of a specimen. The eyepieces and the objectives are the main components of the magnification system of the
microscope, the product of the magnification of the objective lens and the ocular lens
give the total magnification of the microscope. The visibility of the magnified specimen
depends on contrast and resolution. Contrast is the difference in light intensity between
an object and its background. Some biological samples contain coloured compounds, for
example pigmented animal cells and chlorophyll-containing chloroplasts in plant cells,
but most biological samples are colourless and have to be fixed and stained before observation [5]. Such stained specimens are observed using bright field microscopy. Other
kinds of microscope systems are available to enhance contrast in living samples; these
include phase contrast, dark field, differential interference contrast (DIC) and fluorescence microscopy (Table 1.1). The flow chart in Figure 1.1 will help in the selection of
the appropriate microscopic observation method.
Cell Biology Protocols. Edited by J. Robin Harris, John Graham, David Rickwood
 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-84758-1

2

BASIC LIGHT MICROSCOPY

Table 1.1

Type
Bright field

Phase contrast

Dark field

Differential
interference
contrast
Fluorescence

Techniques for producing contrast in light microscopy

Mechanism

Requirements

Fixed
cells

Live
cells

Appearance

Absorption of
visible light
following
staining of
specimen
Variations in
refractive index
within specimen
Scattered light

Any light microscope;
range of
histochemical
stains

Yes

No

Coloured image
depending on
stains

Phase objective and
phase condenser

Yes

Yes

Many shades of
grey

Dark field stop in
condenser

Yes

Yes

Gradient of
refractive index

Special objective lens

Yes

Yes

Bright objects
against dark
background
3D effect

Excitation and
emission of
light by
fluorophore

An excitation light
source and
appropriate filters
for emission; range
of fluorescent
probes including
naturally
fluorescent proteins

Yes

Yes

Bright colours
against a
dark
background

The resolution of the optical system, that is the ability to distinguish objects separated
by small distances, determines the degree of detail observable. The limit of resolution of
the light microscope is about 0.2 µm. Enlarging the image too much results in ’empty
magnification’ and the quality of the image deteriorates. The limits of resolution are
determined by the quality of the objective and the condenser.

Key components of the compound microscope
The eyepieces, body tube, nosepiece and objectives are part of the magnification system
of the microscope. The condenser, condenser-iris diaphragm, filters, field iris diaphragm
and light source are the parts that compose the illumination system of the microscope.
To use a microscope properly, and to get the most out of it, it is important to understand
the purpose and function of each of the microscope’s components (Figure 1.2).
The body and lamp

The binocular body, the arm and the base form the frame of the microscope. This
provides the stability and holds the optical and other components rigid and in place. The
lamp is in the base of the body; its brightness is controlled by an on/off switch and a
rheostat control knob. Just above the lamp is a collector lens with a field diaphragm to
control the area of illumination. The field diaphragm also aids focusing and centring of
the illumination.

KEY COMPONENTS OF THE COMPOUND MICROSCOPE

3

START
>> a cell

How small is it?

Use hand lens or
dissecting microscope

≤ a cell
Use a compound
microscope

Bright field, Dark field
Epi-illumination

What is it mounted on?

Petri dish, etc.

Slide
Use an upright microscope

Use an inverted microscope

X
No

Is it thin (< 50 µm)?

Use epi-illumination

Yes
Is it fluorescently labelled?

Yes

Epi-fluorescence

No
Is it reflective?
e.g. gold, silver

Use transillumination
Yes

Is it coloured or densely
contrasted or stained?
No
Is it transparent?

Yes

Yes

No
Bright field
Phase contrast
Phase contrast
Nomarski
Autofluorescence

Is it fluorescently
labelled?

Yes

No
Section

No
Is it reflective?
e.g. gold, silver

Yes

Dark field
Reflected light

No
Is it birefringent?

Yes

Question
KEY

Conclusion

Polarized light

Go to X

Epi-fluorescence
± confocal imaging

Reflected light
±confocal imaging

Specific technique

Figure 1.1 Flow chart for selection of observation methods. Reproduced from Rawlins (1992) Light
Microscopy, Fig 1.1 Bios Scientific Publishers, Oxford

The condenser

The condenser provides a bright, even illumination of the specimen for a wide range
of magnifications. The condenser can be focused and light transmission regulated by
the condenser-iris diaphragm; correctly used these will optimize resolution, contrast and
depth of field. Modified condensers are required for contrasting techniques such as phase
contrast and differential interference contrast.

4

BASIC LIGHT MICROSCOPY
Eyepiece

Binocular body

Body lock screw

Focusing reverse
nosepiece

Arm

Infinity corrected
objectives
Graduated
mechanical stage

Condenser
Condenser control lever
Condenser
adjustment screw
Collector lens with field diaphragm lever
Field diaphragm lever
Rheostat control knob
Base

Coarse
adjustment knob

Fine
adjustment knob

Figure 1.2

On/off
switch

Condenser rack
and pinion knob

The parts of the compound light microscope

The stage and focus mechanism

The specimen, usually on a slide, is held in place by a sprung arm on the mechanical
stage. The stage can be moved in the x and y planes and mounted vernier scales can be
used to locate sites of interest on the coverslip/slide. The course (outer) and fine (inner)
focus adjustment knobs alter the level of the stage with respect to the objective.
The objective

The objectives lenses are mounted on a revolving nosepiece which allows for easy
changes between magnification and also facilitates the maintenance of focus when the

5

KEY COMPONENTS OF THE COMPOUND MICROSCOPE

Table 1.2

Magnification of
objective
10
40
100 (oil)

Properties of some objective lenses

Focal
length (mm)

NA

Working
distance (mm)

Diameter
of field (mm)

Depth of
field (µm)

16
4
2

0.20–0.30
0.65–0.85
1.20–1.30

4–8
0.2–0.6
0.11–0.16

1–2
0.25–0.50
0.1–0.2

c. 10
1–2
0.5

different objectives are moved into position, giving parfocality. The objective lens of
the microscope is the major component responsible for the magnification and resolution
of the image; it is perhaps the single most important element of the microscope.
Basically, an objective consists of a set of lens elements that form an image of an
object at a distinct distance beyond the objective; it collects light from every specimen
point and forms a real intermediate image in the eyepiece focal plane. Besides collecting
light from the specimen and ‘magnifying’ the latter, the objective contains lenses that
correct the aberrations created as light passes through the collecting lens system. The
ability to collect light and, therefore, to resolve detail is termed the numerical aperture
(NA) of the objective. The limit of resolution is determined by the wavelength of light
used (λ) and the NA, the light-gathering capacity of the objective:
Resolution = 0.61 ×

wavelength of light source(λ)
numerical aperture (NA)

A dry objective cannot have an NA greater than 1 but an immersion medium, for example
oil, can increase the NA beyond 1 (Table 1.2)
In selecting an objective for a given purpose it is useful to know certain figures. These
are (1) the magnification, (2) the focal length, (3) numerical aperture, (4) the working
distance, (5) the diameter of the field of view and (6) the depth of field. Average values
for commonly used objectives are shown in Table 1.2
The working distance is the clearance between the lowest point of the objective and
the upper surface of the coverslip. The depth of field is the range of distances over
which objects can still appear reasonably sharp. The most important factor in deciding
this quantity is the NA.
The objective lenses bear a number of inscriptions including the type, the magnification
and the NA (Figure 1.3). Achromat, Plan Achromat and Plan Apochromat are the names
of objectives of increasing quality. The Achromat lenses are colour corrected for two
wavelengths (red, 656 nm and blue, 486 nm) and are corrected for spherical aberration
in the green (546 nm). The Apochromats have been further corrected to give the best
colour reproducibility. The Plan designation refers to correction for flatness of field
across the whole image. The inscription on the objective lens shown in Figure 1.3 is,
for example, 40/0.65 and 160/0.17. These figures indicate the initial magnification ×40,
numerical aperture 0.65, for use with microscopes with a mechanical tube length of
160 mm and with a coverslip 0.17 mm thick.
The eyepieces

The real, intermediate image formed by the objective is observed and further magnified
by means of an eyepiece. They usually have a magnifying power of 10× but can range

6

BASIC LIGHT MICROSCOPY

Figure 1.3

An objective lens showing the specifications engraved on the metal body tube

from 4× to 30×. Eyepieces over 12.5×, however, depending on the objective used, may
result in ‘empty magnification’. Apart from its magnification, an eyepiece is characterized
by its field of view number. With the aid of this number it is possible to calculate the
diameter of the field covered in the specimen plane. The field of view number of the
eyepiece divided by the magnification of the objective gives the diameter of the actual
field of view in millimetres.
There are also eyepieces specially designed for spectacle wearers. They are usually
marked with a diagram of a pair of glasses. The interpupillary distance can be altered
in most binocular microscopes.

Techniques of microscopy
Bright field microscopy

Bright field microscopy is probably the most widely used form of microscopy and is
used mainly for fixed and stained specimens. For optimal resolution the microscope
should be aligned correctly and one of the most important alignments is setting up
Köhler illumination. This provides bright and even illumination over the specimen and
allows for the control of contrast and depth of field.

PROTOCOL 1.1
Setting up the microscope for bright field
microscopy

1. Set up the microscope on a clean,
dry area of bench as vibration-free as
possible.
2. Plug in and switch on the illuminator.
3. Centre and focus the light source
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The light source on many
microscopes is precentred.
4. Bring the ×10 objective into position
on the nosepiece and ensure the condenser is in the bright field position,
usually indicated by a zero (0).
5. Fully open the field diaphragm on
the light source and the aperture
diaphragm of the condenser.
6. Adjust the brightness of the light from
the illuminator to a comfortable level
using the rheostat.

7. Place a clean, prepared slide on the
stage. Use a stained preparation or
section. Bring the objective to within
a few millimetres of the coverslip on
the slide. Make sure that the specimen
is in line with the objective.
8. Looking through the eyepieces gently
lower the stage by rotating the course
adjustment until the specimen appears
in focus. Move through the focal
position: continue rotating the knob
until the specimen has appeared in
focus, and is just beginning to become
blurred again.
9. Now use the fine adjustment to make
the image clear.
10. Adjust the interpupillary distance
between the eyepieces so that it is
comfortable for you.

PROTOCOL 1.2
Setting Köhler illumination

To focus the condenser and set up Köhler
illumination:
1. Gently rack the condenser upwards to
the top of its travel.
2. Close down the field iris diaphragm
of the illuminator. Focus the image by
lowering the condenser. The condenser
is focused when both the specimen and
the diaphragm edge are sharply defined.
3. Centre the field diaphragm image into
the centre of the field of view, using the
centring screws on the condenser, then
open the field diaphragm to just fill the
field of view.
4. Remove one eyepiece and, looking into
the tube, adjust the condenser aperture
diaphragm so that it covers two-thirds
to three-quarters of the circular illuminated area. This controls the angle of
the cone of light illuminating the object
and helps avoid flare.
5. Replace the eyepiece; Köhler illumination is now set up. The brightness of the
field should be altered by adjusting the
light intensity of the illuminator. Do not
alter light by adjusting the condenser or
field diaphragm.
6. The alignment should be correct for all
objectives. The nosepiece can be rotated

to bring other objectives into position.
Most microscopes are parfocal so only
the fine focus should be used to make
final adjustments to obtain clear images.
Use of oil immersion objectives

Oil immersion objectives are objectives
that are used with immersion oil (instead
of air) in the space between the front
lens of the objective and the coverslip.
As explained previously, this method leads
to a gain in NA, and hence a gain in
the resolution, brightness and clarity of
the image. Immersion oil has a refractive
index of 1.515 and glass has a refractive
index of 1.51. The principles underlying
the use of the ×100 objective are similar
to those used in setting up the lower
power objectives. The only differences, in
practice, are the introduction of an oil film
between the top of the coverslip and the
objective lens and the need for very great
caution in focusing because of the very
short working distance of ×100 objectives.
When examining extremely small specimens, such as bacteria and individual
eukaryote cells, locating the sample image
can be difficult. It is easiest to focus on
the sample first using the ×40 objective.
Then, using the fact that the objectives are
parfocal, move to the ×100 objective.

PROTOCOL 1.3
Focusing procedure

1. Focus on the specimen using the ×40
objective (in some cases, you may wish
to start with an even lower power
objective first).
2. Move the ×40 objective away from the
slide, but do not yet move the revolving
nosepiece fully round to bring the ×100
objective into position.
3. Leaving the slide in position on the
stage, apply a small drop of immersion
oil onto the illuminated spot on the
coverslip. Do not use too much oil, it
can run off the slide and on to the
microscope.
4. Carefully move the ×100 objective into
position, checking that there is space for
it. The objective should make contact
with the oil, but not the slide.
5. You should be approximately in focus
already so only use the fine focus
knob.
Oil immersion objectives and slides which
have been used with oil should always be
cleaned with lens tissue immediately after
use. If left uncleaned the oil tends to dry up
and may form a hard film on the objective
and slide.

Phase contrast microscopy

If a typical living cell is observed under
well-aligned bright field microscopy, very
little detail can be observed. However, small
differences in the refractive indices or the
thickness within specimen structures can be
converted into differences of light and dark.
This is what is known as phase contrast
microscopy and it is extensively used for
observing living and unstained specimens.
In the phase contrast optics there is a
phase ring in the rear focal plane of the
objective and a phase annulus in the front
focal plane of the condenser (Figure 1.4A).
The ring and the annulus alter the amplitude and phase relationships of the light
diffracted by structures in the cell compared to the non-diffracted light to generate
interference, thereby enhancing contrast.
Phase contrast produces an image of many
dark and light grey gradations. Positive
phase contrast areas with higher refractive
indices, like mitochondria in the cytoplasm
and nucleoli against the background of the
nucleoplasm, appear darker.
Phase contrast microscopy is limited to
thin specimens, single cells or very thin
cell layers. The resolution is also limited
by the phase ring and phase annulus.

10

BASIC LIGHT MICROSCOPY
Phase ring as seen
down the centring
telescope

(a)

Side view of
phase ring in
objective
Objective

Specimen on slide

Phase annulus as down
the centring telescope
Condenser

Side view
of phase
annulus in the
condenser

Phase ring

(b)

Phase annulus

(i)

(ii)

Figure 1.4 Phase contrast. (a) the light path in a phase contrast microscope showing the phase ring
in the objective and the phase annulus in the condenser. (b) Incorrect (i) and correct (ii) alignment of
the phase ring and phase annulus

PROTOCOL 1.4
Setting up the microscope for phase contrast
microscopy

1. The objectives for phase microscopy are
different from those used for brightfield only. They include a phase ring and
are usually inscribed Ph. Phase contrast
objectives can also be used for bright field
work. The condenser is also different; it
contains a series of phase annulae.
2. Köhler illumination is set up as described previously
3. To centre the phase contrast annular
diaphragm, start with the objective ×10
Ph 1. Set the condenser turret to the
appropriate position.
4. Move the specimen slide to a position
where no object is seen, yet the coverslip is still present.
5. Remove the eyepiece and in its place
insert the centring telescope (phase
telescope). Rotate the top part of the
telescope to bring the image of the
phase plate in the objective into sharp
focus. The image of the condenser
annulus will also be visible.
6. The position of the objective phase ring
is fixed but the phase annulus in the
condenser can be moved by manipulating the adjusting screws on the condenser. The phase annulus needs to be
superimposed, concentrically, over the
phase ring (see Figure 4B).
With many microscopes the phase annulae
in the condenser turret are adjusted taking
×10 Ph 1 as the standard so it may not

be necessary to perform the centring procedure at each magnification. However, for
ideal resolution and for photomicrography
it is advisable to check the centring at each
magnification.
Differential interference contrast
microscopy

This is another type of interference system
that detects very small gradients or differences in thickness or refractive index. It
is based on illumination of the specimen
with two beams of light polarized at 90◦ to
each other and with a lateral displacement
(shear) of approximately the resolution
limit of the objective. By altering the special beam-splitting prisms one can obtain
an almost continuous change from bright
field to dark field microscopy resembling
degrees of highly oblique illumination
and giving a three-dimensional appearance. Like phase contrast microscopy, this
method is used to reproduce unstained
transparent objects at high contrast. The
image obtained gives a characteristic relief
effect and offers some advantage over ordinary phase contrast optics. It is particularly
useful for the study of dynamic events
in vivo, for example cells in mitosis, and
for studying the three-dimensional structure of cells and embryos.
Dark field microscopy

Dark field microscopy can be employed
in the study of living micro-organisms

12

BASIC LIGHT MICROSCOPY

such as spirochetes, protozoa and yeast and
unstained tissues and cells.
In bright field microscopy stains are
used to produce sufficient contrast in the
specimen so that diffraction can occur,
thus rendering the specimen detail visible. Staining, however, can produce artifactual changes in some biological specimens; also fixation prior to staining kills
the cell. Therefore, dark field microscopy,
like phase contrast, is very useful for the
study of living specimens. With dark field
microscopy sufficient contrast can be introduced between a transparent object and the
surrounding medium to render the object
visible. This is done by illuminating the
object at such an oblique angle that intense
rays of light that normally pass through
the specimen and travel directly into the
objective (illuminating the entire field of
view) are directed past the objective. This
produces a dark field of view but the contrast between the dark background and the
diffracted rays scattered off the specimen
renders the object visible, bright and shiny
against the dark background.
Although bright field condensers can
be adjusted to give an approximation of
a dark field, special condensers produce
the required hollow cone of light more
effectively.
Of great importance when using dark
field techniques is the extreme cleanliness of slides, coverslips and immersion substances. Air bubbles, dirt or any
extraneous material will be refractile and
therefore interfere with the image from the
specimen.
Fluorescence microscopy

Fluorescence microscopy is a sensitive
technique very widely used in both research and clinical laboratories. Some
materials for microscopic examination are
autofluorescent, e.g. lipids, vitamins, porphyrins, drugs and drug-containing tissues

and carcinogenic compounds. In addition
fluorescent dyes are used to stain cells and
tissues. There are now a wide range of fluorescent labels for a large number of physiologically important biological molecules.
Secondary fluorescence is also of major
importance. This is obtained by such methods as immunofluorescence, whereby a
biological molecule is located by using
an antibody joined to a fluorochrome dye
or when fluorescent probes attached to
oligonucleotides are used to identify genes
on chromosomes.
An atom or molecule, when struck by
a quantum of light, undergoes a change
in the arrangement of the electrons about
its nucleus. The electron (or electrons) is
displaced to a higher energy level in the
form of heat and light. Since some of the
energy is lost to heat, the light energy
emitted is of a lower energy level and
thus of a longer wavelength than the light
that energized it. Therefore, when light of
a short wavelength is directed towards a
fluorochrome dye conjugate, the dye will
emit radiation of a longer wavelength plus
heat. By blocking out the exciting light
ray, the emitted light rays can be isolated
and detected by the eye through the microscope. The only difference between basic
bright field microscopy and fluorescence
microscopy is the use of an illumination
system which produces only light of a
shorter wavelength and a receiving system
which receives only light of a longer wavelength.
In addition to the light source (usually a mercury or xenon lamp), a fluorescence microscope requires excitation
and barrier filters. The excitation or primary filter will transmit shorter wavelength
radiation only, while the barrier or secondary filter will transmit the longer wavelength emitted fluorescent light only. In
order to obtain the best possible contrast,
with bright specimen portions where fluorescence occurs and the darkest possible

13

PROTOCOL 1.4

background where there is no fluorescence,
the most commonly used condenser system
is a dark field condenser.
Most contemporary fluorescent microscopes use epifluorescence or incidentlight fluorescence. In these microscopes the
objective also works as a condenser carrying the exciting beam and also collecting
the emitted light. The assembly of filters in
the filter block include the excitation filter
and the barrier filter (interference filters)
and a chromatic beam splitter (Figure 1.5).
The microscope is relatively easy to align
and it allows the use of thicker specimens and also the combination of the
incident-light fluorescence excitation with
a transmitted-light technique such as phase
contrast.

Eyepiece

Excitation
filter

Barrier
filter

Lamp
Beam
splitter

Objective

Figure 1.5 Filter and dichroic mirror block in an
epifluorescence microscope

PROTOCOL 1.5
Setting up the microscope for epifluorescence

The alignment of the light source
to achieve an evenly illuminated field
is critically important in epifluorescent
microscopy:
1. Turn on the lamp and allow to warm up.
2. Insert the filter block to be used.
3. Place a white piece of paper on the
stage and adjust the light intensity to
a suitable level with the slider. Open
the condenser diaphragm and the field
diaphragm.
4. Adjust the lamp collector focusing until
a sharply focused image of the lamp is
seen. Centre the image with the lamp
centring screws.
5. Focus on a specimen slide. Close down
the field diaphragm until it can be seen,
focus the condenser and centre it using
the centring screws on the condenser.
When focused and centred open up the
iris to the edge of the field of view.
Confocal microscopy

The resolution of fluorescence microscopy
is limited by light emitted from above
and below the focal plane leading to considerable blurring of the image. Confocal microscopy is intended to achieve a
high axial resolution, that is structures in
the centre of a cell can be distinguished
from those at the top or the bottom. Contrary to conventional microscopy, it relies
on point illumination, rather than field
illumination. A schematic diagram of the
corresponding configurations is shown in

Figure 1.6. The specimen is illuminated
by a point source, consisting of a laser
beam focused through a small aperture.
Hence, the intensity reaching out-of-focus
points on the specimen is lower than using
conventional, field illumination. In turn,
fluorescent light leaving the specimen is
focused on the small detector aperture. As
can be seen in Figure 1.6, the combined
effects of point illumination, together with
point detection, mean that most of the outof-focus light is excluded from the final
image, considerably increasing the contrast
and therefore the fine detail of the sample.
The chromatic beam splitter reflects
the excitation light towards the specimen,
while allowing the emission light to reach
the detector. The optical path from the
source aperture to the objective lens is
essentially the same as that from the objective lens to the detector aperture. Therefore, both the illuminating and detector
apertures are focused on the illuminated
point in the specimen and this is the reason why the system is called confocal.
The detector is a photomultiplier (PMT),
because the signal to be detected is usually
very weak.
In a confocal system only a single point
is viewed at a time. Therefore, in order
to build an image, that point has to be
scanned over the sample and the measured intensities recorded. This is usually
achieved by scanning the beam using two
mirrors, giving rise to the name confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM).
Measured intensities are recorded and displayed by a host computer, which also

PROTOCOL 1.5

15

Confocal

Wide field

Detector

PMT

Pinhole

Objective lens

Cell

Condenser lens

Pinhole

Light source
A

B

Figure 1.6 Comparison of the light path in conventional (wide field) microscopy with that in confocal
microscopy

drives the scanning system. All the thin
sections along the axis obtained are largely
devoid of out-of-focus light, this effect
being called optical sectioning, and repetition of the X –Y scanning along the Z
axis allows the construction of a 3-D image
of the object being analysed. Projection of
all Z sections over a single plane (maximum projection) results in a 2-D image
which, unlike conventional microscopy,
contains only in-focus information; thus a

large depth of field is achieved by adding
together very thin, in-focus sections.
For optimum image acquisition, three
elements have to be combined: the laser
intensity, the size of the confocal aperture and the gain of the amplifier. Any
increase of these parameters produces a
bright image, but the effect may be detrimental on the image quality by reducing
the resolution or increasing image noise
or photobleaching. Table 1.3 summarizes

16

BASIC LIGHT MICROSCOPY

Table 1.3

Effect on:

Factors affecting image collection in confocal microscopy

Laser intensity

Aperture

Gain

Resolution

Not affected, but high
intensity allows for
smaller aperture

Closing the aperture
increases the
resolution and the
Z-sectioning effect

Not affected directly but
through the control of
noise

Image noise

Not directly affected, but
high intensity allows
for lower gain

Not directly affected, but
large aperture allows
for lower gain

Raising the gain
introduces more noise

Photobleaching

Higher intensity
produces higher
photobleaching

Not affected

Not affected

the effects of these components on the
collected image.
Common problems and microscope care
and maintenance

Problems in light microscopy usually arise
from misalignment or dirt on the optical
surfaces. Dark image and uneven illumination usually mean that the condenser
is not correctly centred or the condenser
diaphragm or field diaphragm are closed
down too much or off-centre. The opposite can also occur with the image visible,
but pale and undefined; this usually means
that too much light is coming through
and causing flare. The field or condenser
diaphragms need to be closed down and
the condenser adjusted. Dirt on the eyepieces or the objective will cause blurring and loss of definition. Dust on the
lenses should be blown away with dry
air and the lens cleaned with lens tissue
moistened with distilled water. Stubborn
grease can be removed with xylol; alcohols may dissolve the lens cement. Immersion oil should be wiped off at the end
of every session of microscope use with
lens tissue; never let the immersion oil dry
to form a hardened film. Immersion oil
should not be allowed to come into contact
with any lenses except the oil immersion
objective, but it is surprising how often a

film of oil is found on low and medium
power objectives. This should be cleaned
off as for the oil immersion objectives.
Care should be taken not to scratch the lens
surfaces.
Care should also be taken to ensure that
the tubes of the microscope are closed
either by an eyepiece or a dust plug. Similarly all positions on the revolving nosepiece should also be closed with a dust
plug.
The rackwork and other moving parts
should be treated with great care; it is
essential not to force anything if it is
apparently jammed. Do not apply grease of
an unspecified type to the sliding surfaces
of the course-focusing adjustment or the
gliding stage.
At all times the instrument should handled carefully; for example, when carrying the microscope hold the base with one
hand and the body with the other. When
not in use the microscope should always
be protected by a vinyl dust cover or kept
in a cabinet.

Preparation and staining
of specimens
Attachment

When working with tissue culture cells or
cell smears, the cells to be stained need to

PREPARATION AND STAINING OF SPECIMENS

be attached to a solid support, usually a
microscope slide or coverslip, to facilitate
handling. This can be done in a number of ways. Adherent cells can be grown
on coverslips in Petri dishes or in special
slide chambers. Poorly adherent cells can
be encouraged to attach to glass or plastic

17

in culture by precoating the coverslips or
slides with 1% (w/v) gelatin in distilled
water or 500 µg/ml poly-L-lysine in distilled water. For easier handling suspension
cells can be bound to slides using chemical
linkers or by centrifuging onto slides using
a cytocentrifuge [3].

PROTOCOL 1.6
Poly-L-lysine coating

Poly-L-lysine is frequently used to coat
slides to facilitate attachment of suspension
cells for fixing and staining. This positively
charged polymer binds to glass sides
through the charged lysine side groups;
cells which have an overall negative charge
bind to the positively charged polymer
through non-covalent interactions.
1. Prepare a stock solution of poly-L-lysine
(MW >150 000 D) at a concentration of
1 mg/ml in distilled water. Do not store
for long periods; make fresh each week.
2. Coat clean glass coverslips or slides by
incubating in the poly-L-lysine solution
for 10 min at room temperature.
3. Wash in several changes of water and
air-dry.
4. Add a drop of cell suspension in PBS
onto the coverslip. Incubate for 10 min
Table 1.4

Organic fixatives
Ethanol 70–100%
Methanol 70–100%
Acetone : methanol (1 : 1 v/v)
Glacial acetic acid : Methanol (1 : 3 v/v)

Cross-linking agents
4% (w/v) Paraformaldehyde in PBS

0.5% (v/v) Glutaraldehyde in PBS

at room temperature. After this the cells
are ready for fixing.
Fixation

The fixation process preserves the specimen and stabilizes the cellular structure
while permeabilizing the cell to allow
access of stains or antibodies, in the case
of immunostaining [5, 6]. Fixatives can be
divided into two broad categories, organic
solvents and cross-linking reagents. The
organic solvents such as acetone and alcohols extract lipids and dehydrate the cells;
macromolecules are precipitated. Crosslinking agents, for example formaldehyde
or glutaraldehyde, form cross-links mainly
between amino groups, stabilizing molecular structures. The choice of fixative
depends on the sample and staining techniques to be used; some common fixatives
are listed in Table 1.4. The fixation process

Some commonly used fixatives
Suggested conditions
5 min, room temperature. Air-dry
5 min, room temperature. Air-dry
5 min, room temperature. Air-dry
10 min, room temperature. Air-dry (for
immunocytochemistry remove solvent and wash
several times with PBS)
10 minutes, room temperature. Wash cells several
times with PBS (for immunocytochemistry
cells/tissue should be permeabilized with 0.2%
(v/v) Triton X100 or NP40 for 2 min at room
temperature)
30 min to several hours. Wash cells several times
with PBS

PROTOCOL 1.6

Table 1.5

Some commonly used stains

Stain
Giemsa (dilute stock in Hepes buffer,
pH 6.8)
Hematoxylin (Mayer’s) and Eosin
Papanicolaou’s
Sudan Black

19

Use
General staining, nuclei stain purple, cytoplasm blue.
Also used for blood smears and bone marrow
preparations
General staining, nuclei stain dark blue and cytoplasm
pink-red
General staining, nuclei blue, nucleoli blue or red and
cytoplasm pink or blue depending on cell type
Stains neutral fats green/brown, other lipids green/black;
cytoplasm unstained

may cause artefacts and it is advisable to
test several fixatives to determine the most
effective in a particular situation. Also the
procedures and conditions should be carefully controlled for consistency.
Preparation of tissue sections

Two commonly used methods used to
prepare tissue for staining are sectioning of paraformaldehyde-fixed, paraffinembedded tissues and sectioning of frozen
tissues [6, 7]. Frozen sectioning is a relatively gentle way to prepare tissue samples with the advantage that the tissue is
unfixed. A disadvantage is that specialist
sectioning equipment in the form of a cryostat is required. Most histological studies
are carried out on paraformaldehyde-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue samples. The fixing and embedding processes are quite
harsh and may not be suitable for immunohistochemistry where particular care has to
be taken with fixation.
Staining

Fixed cultured cells, cell smears or tissues
sections need to be stained to give the contrast required for observation with bright

field microscopy. There are many different stains that can be used to differentiate
different cell types and different subcellular structures [3, 5, 6]. A selection of commonly used stains is given in Table 1.5.
Most of these stains are commercially
available, prepared as stable solutions.

References
1. Bradbury, S. and Bracegirdle, B. (1998) Introduction to Light Microscopy, 2nd edn. Bios
Scientific Publishers, Oxford.
2. Rubbi, C. (ed.) (1994) Light Microscopy:
Essential Data. John Wiley, London.
3. Spector, D., Goldman, R. and Leinwand, L.
(1998) Cells: A Laboratory Manual. Cold
Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York.
4. Wright, S. and Wright, D. (2002) in Methods in Cell Biology, Vol. 70: Cell Biological Applications of Confocal Microscopy
(B. Matsumoto, ed.), pp. 1–85. Academic
Press, New York.
5. Boon, M. and Drijver, J. (1986) Routine
Cytological Staining Techniques: Theoretical
Background and Practice. Macmillan, London.
6. Dealtry, G. and Rickwood, D. (eds) (1992)
Cell Biology LabFax. Bios Scientific Publishers, Oxford.
7. Kiernan, J. (1990) Histological and Histochemical Methods. Pergamon Press, Oxford.

2
Basic Electron Microscopy
J. Robin Harris

Protocol 2.1
Protocol 2.2

Protocol 2.3
Protocol 2.4
Protocol 2.5
Protocol 2.6
Protocol 2.7
Protocol 2.8
Protocol 2.9
Protocol 2.10
Protocol 2.11

Preparation of carbon-formvar, continuous carbon and
holey carbon support films
The ‘droplet’ negative staining procedure (using
continuous carbon, formvar–carbon and holey carbon
support films)
Immunonegative staining
The negative staining-carbon film technique: cell and
organelle cleavage
Preparation of unstained and negatively stained vitrified
specimens
Metal shadowing of biological specimens
A routine schedule for tissue processing and resin
embedding
Agarose encapsulation for cell and organelle suspensions
Routine staining of thin sections for electron microscopy
Post-embedding indirect immunolabelling of thin
sections
Imaging the nuclear matrix and cytoskeleton by
embedment-free electron microscopy

25
27
29
31
33
35
37
39
40
42
44

Introduction
Electron microscopy (EM) is an essential tool for most cell biologists. When used
appropriately, EM is able to provide direct visual evidence for the organization of
biological structures at the subcellular and even molecular level. This chapter aims
to provide cell biologists with some basic knowledge of the available EM specimen
preparation techniques which will allow them to carry out the more straightforward
analyses of cellular, subcellular and macromolecular samples. For more detailed methodologies the reader should consult one of the several available texts that is dedicated to
EM [1–5].

Cell Biology Protocols. Edited by J. Robin Harris, John Graham, David Rickwood
 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-84758-1

22

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

EM methods available
The techniques used for biological specimen preparation fall into two main categories,
those utilizing resin embedding followed by thin sectioning and positive staining or
immunolabelling, and those using a thinly spread layer of particulate material, followed
by metal shadowing, air-dry negative staining or rapid freezing/vitrification without
or with negative staining. The technique of freeze-fracture, although widely used in
the past, is somewhat less popular today although it remains useful for a number of
situations [1, 5]; it is not easy for the inexperienced to perform as a routine procedure
and is not included in this chapter. Thin sectioning of resin embedded cell suspensions,
monolayers and organelles (see Protocol 2.7 ) essentially follows the established fixation
and staining procedures that are widely used for tissues. Suspended cells and isolated
organelles can be pelleted, followed by dispersal in low melting temperature agarose (see
Protocol 2.8 ). Agarose can also be added to monolayers in situ, for direct processing
on the plastic cell culture flask, miniature culture system or Petri dish. This agarose
encapsulation approach is considered to be especially convenient, since small pieces of
gelled agarose, containing the cellular material of interest, can be processed throughout
the specimen preparation stages far more easily than by repeated centrifugal pelleting
and resuspension, prior to embedding of the fixed and dehydrated material in resin. A
specialist technique for embedment-free electron microscopy is given in Protocol 2.11.
Negative staining

Negative staining (see Protocols 2.2 and 2.3 ), by surrounding thinly-spread particulate
biological materials with an amorphous coating of dried heavy metal salt, cannot usually
be applied to structures as large and thick as intact cells or indeed cell nuclei, although
some success has been achieved with blood platelets and cells that have been extracted
with neutral surfactant or split open/wet-cleaved during the specimen preparation. When
it comes to isolated organelles and their subfractions, such as mitochondria, chloroplasts,
plasma membrane fractions such as cell junctions, rough and smooth ER, caveosomes,
Golgi, nuclear envelope, cytoskeletal and fibrillar proteins, negative staining has considerable potential. The same applies to the use of negative staining for the study of oligomeric
proteins, enzymes and macromolecular assemblies such as the 20S and 26S proteasome,
ribosomes and the isolated nuclear pore complex [3]. A recently introduced improvement
to the technique provides a standardized procedure for spreading biological particulates,
supported by negative stain alone, across the holes of holey carbon support films [6].
Vitrification

The technique of vitrification of unstained biological particles suspended in a thin aqueous film, followed by cryoelectron microscopy, generally provides a superior structural
approach than negative staining (see Protocol 2.5 ). Cryoelectron microscopy brings with
it some technical difficulties, but these have largely been overcome in recent years [7].
It should, however, be borne in mind that unstained vitrified/frozen-hydrated specimens
have to be studied under strict low temperature and low electron dose conditions, and
that very often digital image processing is required in order to recover the structural

EM METHODS AVAILABLE

23

information from the electron micrographs, because of the inherently low image contrast.
Air-dried negatively stained specimens, adsorbed to carbon or spread across holes, can
also be studied at low temperatures in the presence of glucose or trehalose which provide
considerable protection of the biological material, increased sample mobility/reduced
adsorption by the carbon support and reduced sample flattening. This low temperature negative staining approach is somewhat more easily performed than the study of
unstained vitrified specimens and can yield a resolution in the order of 1.5 nm, but is
likely to be inferior to the recently introduced procedure of cryonegative staining [8],
which combines the benefits of both vitrification and negative staining.
Metal shadowing and freeze-fracture

Both negatively stained and vitrified unstained specimen preparation is usually performed with unfixed samples. On the other hand, platinum–carbon or tungsten–iridium
metal shadowing often requires prior fixation of the biological material, together with
total removal of fixative and buffer salts by prior dialysis against distilled water, washing after attachment to a mica or carbon substrate, or suspension in a buffer composed
of volatile salts such as ammonium acetate or ammonium bicarbonate usually together
with glycerol (see Protocol 2.6 ). The resolution obtained from metal shadowing used
following freeze-fracture [5] is often somewhat inferior to negative staining and cryomicroscopy of unstained vitrified material, but excellent results have been achieved from
freeze-dried and freeze-cleaved samples, where the granularity of the metal evaporated
in vacuo is very fine [9].
Immunolabelling

Of considerable significance in modern cell biological studies is the ability to perform
immunolabelling of antigens located within cellular structures and isolated macromolecules. Immunolabelling can be applied to biological material before or after processing
for resin embedding (pre-/post-embedding labelling; see Protocol 2.10 ) and can also be
successfully combined with negative staining [10, 11] (see Protocol 2.3 ), vitrification
and metal shadowing techniques. Colloidal gold is the most widely used electron-dense
marker for conjugation with antibody (IgG/Fab/Fab ) or other ligand such as protein
A/protein G, avidin/streptavidin (for biotinylated proteins) or lectin. Colloidal gold particles ranging from 1 to 20 nm diameter are available commercially, which also enable
double labelling procedures to be performed on the same tissue, using antibody–gold
probes of different size. The preservation of antigenicity is a major consideration when
post-embedding is to be performed. An underlying difficulty of the post-embedding
labelling procedures in the fact that the antigenic epitopes under investigation may
not withstand the high concentrations of fixatives (e.g. 3% glutaraldehyde) normally
employed for tissue stabilization prior to dehydration and embedding. Consequently
2 percent (para)formaldehyde–0.5% glutaraldehyde is often used for fixation, with
retention of cellular protein antigenicity, but often with inferior structural preservation.
Recently 1.4 nm gold cluster (Nanogold) labels and 0.8 nm undecagold have become
available commercially. These probes can be chemically linked to antibodies and streptavidin and are likely to make an increasing impact within the areas of high-resolution
cellular and macromolecular labelling in the future.

24

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

Specialized techniques

It is beyond the scope of the present book to deal with the use of vacuum coating, ultramicrotomy, cryoultramicrotomy, high pressure freezing, freeze-substitution, freeze-fracture
and plunge freezing. These skilled procedures are thoroughly documented elsewhere,
but are usually best learnt directly from technicians/scientists within the EM laboratory.
Very often such staff may provide a service role, available to all users of the laboratory,
dependent upon local collaborative arrangements and funding.
Equipment and reagent hazards

The EM preparative equipment available in different laboratories will vary somewhat
with respect to the larger items, such as vacuum coating units, glow-discharge equipment,
ultramicrotomes, cryoultramicrotomes, rapid freezing apparatus and cryostorage systems.
All these items need to be used carefully according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
The smaller cheaper items of equipment tend to be widely available in all laboratories,
having been supplied through the international network of well-established suppliers of
EM equipment and consumables. Some of the reagents used for electron microscopy
are hazardous. In particular, osmic acid should be used with care and always within a
fume extraction hood. Osmic acid solutions should be kept in a sealed desiccator at 4 ◦ C.
Glutaraldehyde is also dangerous and should be handled in a fume hood; stock 25% (v/v)
glutaraldehyde should be stored at 4 ◦ C. All contaminated organic solvent waste should
be disposed of in bulk via environmentally acceptable procedures. Uranyl acetate has a
low level of natural radioactivity. Accordingly, waste solution and contaminated filter
paper and tissues should be disposed of using specified, approved routes. Other waste
heavy metal staining salts should be disposed of in accordance with local regulations.

PROTOCOL 2.1
Preparation of carbon-formvar, continuous
carbon and holey carbon support films

Reagents
Chloroform
Formvar
0.25% (w/v) solution of formvar in chlo1
roform 
Glycerol
Sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS)

Equipment
Carbon rods or carbon fibre
Carbon rod sharpener
EM grids, 400 mesh
Filter paper (e.g. Whatman No. 1)
Floating-off dish (with stop-tap control on
outflow)
Glass microscope slides (ethanol cleaned)
Mica
One-sided razor blade
Petri dishes
Vacuum coating apparatus (with carbon
rod, carbon fibre or electron gun source)

Procedure 
2
1. Immerse a clean dry microscope slide
into the formvar solution. Allow slide to
drain vertically onto a filter paper and
then dry.
2. Score three edges of one side of the
slide with a single-sided razor blade and

float off the formvar film onto a water
surface (i.e. in the ‘floating-off’ dish).
3. Place EM grids shiny side up on
the floating formvar and remove the
formvar + grids from the water surface
with a piece of stainless steel gauze, a
3
piece of perspex or a filter paper. 
4. Allow to dry and then carbon-coat to an
4
optimal thickness (e.g. 10–15 nm). 
Carbon–formvar films are then immediately ready for use as negative staining supports, with or without glow discharge treatment.
5. For production of support films of
carbon alone, dissolve the formvar and
wash away by immersing individual
grids vertically into chloroform.
Alternatively for carbon support films:
1. Carbon-coat pieces of freshly cleaved
mica with a layer of carbon (see step 4,
above). 1
2. Position EM grids, dull-side-up, on a
piece of stainless steel gauze under
5
water in the ‘floating-off’ dish. 
3. Float off the carbon onto the water
surface, as step 3, above, position over
the grids and lower the water level to
bring the carbon onto the grids. Remove
carefully and allow to dry beneath an
6
angle lamp before use. 

26

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

Notes

of white paper alongside the grids.
Alternatively, a calibrated quartz crystal, carbon thickness monitor may be
available.

This procedure will take approximately
1–2 h.


1 Allow several hours or overnight
for the formvar to completely dissolve in the chloroform before using.
Store in a well-stoppered bottle and
avoid contamination with airborne
dust.

2 This protocol presents a combination of possibilities for the production of formvar, formvar-carbon and
carbon support films. It can also
be easily modified for the production of ‘holey’ carbon support films,
if a glycerol–SDS–water suspension
(0.5% v/v, 0.1% w/v, 0.35% v/v) in
0.15% (w/v) formvar–chloroform is
used, or if the drying chloroformformvar is subjected to microdroplets
of water by breathing onto the microscope slide or placing the slide on a
cooled metal block (see refs 2, 3, 6).

3 This manoeuvre will require a little
practice.

4 The thickness of the evaporated
carbon can be estimated in a reasonable manner by simply placing a piece


5 Alternatively, a piece of filter paper
can be placed on the stainless steel
gauze, before carefully positioning the
grids under water.

6 Support films of carbon alone will
be found to be much more fragile
than carbon–formvar films. The former are, however, more often used for
negative staining, but the latter may be
found to be desirable for immunonegative staining (using nickel or gold
EM grids) where an increased number of incubations and washing stages
are necessary. Extremely thin carbon films may be supported across
a thicker holey carbon film, as can
samples mixed with negative stain +
trehalose (see ref. 6).
Pause point
1

Carbon-coated mica can be stored
under dust-free conditions until required.

PROTOCOL 2.2
The ‘droplet’ negative staining procedure
(using continuous carbon, formvar–carbon
and holey carbon support films)

Reagents
2% Ammonium molybdate in distilled
water (to pH 7.0 with NaOH)
5% Ammonium molybdate + 0.1% (w/v)
trehalose in distilled water (to pH 7.0
1
with NaOH) 
Aqueous sample suspension (e.g. protein,
virus, organelle, membrane, lipid), at
∼0.1–0.5 mg/ml
0.1% (w/v) trehalose in distilled water
2% Uranyl acetate in distilled water
4% Uranyl acetate + 0.1% trehalose (w/v)
in distilled water

Equipment
Carbon-, formvar-carbon- or holey carbon2 (see Protocol 2.1 )
coated EM grids 
Filter paper and filter paper wedges (e.g.
Whatman No. 1)
Fine curved forceps with rubber closing
ring (or use reverse action forceps)
Glow discharge apparatus
Grid storage boxes
Needle
Parafilm, or equivalent

Petri dishes
Pipettes (20 and 10 µl) and tips

Procedure [1, 3, 6, 7, 12]
1. Cut off an appropriate length of parafilm. With the paper backing still
in place, attach the paraffin wax layer
loosely to the work bench by running a blunt object (e.g. curved-ended
scissors) in straight lines around the
edges using a ruler, and then produce
a number of straight lines across the
parafilm, depending upon the number
3 Then remove the paper
of samples. 
overlay.
2. Position three or four 20 µl droplets of
water spaced along the parafilm lines,
with a 20 µl droplet of negative stain
solution at the back and a 10 or 20 µl
droplet of sample suspension at the
front.
3. Take individual (briefly glow-discharge
4 ) carbon support films caretreated 
fully by the edge in fine forceps and
touch to the sample droplet.
4. After a period of time for sample adsorption, ranging from 5 to 60 s (depending upon sample concentration),
remove the fluid on the grid by touching
to the edge of a filter paper wedge.

28

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

5. Wash the grid by touching successively
to the water droplets, and remove fluid
5 
6
with the same filter paper wedge. 
6. Touch to the negative stain droplet and
remove excess stain with the filter paper
wedge. Allow the thin layer of adsorbed
sample plus negative stain to dry at
room temperature.
7. Position the grid, sometimes with the
help of a needle point, onto a filter paper
in a Petri dish. Record the sample and
negative stain details alongside each
grid.
8. Position all grids prepared during the
specimen preparation session within a
storage box, for transport to the EM
room, with appropriate documentation
of the date, sample and negative stain
information.

Notes
This procedure takes approximately 5 min
per specimen grid.


1 Several other negative staining salts
can be used, alone or in combination with 0.1% trehalose, e.g. uranyl
formate, sodium phosphotungstate and
silicotungstate, methylamine tungstate.
Methylamine vanadate (Nanovan) is
particularly useful for low-density negative staining of nanogold-labelled
samples.


2 Carbon-coated EM grids are prepared
by evaporating carbon in vacuo onto
mica or onto grids positioned on a
floating plastic film, such as formvar,
see Protocol 2.1. Carbon alone is best,
but some breakage of this support
film may be encountered during the
negative staining procedure.

3 In practice it is best to restrict the
number of specimens prepared in any
one session to ∼10.

4 Equipment for glow-discharge treatment of carbon support films is usually
available in EM laboratories. Glowdischarge improves the hydrophilicity
of the carbon and assists sample and
stain spreading.

5 Depending upon the total salt and
other solute concentration in the sample, fewer or a greater number of
water washes may be required. Excessive washing may break the carbon
film.

6 For negative staining on holey carbon
films (see ref. 6), a higher sample concentration is desirable (i.e. 1 mg/ml).
The washings are best done using
0.1% w/v) trehalose and negative stain
should also contain 0.1% trehalose.
The final removal of negative stain
should be performed more rigorously,
in order to produce a very thin film of
sample + stain spanning the holes.

PROTOCOL 2.3
Immunonegative staining

Reagents
Antibodies
Antibody–colloidal gold conjugate
Protein A-/protein G–colloidal gold conjugate
Phosphate buffered saline (PBS) or Trisbuffered saline (TBS)
1% Bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS
(blocker)
1 or fetal calf serum in PBS
1% species 
(blocker)
2.5% v/v Glutaraldehyde in PBS (diluted
from 25% glutaraldehyde stock)
Negative stain solutions (as for Protocol
2.2 )

Equipment
Nickel or gold EM grids with formvarcarbon or carbon support films plus
adsorbed biological material (e.g. cells,
organelles, proteins, see Protocol 2.2
or cleaved cell/organelles, see Protocol 2.4 )
Fine curved forceps with rubber closing
ring (or reverse action forceps)
Parafilm
Pipette and tips
Filter paper wedges
Petri dishes

Procedure [10, 11]
1. Wash sample grids with 20 µl droplets
of PBS on a parafilm surface, to re2
move unbound material. 

2. Incubate at RT on 20 µl droplet of 1%
species or fetal calf serum in PBS for
3
∼10–30 min. 
3. Droplet-wash with 1% BSA in PBS.
4. Incubate by floating on a 20 µl droplet
of appropriately diluted primary antibody (use 1% BSA in PBS) for
4
15–120 min. 
5. Droplet wash with 1% BSA in PBS.
6. Incubate on 20 µl droplet of appropriately diluted secondary antibody–
colloidal gold conjugate. 
5
7. Droplet wash with 1% BSA in PBS.
8. Fix briefly in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in
PBS.
9. Droplet wash with distilled water.
10. Droplet negative stain (as in Protocol
2.2 ). 
6

Notes
This procedure takes approximately 2–3 h,
depending upon incubation times.


1 Non-immune serum from the same
species as the antibody is a good
‘blocker’.

2 Carbon films alone will be found to be
rather fragile and should be handled
very gently if used; carbon-formvar
films are more robust. Cellular material can also be incubated in antibody
and antibody–gold conjugates whilst
attached to the Alcian blue-coated

30

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

mica, i.e. before carbon-coating, for
external labelling (see Protocol 2.4 )


3 This step is important to block nonspecific interactions. During grid incubation, the droplets on parafilm should
be covered with an inverted Petri dish
to reduce evaporation.

4 If the primary antibody is already gold
conjugated, go straight to step 7.


5 Protein A- or protein G–gold conjugate can also be used, or avidin/
streptavidin–gold if the sample material, primary or bridging antibody is
biotinylated.

6 It is essential to perform all possible
control incubations in parallel, to rule
out non-specific labelling.

PROTOCOL 2.4
The negative staining-carbon film technique:
cell and organelle cleavage

Reagents
0.01% (w/v) Alcian blue in distilled water
Cell or organelle suspension
25% (v/v) Glutaraldehyde
20% (v/v) Glycerol in 0.155 M ammonium
acetate
Negative stain solutions (see Protocol 2.2 )
PBS and 0.1% (v/v) glutaraldehyde in PBS
Small pieces of freshly cleaved mica (e.g.
1 × 2 cm)

Equipment

5. Wash thoroughly with PBS to remove
1
unbound cells. 
6. Wash thoroughly with 20% glycerol0.155 M ammonium acetate to remove
non-volatile salts.
7. Drain off excess fluid onto a filter paper.
2 in coating unit and
8. Dry in vacuo 
coat with a thin layer of carbon.

9. Remove mica from vacuum apparatus.
10. Float off the carbon layer + adsorbed
membranes onto distilled water in a
Petri dish. This physically cleaves the
3
cells. 

EM grids (400 mesh)
Filter paper (e.g. Whatman No. 1)
Fine curved forceps with rubber closing
ring (or use reverse-action forceps)
Parafilm
Petri dishes
Pipettes and tips
Vacuum coating unit

11. Transfer pieces of carbon onto individual bare EM grid held in fine
forceps, from beneath the floating
carbon.

Procedure [13]
1. Flood the clean surface of freshly
cleaved mica with 0.01% Alcian blue.

14. Repeat until all the floating carbon
has been transferred to grids and negatively stained.

2. After approx. 1 min wash thoroughly
in distilled water and air-dry. 1

Notes

3. Apply 20 µl cell suspension and
spread over mica surface.
4. Leave horizontal for approx. 2–5 min.

12. Negatively stain the material attached
to the lower surface of the carbon
with a 20 µl droplet on parafilm (see
Protocol 2.2).
13. Remove excess negative stain with a
filter paper wedge and air-dry.

This procedure takes approximately 2 h.


1 Attachment of cells to mica can be
monitored by light microscopy. Brief

32

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

diam. micro-wells in Teflon block,
using small pieces of mica (e.g. 3 mm
squares with the corners cut off). Also,
droplet immunolabelling can be performed at this stage, either directly or
after brief glutaraldehyde fixation as
1
in. 

fixation of the attached cells may be
performed using 0.1% glutaraldehyde
in PBS. Avoid excessive fixation,
as this will interfere with the cell
cleavage. External labelling can be
applied to mica-bound cells prior to
cleavage.


2 Usually at least 1 h at 10−5 Torr will
be required to remove all the glycerol.

3 This cell cleavage stage of the procedure can also be performed in 4 mm

Pause point
1

Alcian blue-treated mica can be stored
in dust-free conditions until required.

PROTOCOL 2.5
Preparation of unstained and negatively
stained vitrified specimens

Reagents
Aqueous suspension of biological material
(∼1.0 mg/ml)
Liquid nitrogen
Liquid ethane
16% (w/v) ammonium molybdate (to ∼
pH 7.0 with NaOH)

Equipment
Holey carbon support films 
1
Plunge-freezing apparatus (available commercially or workshop-made)
Fume extraction hood
Polystyrene container for liquid nitrogen
Small metal container for liquid ethane
Fine straight forceps, with rubber closing
ring (or reverse action forceps)
Filter paper (e.g. Whatman No. 4)

Procedure 
2
1. Adjust in advance the fall of the plunge
freezing apparatus within a fume extraction hood so that a specimen grid held
by fine straight forceps will enter the
small metal container and not be damaged.
2. Fill the small container, surrounded by
liquid nitrogen in the polystyrene container, with liquid ethane from a commercial cylinder of cryogen. Position

vertically beneath the plunge-freezing
mechanism.
3. Apply a ∼4 µl droplet of sample (ideally in water or a low ionic strength
buffer) to a holey carbon film held in
straight forceps by the closing ring.
For cryo-negative staining [8], the grid
should be floated on a 100 µl droplet
of 16% ammonium molybdate solution
for ∼60 s.
4. Position and clamp the forceps, with
holey carbon support film, in the holder
of the plunge freezer.
5. Blot away the excess fluid by touching
a filter paper onto the sample droplet
3
for 1 or 2 s. 
6. Remove the filter paper and instantly
release the plunge mechanism.
7. Release the forceps and transfer the
grid from the liquid ethane to liquid
4
nitrogen. 
8. Store the thin vitrified specimen under
liquid nitrogen in an appropriate container or transfer direct to a liquid
5
nitrogen-cooled cryoholder. 

Notes
These procedures
30 min.

take

approximately


1 Holey carbon support films are readily
prepared by established procedures

34

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

available in most EM laboratories [3]
(see Protocol 2.1 ); they are also
available commercially. Quantofoil
micromachined holey carbon grids can
also be used.


2 These procedures, developed initially
by Marc Adrian and his colleagues
[7, 8] usually require a protein/lipid/
nucleic acid concentration somewhat
in excess of 1 mg/ml. The study of
specimens prepared by this technique
requires a suitable cryoelectron microscope with cryoholder and cryotransfer system. Specimens have to be studied in the electron microscope under
strict low electron dose conditions.
The necessary financial investment
and time involved are considerable;

supplementary skill in image processing is usually required.


3 A very thin layer of fluid is left
across the holes of the holey carbon
support film. Satisfactory blotting time
can only be determined by trial and
error.

4 As much liquid ethane as possible
should be removed at this stage,
since any remaining on the grid surface solidifies on entering the liquid
nitrogen.

5 Further detail on cryotransfer and
cryoelectron microscopy can best be
learnt by visiting a laboratory routinely performing this procedure. (See
also ref [3])

PROTOCOL 2.6
Metal shadowing of biological specimens

Reagents

source. Both carbon rods should be
smoothed with emery paper for close
electrical contact.

Ammonium acetate
Ammonium carbonate
Biological sample (protein/nucleic acid/
1
lipid/polysaccharide, ∼0.05 mg/ml) 
Glycerol (redistilled)
Uranyl acetate

3. Prepare suitably spread sample mate1 on a freshly cleaved clean mica
rial 
surface, by spraying or evenly spreading with a pipette tip on its side.

Equipment 
2

5. Position the mica + sample within vacuum coating apparatus, at an angle of
c. 45–60◦ to the horizontal, within a
stationary or rotary holder.

Carbon rod, carbon fibre or electron beam
carbon source
Carbon rod sharpener
Curved forceps
Dialysis tubing
EM grids
Emery paper
Mica
Petri dishes
Pipettes and tips
Platinum/platinum-palladium/tungsten wire
Rotary specimen holder
Small nebulizer
Vacuum coating apparatus

4. Air-dry the sample. 
4

6. Evacuate chamber to 10−5 Torr or
better.
7. Preheat carbon rods gently to outgas
with a shutter between the source and
specimen. Remove shutter and rapidly
evaporate the platinum carbon until a
5
desired thickness has been achieved. 
8. Remove mica and float the platinum–
carbon replica onto water in a Petri
6
dish. 
9. Prepare specimens by bringing EM
grids individually from beneath the
floating replica. Wipe gently on a filter paper to remove any overhanging
replica and air-dry.

Procedure
1. Prepare a pointed carbon rod with a
molten droplet (∼2 mm diameter) of
3
platinum at the end. 
2. Position the platinum rod against an
angled carbon rod within the carbon

Notes
This procedure will take between 1 and
20 h, depending upon the removal of
any glycerol and volatile buffer from the
sample in vacuo.

36

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY


1 The sample should be dialysed
against bidistilled water or 0.155 M
ammonium acetate/bicarbonate at the
desired pH, to remove non-volatile
salts. It may be necessary to fix some
samples with glutaraldehyde prior
to water dialysis to reduce particle
flattening, particularly if air-drying
is to be employed. Uranyl acetate
stabilization may also be useful to
prevent structural collapse.

2 Many technical variants of the metal
shadowing procedure are available
to suit different biological samples.
The protocol presented represents a
simplified example that will produce
reproducible results, but should be
modified to suit the sample material
and the vacuum coating equipment
that is available.

3 The globule of platinum at the end
of a carbon rod is prepared from a

small ring of platinum wire, by gentle
heating, in vacuo, until it melts.


4 If glycerol (e.g. 20–50%) and/or
ammonium acetate/bicarbonate are
present, drying should be performed in
vacuo for an extended period of time
(several hours or overnight).

5 A thickness monitor is not necessary
at this stage, but may be useful if a
further vertically evaporated layer of
carbon is added to stabilize the replica.

6 Alternatively, the mica can be cut
into small (∼3 mm) squares and the
replica floated off onto water in 4 mm
diam. micro-wells in a Teflon block
or in a small Petri dish, before transfer to EM grids. With care, on-grid
immunolabelling can also be performed at this stage.

PROTOCOL 2.7
A routine schedule for tissue processing
and resin embedding

Reagents
Acetone
0.075 M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4)
Embedding resin
25% (v/v) Glutaraldehyde
3% (v/v) Glutaraldehyde in 0.075 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4)
Graded methanol–distilled water solutions
(e.g. 30–90%)
Methanol
1% (w/v) Osmium tetroxide (osmic acid)
in 0.075 M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4)
Propylene oxide (1,2-epoxy propane)
Uranyl acetate

Equipment
Forceps
Glass vials
Scalpel
Tissues

3. Post-fix tissue in 1% osmium tetroxide
in cacodylate buffer at 4 ◦ C for 1–2 h.
4. Wash tissue in 10–20 ml distilled
water for 20 min and repeat twice. 2
5. Dehydrate tissue using graded methanol solutions: 10 min in 30% meth1 then 10 min in each of 60, 70,
anol, 
80 and 90% methanol solutions and
finally 100% methanol.
6. Wash with propylene oxide, 2 × 10
min.
7. Infiltrate tissue pieces with resin at
room temperature, for at least 30 min.
8. Repeat infiltration with fresh resin
overnight, at room temperature.
9. Embed tissue pieces in fresh resin
and polymerize at 60 ◦ C for 24–48 h,
2
depending upon the resin used. 
10. Thin section and post-stain sections
(see Protocol 2.9 ).

Notes
Procedure
1. Place 1–2 mm pieces of tissue in glass
vials and fix in 10–20 ml glutaraldehyde in cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4),
usually overnight at 4 ◦ C, or a somewhat shorter time at room temperature.
2. Wash tissue pieces in 10 ml cacodylate
buffer, with at least four changes and
finally at 4 ◦ C overnight. 1

This procedure will take approximately
3 days.


1 Block staining can be included at
this stage using 2% uranyl acetate
in 30% methanol, for 30 min, followed by washing for 10 min in 30%
methanol before continuing the dehydration sequence.

38

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY


2 The resin used will depend upon the
nature of the tissue and experiments.
For routine embedding, the epoxy
resins (Araldite, Epon, Spurr’s)
are all suitable, and should be
prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For postembedding immunolabelling, with tissue prepared at a reduced level of
fixation and dehydration to maintain tissue antigenicity, the glycol
methacrylate ‘London’ resins (LR
White and LR Gold), Unicryl

or cross-linked acrylate-methacrylate
Lowicryl resins should be used (see
Protocol 2.9 ).
Pause points
1

Glutaraldehyde-fixed tissue can be
stored for several days after washing.

2

Tissue treated with osmium tetroxide
can be stored in water for several days
before dehydration.

PROTOCOL 2.8
Agarose encapsulation for cell
and organelle suspensions
gently and centrifuge at 40 ◦ C to form
a loose pellet of the cells or organelles.

Reagents
Distilled water
3% (v/v) Glutaraldehyde in 0.075 M
cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4)
High purity, low gelling temperature agarose (e.g. SeaPlaque, Sigma, Oxoid)
Phosphate buffered saline (PBS)

6. Remove the agarose gel from the tube
and cut off the bottom region containing
the pelleted sample into ∼2 mm cubes
using a razor or scalpel blade.

Equipment

7. Process the cubes of agarose as for a
tissue sample (see Protocol 2.7 ).

Microcentrifuge and tubes
Pipettes and plastic tips
Single-sided razor blade/scalpel

Procedure
1. Fix specimen material in suspension
1 
2
using 3% glutaraldehyde. 
2. Prepare a 1.5–2% solution of agarose in
distilled water, by heating until agarose
has just melted. Allow to cool to
∼40 ◦ C, whilst remaining a solution.
3. Pellet the specimen material, by centrifugation if necessary, and remove
most of the fixative solution from above
the pellet.
4. With a plastic pipette add a small
amount of agarose to the pellet, mix

5. Allow the agarose to harden at room
temperature or 4 ◦ C. 1

Notes
This procedure will take approximately
2 h.


1 The agarose procedure can also be
used for cell monolayers in culture
flasks or Petri dishes, with recovery
of the monolayer for flat-embedding.

2 Unfixed cell samples can be processed, if the agarose is prepared in
PBS or Medium 199. Glutaraldehyde
fixation can then be applied to the
cubes of agarose.
Pause point
1

Agarose gel can be stored for several
days as long as drying is avoided.

PROTOCOL 2.9
Routine staining of thin sections for electron
microscopy

Reagents
Distilled water
Lead citrate–sodium citrate solution,
according to Reynolds [14] 
1
NaOH Pellets and 1 N solution
Uranyl acetate (saturated aqueous solution;
filter or centrifuge before use)

Equipment
Beakers
Dental wax/Parafilm
Filter funnel and filter paper
Fine forceps
Glass Petri dishes
Microcentrifuge and tubes
Pipette and tips
Plastic wash bottle containing distilled
water

Procedure
1. To stain sections with uranyl ace2 : put 20 µl droplets of uranyl
tate 
acetate solution onto paraffin wax or
Parafilm in a Petri dish.
2. Float the grids with section side
down 
3 on the stain droplets in a
covered Petri dish. The usual staining
time ranges from 30 min to 2 h at room
temperature.

3. Wash the grids thoroughly individually
with flowing distilled water from a
pipette, while holding them in forceps,
or rinse in three consecutive 100 ml
beakers of distilled water.
4. Stain sections with lead citrate: place
some NaOH pellets (to minimize atmospheric CO2 ) in the Petri dish alongside 40 µl droplets of freshly filtered/
centrifuged stain solution.
5. Float the grids, section side down on the
stain droplets, cover firmly with Petri
dish lid and stain for 5 min (Araldite,
Spurr, Methacrylate), 15–30 min
for Epon.
6. Wash grids thoroughly with distilled
water, as step 3, or with 0.02 M
4 followed by distilled water.
NaOH 

Notes
This procedure will take approximately
1 h.


1 Dissolve 1.33 g lead citrate in 30 ml
distilled water and add 1.76 g sodium
citrate. Mix the resulting suspension
for 1 min and allow to stand for
30 min. Add 8.0 ml 1 N NaOH and
make up to 50 ml with distilled water
and mix. Store the solution in a
well-sealed dark bottle at 4 ◦ C and
centrifuge/filter before use [14].

PROTOCOL 2.9


2 Omit steps 1–3 if the specimen material has been block stained with uranyl
acetate.

3 Sections may be mounted on formvarcoated EM grids, for greater stability.

41


4 Use NaOH washing if lead citrate
staining produces precipitate on the
sections.

PROTOCOL 2.10
Post-embedding indirect immunolabelling
of thin sections

Reagents
1% (w/v) Bovine serum albumin (BSA) 
1
in PBS or TBS
5% (v/v) Fetal calf serum (blocker) in PBS
or TBS
Phosphate buffered saline (PBS) or Tris
buffered saline (TBS)
Primary IgG antibody (often monoclonal)
Protein A/protein G colloidal gold conjugate
Secondary antibody, antibody–ferritin or
2
antibody–colloidal gold conjugate 
Sodium m-periodate
Tween 20

Equipment
Parafilm or spotting plates
Petri dishes
Pipette and tips
Thin sectioned tissue/cells, usually in
methacrylate resin on nickel or gold EM
grids

Procedure[15]
1. Etch the plastic of the sections by
3 of
floating the grids on droplets 
freshly prepared saturated sodium mperiodate to expose protein antigens;
5 min is usually sufficient for LR
White and LR Gold.

2. Wash grids three to five times with
distilled water or PBS.
3. Block non-specific interactions by
incubating sections with 1% BSA or
5% fetal calf serum in PBS for 15 min.
4. Rinse five times with PBS.
3 at room
5. Incubate sections for 1–2 h 
temperature (RT) on 20 µl droplets of
the primary antibody diluted with 1%
BSA in PBS, on parafilm in a covered
Petri dish.

6. Rinse five times with PBS.
7. Incubate grid for 30 min at RT with
appropriately diluted secondary antibody colloidal gold conjugate and go
to step 11 below, or
8. If an unlabelled secondary antibody
is being used as a bridging antibody,
incubate grids on the secondary antibody diluted with 1% BSA in PBS for
4
30 min at room temperature. 
9. Rinse five times with PBS.
10. Incubate grids for 30 min at RT
on droplets colloidal gold conjugated
with protein A, protein G or immunoglobulin, or if the secondary antibody
5
is biotinylated, streptavidin-gold. 
11. Rinse again five times with PBS
and then a further five times with
deionized distilled water.
12. Study grids briefly in EM to assess the
6
level of labelling. 

PROTOCOL 2.10

13. Post-stain the sections briefly with
uranyl acetate and lead citrate, if
additional tissue density is required,
before detailed EM study.

Notes

1 Tween 20 can also be added to the
PBS, to 0.1% (v/v).
This procedure takes several hours,
depending upon incubation times.

2 Colloidal gold conjugates are usually purchased commercially. See also
ref. 10.

43


3 20 µl droplets of reagent and PBS
on parafilm will be found to be
satisfactory.

4 Incubation times can be varied to suit
antibody avidity, in order to obtain
adequate labelling.

5 Biotin–streptavidin binding affinity
is strong and can lead to excellent
labelling.

6 All necessary controls, i.e. without
primary/secondary antibodies, should
be incorporated alongside grids passed
through the complete protocol.

PROTOCOL 2.11
Imaging the nuclear matrix and cytoskeleton
by embedment-free electron microscopy
Jeffrey A. Nickerson and Jean Underwood
Introduction
Conventional embedded section electron
microscopy is well suited for the visualization in cells and tissues of membranebounded organelles, whose sectioning generates characteristic membrane profiles.
Among other uses, embedded sections also
allow simple selective staining for cell
components using electron dense elements,
such as EDTA-regressive or Terbium staining for RNA [16, 17] and allow the imaging of chromatin packaging densities, for
example, distinguishing euchromatin and
heterochromatin. Embedded sections, however, are not an ideal technique for viewing
filamentous networks such as the nuclear
matrix or cytoskeleton. After sectioning
and staining, filaments are usually seen in
cross-section. Planes of section where a filament is near the surface of the section
and parallel to that surface show the filament as a filament but they are rare. It can
take imagination to understand the threedimensional complexity of filamentous cell
structures given only embedded section
images. It has been suggested that this feature of conventional electron microscopy
has led casual observers to undervalue the
importance of these structures in cell organization [18].
Embedment-free electron microscopy
permits the visualization of structural
networks in all their three-dimensional

complexity. In whole mount electron
microscopy, cells are grown on grids and
visualized without any sectioning [19, 20].
In resinless section electron microscopy,
cells are embedded and sectioned but
the embedding material is removed
before visualization [21]. Neither technique requires staining with electron dense
compounds; proteins are sufficiently electron dense to form images of high contrast
to vacuum. Conventional sections require
staining because the electron density of
cell molecules and the embedding material is similar. Embedment-free-techniques
can, however, be combined with immunogold antibody staining to localize specific
proteins within structures [22].

Reagents
Auroprobe EM grade gold-conjugated second antibodies, obtained from Amersham
Biosciences Corp. (Piscataway, NJ)
Delafield’s Hematoxylin, available as a
solution from Exaxol Chemical Corp.
(Clearwater, FL)
Diethylene Glycol Distearate (DGD), available from Polysciences (Warrington, PA)
and Electron Microscopy Sciences (Fort
Washington, PA)
All other electron microscopy chemicals
and supplies can be purchased from

PROTOCOL 2.11

either Ted Pella (Redding, CA) or from
Electron Microscopy Sciences

Solutions
1. TBS-1: (10 mM Tris HCl, pH 7.7,
150 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 1.5 mM
MgCl2 , 0.05% (v/v) Tween 20, 0.1%
(w/v) bovine serum albumin, 0.2%
(w/v) glycine)
To make 1 l of buffer, use 10 ml
Tris-HCl (from a 1 M Tris HCl stock
solution); 8.766 g NaCl; 0.224 g KCl;
0.352 g MgCl2 ·8H2 O; 1 g bovine serum
albumin; 2 g glycine; and 500 µl of
Tween 20. Filter with a 0.22µ bottle
top filter in a sterile hood and freeze
in aliquots at −20 ◦ C.
2. TBS-2: (20 mM Tris HCl, pH 8.2,
140 mM NaCl, 0.1% (w/v) bovine serum
albumin)
To make 1 l of buffer, use 20 ml
Tris HCl (from a 1 M Tris HCl stock
solution); 8.176 g NaCl; and 1 g bovine
serum albumin. Filter with a 0.22µ
bottle top filter in a sterile hood and
freeze in aliquots at −20 ◦ C.
3. Normal goat serum: (10% and other
dilutions)
Make 10% normal goat serum with
(v/v) heat inactivated normal goat serum
in TBS-1 to the desired volume. Filter just before use with a 0.22µ filter;
then use this filtered 10% preparation to
make all further dilutions needed.
4. Cacodylate buffer: (The stock buffer is
0.2 M sodium cacodylate, pH 7.2–7.4)
The following method makes 1 l of
0.2 M cacodylate buffer.
Solution A:
42.8 g
sodium cacodylate
(Na(CH3 )2 AsO2 .3H2 O)
distilled water
100.0 ml

45

Solution B (0.2 M HCl):
conc. HCl (36–38%)
distilled water

10 ml
603 ml

The stock solution of the desired pH
can be obtained by adding Solution B
as shown below to 20 ml of Solution A
and diluting to a total volume of
200 ml.
Solution B (ml)
23.2
17.2
11.2

pH of buffer
7.0
7.2
7.4

The stock 0.2 M sodium cacodylate
buffer is stable for a few months and
should be kept at 4 ◦ C. The washing
buffer is 0.1 M sodium cacodylate and
is prepared by mixing together 1 : 1 v/v
0.2 M sodium cacodylate and distilled
water as needed.
5. Glutaraldehyde fixative: (2.5% solution)
The 2.5% glutaraldehyde fixative is
freshly prepared prior to use in 0.1 M
cacodylate buffer and can be stored for
only several hours at 4 ◦ C. Only EM
grade glutaraldehyde should be used.
Glutaraldehyde is packaged in 1 ml
ampules of 8 or 25% aqueous solutions.
6. Osmium fixative: (1–2% solution; optional fixative)
A solution of 1–2% osmium tetroxide in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer, pH
7.2–7.4, is the optional second fixative. Osmium tetroxide can be purchased from most electron microscopy
suppliers as a stock solution or as a
crystal in sealed ampules from which
a stock solution is made with distilled
water. The osmium stock solution is stable for 1–2 months at 4 ◦ C. The osmium
fixative is freshly prepared by mixing
the osmium stock solution with 0.2 M
cacodylate buffer and distilled water to
the desired concentration before use.

46

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

Equipment and supplies
Carbon evaporator
Colloidal gold-conjugated second antibodies, 5 and 10 nm
Critical point dryer
Diamond knife or glass knives
Gold and copper EM grids, 200 or
300 mesh
Oven (50–60 ◦ C)
Thermanox coverslips
Transmission electron microscope
Ultramicrotome

Procedure
Method 1 Whole mounts of cells
for electron microscopy

This technique allows the imaging of the
three-dimensional structure of the nuclear
matrix and cytoskeletal without sectioning
and is most appropriate for very thin cells.
For nuclear matrix extraction procedures,
see Protocol 6.5, Uncovering the Nuclear
Matrix in Cultured Cells. For visualizing
the internal nuclear matrix by this technique, cells should be both thin and have
a nuclear lamina of relatively low density,
so that internal nuclear components are not
obscured. SAOS-2 cells HeLa cells and
fibroblasts have yielded good results.
Formvar (0.25% w/v in ethylene dichloride) support films are applied on gold
200 or 300 mesh grids, lightly carbon
coated, and then sterilized in culture dishes
under ultraviolet light in a tissue culture
hood for a minimum of 2 h. Cells are cultured in subconfluent monolayers on the
films on these grids, carbon-coated side
up. Cells are extracted, fixed and processed through all steps in situ while still
attached to the formvar film. Grids are
either moved between the different solutions, or solutions are gently removed and

exchanged by pipette, without ever allowing the surface of the grids to dry. This
is particularly important following nuclear
matrix or cytoskeletal extractions because
the resulting structures are constructed of
fragile filaments.
1. This method can be adapted to examine
cell structures extracted in many ways.
For this protocol, however, we will
discuss cells that have been extracted to
reveal the nuclear matrix by either one
of the following methods:
(a) Cross-link stabilized nuclear mat1 This preparation
rix method. 
has already been cross-linked with
formaldehyde.
(b) Classical nuclear matrix method. 
1 If this preparation will
be used for immunolocalization of
individual proteins, then it will
have been fixed in a way affording
preservation of both ultrastructure
and antigenicity.
2a. Cells can be examined for morphology
by directly proceeding on to step 11,
1
‘Post-fixation’. 
or
2b. Selected proteins in these preparations can be localized by electron
microscopy using specific primary
antibodies and gold-conjugated second
antibodies according to the following
method:
Immunogold localization of proteins
This is a sandwich procedure using a
primary antibody and a colloidal gold
conjugated second antibody. Colloidal
gold conjugates are available in a variety of sizes. In general, smaller beads
yield a higher density of labelling. We
have achieved good results with 5 and
10 nm beads. Good preservation of
ultrastructure requires fixation before

PROTOCOL 2.11

primary antibody staining. The cross1 has
link stabilized nuclear matrix 
already been extensively cross-linked,
1 has
and the classical nuclear matrix 
already been fixed in 4% formaldehyde in cytoskeletal buffer for 50 min
at 4 ◦ C. The formaldehyde fixative
must be freshly prepared, from a stock
solution of 16% formaldehyde (EMgrade). Appropriate controls include
samples with no primary antibody in
the first incubation. For double label
experiments using gold beads of two
different diameters, useful controls for
cross-reactivity of the second antibodies include two samples, each with
only one primary antibody, and then
incubated with both conjugated second
antibodies.
3. Wash in TBS-1 at room temperature,
twice in 5 min. Glycine in the TBS-1
will quench free aldehyde groups.
4. Blocking In order to block nonspecific staining, the samples are incubated at room temperature in 10%
normal goat serum in TBS-1 (freshly
filtered with a 0.22µ filter) for 1 h.
5. First antibody Incubations with the
first antibody are done in a moist
chamber for 1–3 h at room temperature, or overnight at 4 ◦ C. The first
antibody is diluted to the desired concentration in TBS-1 containing 1%
normal goat serum.
6. The samples are rinsed in TBS-1, three
times, 5–10 min each time.
7. Block with 5% normal goat serum in
TBS-1, at room temperature for 30 min.
8. Second antibody Without rinsing, the
samples are incubated in the appropriate gold-conjugated second antibody
diluted 1 : 3 to 1 : 10 in TBS-2. This
incubation is usually performed in a
moist chamber for 1–3 h at room

47

temperature or at 37 ◦ C. This gold concentration works well for Auroprobe
conjugated second antibodies from
Amersham. Other gold-bead reagents
need to be titrated to determine ideal
concentrations.
9. Rinse the samples with TBS-1, four
times, 10 min each time.
10. Rinse in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer twice
for 3 min.
Post-fixation
11. Incubate in 2.5% glutaraldehyde fixative at 4 ◦ C for 1 h. If antibody staining is not performed and the preparation is to be used only for visualization
of ultrastructure, then the formaldehyde fixation of the classical nuclear
matrix required for antibody staining
should be omitted and the samples
immediately fixed in glutaraldehyde.
12. Wash the fixed nuclei in 0.1 M cacodylate buffer at 4 ◦ C twice in 5 min.
Steps 13 and 14 are optional.
13. Incubate in 1–2% osmium fixative at
4 ◦ C for 30 min.
14. Wash out the osmium with 0.1 M
cacodylate buffer at room temperature
twice in 5 min.
The fixed nuclear matrices can be
stored overnight, at 4 ◦ C in 0.1 M
cacodylate buffer.
Dehydration
This is performed at room temperature.
15. Briefly transfer the samples from
0.1 M cacodylate buffer through increasing ethanol concentrations (30–
95%).
16. Then dehydrate the samples ending
with three changes of 100% ethanol
for 10 min each.

48

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

The dehydrated matrices can be stored
overnight, at 4 ◦ C. They can then be
processed after bringing them to room
temperature.
Final sample preparation
Samples are dehydrated by critical
point drying from 100% ethanol to air.
This must be done to prevent surface
tension generated by air-drying from
damaging the delicate architecture of
filament networks.
17. Critical point drying Transfer the
grids to 100% ethanol in the critical
point dryer and process according to
the apparatus instructions. Store the
grids desiccated until they are (optionally) carbon coated.
18. Carbon coating (optional but preferable) When dry, the grids can be
viewed in the electron microscope, but
the samples are quite delicate and can
be vulnerable to beam damage. The
specimens can be stabilized by a light
coating with carbon in a standard carbon coating apparatus.
Method 2 Resinless sections

This method was designed to observe the
structure of the nuclear matrix in cells which
have been extracted by the cross-link stabi1 or the claslized nuclear matrix method 
1 to reveal the
sical nuclear matrix method 
underlying network of branched filaments.
It is easily adapted for other, for example
cytoskeletal, preparations. Individual proteins can be localized in the nuclear matrix
or cytoskeleton using specific antibodies
and gold-conjugated second antibodies.
Resinless sections can best be described
as a method for infiltrating the delicate
structural network of the extracted nucleus
with a wax (DGD) to provide support for
the fragile structures while they are being
sectioned. Thin sections are cut and the

wax is removed, leaving a well-preserved
structure without any remaining embedding material.
This method combines the advantages
of the whole mount for imaging threedimensional networks with the ability to
section. Sectioning is important to image
internal nuclear structures that in a whole
mount may be obscured by the nuclear
lamina. As with whole mount preparations,
resinless sections are particularly suitable
for the collection of stereo paired images.
Cells are grown in culture on Thermanox coverslips in subconfluent monolayers. They are extracted to reveal the
nuclear matrix structure, fixed and processed through all steps in situ while still
attached to the coverslip (see Protocol 6.5,
Uncovering the Nuclear Matrix in Cultured
Cells). Coverslips are not separated from
the cells until after they are embedded with
the wax (DGD).
Cultured cells grown in suspension are
harvested, extracted and fixed as a small
pellet. After the fixation the pellet is
placed into a BEEM capsule for further
processing. The height of the pellet in the
BEEM capsule should be less than 2 mm;
if larger, then divide the sample or allow
1
more time for individual steps. 
1. Coverslips or cell pellets can be processed through all of the same steps
(with or without the antibody staining)
which have been described above in
Method 1. ‘Whole mounts of cells for
electron microscopy’, step 1 through
post-fixation, step 14.
2. Block staining (optional but preferred) The following staining procedure is not necessary for the ultrastructural visualization of the sample but is
very helpful for locating cells in the
DGD block prior to sectioning. One of
two methods can be selected to stain
the cells; both are done at room temperature.

PROTOCOL 2.11

2a. Staining with Delafield’s Hematoxylin. Before beginning cell dehydration,
Method 1, step 15, incubate in hematoxylin for 20 min. Continue the dehydration as in Method 1, steps 15
and 16.
or
2b. Staining with Eosin Y. Begin cell
dehydration through graded ethanol
concentrations, Method 1, step 15, and
at the 70% ethanol stage, transfer the
samples to a freshly prepared, saturated solution of Eosin Y in 70%
ethanol for 20 min. Briefly wash the
samples in 70% ethanol and then continue the dehydration as in Method 1,
steps 15 and 16.
Transitional solvent
Ethanol and DGD are not miscible so
a transition fluid, n-butanol, is used.
3. Transfer the samples to a 1 : 1 v/v
mixture of 100% ethanol : n-butanol
for 5 min.
4. Transfer cells to 100% n-butanol, two
changes, 5 min each. Put the samples
in a 56–60 ◦ C oven.
DGD infiltration
The infiltration with DGD is performed at 56–60 ◦ C. DGD is melted to
this temperature in an oven and samples can be handled in the oven or on
the lab bench under an infrared lamp.
5. Prepare a mixture of 1 : 1 v/v DGD :
n-butanol and pour it over the samples (use pre-warmed transitional fluid
and melted DGD). Leave the samples in the oven, without a cover, for
30 min to allow the transitional solvent to evaporate.
6. Replace the mixture with two changes
of pure melted DGD for 30–60 min
each change to ensure proper infiltration.

49

7a. For cells on Thermanox coverslips,
remove the coverslips from the oven
and add a large drop of DGD over
the top of the cells. At room temperature, let them cool briefly to solidify. Then, immediately peel the Thermanox coverslips from the solid DGD.
Cell structures should come off the
coverslip, adhering to the surface of
the DGD. Cut squares (about 16 mm2 )
from the area that contains cells and
mount them on DGD stubs with a drop
of melted DGD. Trim the blocks for en
face EM sectioning.
or
7b. For samples in BEEM capsules (pelleted cells from suspensions), cut away
the capsule plastic and the trim the
remaining block for EM sectioning.
8. The sectioning is done with glass or
diamond knives with troughs filled
with distilled water on an ultramicrotome. The sections are collected
on carbon coated formvar films supported on copper 200–300 mesh grids.
The section thickness, approximately
150 nm, is estimated by the continuous interference colour which is essentially the same as in epon sections.
DGD removal
9. Immerse the grids in n-butanol and
incubate them at room temperature.
The n-butanol effects a slow extraction
and samples are best left for a few
hours or overnight.
10. Transfer the grids with sections to a
1 : 1 v/v mixture of 100% ethanol with
the dewaxing solvent n-butanol for
5 minutes
11. Transfer grids to three changes of
100% ethanol, 10 min each.
Final sample preparation
This is the same as in Method 1.
Follow the steps for critical point

50

BASIC ELECTRON MICROSCOPY

Drying, Method 1, step 17, and for
Carbon Coating, Method 1, step 18.

11.

Note

1 Follow the procedures for the crosslink stabilized nuclear matrix or the
classical nuclear matrix methods described in Protocol 6.5, ‘Uncovering
the nuclear matrix in cultured cells’.

12.

13.

Acknowledgement
We thank Sheldon Penman, Gabriela Krockmalnic and David Capco, who developed
these techniques and passed them along
to us.

References
1. Harris, J. R. (ed.) (1991) Electron Microscopy
in Biology: A Practical Approach. IRL Press
at Oxford University Press, Oxford.
2. Sommerville, J. and U. Scheer (eds) (1987)
Electron Microscopy in Molecular Biology: A
Practical Approach, IRL Press, Oxford.
3. Harris, J. R. (1997) Negative Staining and
Cryoelectron Microscopy: The Thin Film
Techniques. RMS Handbook No. 35, BIOS
Scientific Publishers, Oxford.
4. Hajibagheri, M. A. N. (ed.) (1999) Electron
Microscopy Methods and Protocols. Humana
Press, Totowa, New Jersey, USA.
5. Harris, J. R. and Rickwood, D. (eds) (1999)
Multimedia Methods in Cell Biology, Version
1:0. Chapman & Hall/CRCnetBASE.
6. Harris, J. R. and Scheffler, D. (2001) Routine
preparation of air-dried negatively stained
and unstained specimens on holey carbon
support films: a review of applications.
Micron, 33, 461–480.
7. Adrian, M., Dubochet, J., Lepault, J. and
McDowall, A. W. (1984) Cryo-electron microscopy of viruses. Nature, 308, 32–36.
8. Adrian, M., Dubochet, J., Fuller, S. D. and
Harris, J. R. (1998). Cryo-negative staining.
Micron, 29, 145–160.
9. Heuser, J. E. (1983) Procedure for freezedrying molecules adsorbed to mica flakes. J.
Mol. Biol., 169, 155–195.
10. Hyatt, A. D. (1991) Immunogold labelling
techniques. In: Electron microscopy in Biology: A Practical Approach (J. R. Harris, ed.),

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

pp. 59–81. IRL Press at Oxford University
Press, Oxford.
Petry, F. and Harris, J. R. (1999) Ultrastructure, fractionation and biochemical analysis
of Cryptosporidium parvum sporozoites. Int.
J. Parasitol., 29, 1249–1260.
Harris, J. R. and Horne, R. W. (1994) Negative staining: a brief assessment of current
technical benefits, limitations and future possibilities. Micron, 25, 5–13.
Harris, J. R. (1992) Negative staining-carbon
film technique: new cellular and molecular
applications. J. Elect. Microsc. Tech., 18,
269–276.
Reynolds, E. S. (1963) The use of lead citrate
at high pH as an electron opaque stain
in electron microscopy. J. Cell Biol., 67,
208–210.
Oliver, C. (1994) In: Methods in Molecular
Biology Vol. 34: Immunological Methods and
Protocols (L. C. Javois, ed.), pp. 291–328.
Humana Press, Inc.
Bernhard, W. (1969) A new staining procedure for electron microscopical cytology. J.
Ultrastruct. Res., 27, 250–265.
Biggiogera, M. and Fakan, S. (1998) Fine
structural specific visualization of RNA on
ultrathin sections. J. Histochem. Cytochem.,
46, 389–395.
Penman, S. (1995) Rethinking cell structure.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 5251–5257.
Capco, D. G. and Penman, S. (1983) Mitotic
architecture of the cell: the filament networks
of the nucleus and cytoplasm. J. Cell Biol.,
96, 896–906.
Capco, D. G., Wan, K. M. and Penman, S.
(1982) The nuclear matrix: three-dimensional
architecture and protein composition. Cell,
29, 847–858.
Capco, D. G., Krockmalnic, G. and Penman, S. (1984) A new method of preparing embedment-free sections for transmission electron microscopy: applications to
the cytoskeletal framework and other threedimensional networks. J. Cell Biol., 98,
1878–1885.
Nickerson, J. A., Krockmalnic, G., He, D. C.
and Penman, S. (1990) Immunolocalization
in three dimensions: immunogold staining of
cytoskeletal and nuclear matrix proteins in
resinless electron microscopy sections. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 87, 2259–2263.

3
Cell Culture
Anne Wilson and John Graham

Protocol 3.1
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol

3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7

Protocol 3.8
Protocol 3.9
Protocol 3.10
Protocol 3.11
Protocol 3.12
Protocol 3.13
Protocol 3.14

Tissue disaggregation by mechanical mincing or
chopping
Tissue disaggregation by warm trypsinization
Cold trypsinization
Disaggregation using collagenase or dispase
Recovery of cells from effusions
Removal of red blood cells by snap lysis
Removal of red blood cells (rbc) and dead cells using
isopycnic centrifugation
Quantitation of cell counts and viability
Recovery of cells from monolayer cultures
Freezing cells
Thawing cells
Purification of human PBMCs on a density barrier
Purification of human PBMCs using a mixer technique
Purification of human PBMCs using a barrier flotation
technique

54
56
58
60
63
64
65
67
71
74
76
80
82
83

Cells: isolation and analysis – Anne Wilson
Introduction

The main subcellular components separated from isolated cells include: (i) compact
organelles such as mitochondria, nuclei and lysosomes, (ii) membrane systems including
the cell membrane, Golgi complex and endoplasmic reticulum, (iii) cytoskeletal elements
and (iv) proteins and small cytosolic particles. The four main types of tissue comprise:
epithelial, connective, muscle and nervous. All tissues contain specialized cell types
which are organized into functional units. The integrity of the tissue is maintained by
Cell Biology Protocols. Edited by J. Robin Harris, John Graham, David Rickwood
 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-84758-1

52

CELL CULTURE

structural and chemical adhesion mechanisms, both between adjacent cells and to the
extracellular matrix or basal lamina. Cells may be joined by a variety of specialized
junctional complexes involving different cytoskeletal filaments and different families of
adhesion molecules, including cadherins and adherins which are often dependent upon
divalent cations (Mg++ and Ca++ ). Dissociation of tissue requires disruption of adhesion
with minimal damage to the cells. Since the process of separation may itself compromise
cellular integrity and function, awareness of the effect of cell isolation on the viability
and function of the intact cells is necessary for optimizing separation conditions for
specific cell components.
In turn, the validity of the results obtained from experimental studies on subcellular
components is dependent upon the quality of the isolated cells from which those components were derived. Methods used for isolating single cells should maintain viability
and metabolic activity of the population; a quantitative baseline to which results can
be related and inter-experimental results compared is essential. Determination of cell
number, cell viability and protein concentration provides this baseline.
Solid tissues, biological fluids including blood, pleural and abdominal effusions and
continuous cell lines are all potential sources for isolated cells. Cells recovered from
fresh tissues are likely to be heterogeneous and methods for identifying the isolated cell
types are required. Confirmation of cell type derived from cell lines is also advisable.
Heterogeneity of structure between different tissues precludes the use of generic protocols for tissue disaggregation, though features common to tissue-specific protocols
include a mechanical means of disaggregating the tissue into small fragments and enzymatic digestion of the supporting matrix for release of individual cells. Variations in
enzyme type, enzyme concentrations, exposure time and temperature allow optimization
of conditions for different tissues.
A variety of methods described elsewhere [1], for different normal animal tissues
are summarized in Table 3.1. Although primarily for setting up cell cultures, they are
still relevant in that cell culture requires viable cells with preserved metabolic and
reproductive function. Explant cultures are used when the required cell population is
represented by only a small number of cells and expansion of numbers is needed.
Rather than offering different protocols for specific tissues, protocols are included that
have been used for the disaggregation of human ovarian malignancies. These tumours
are sufficiently variable in their characteristics as to require a range of techniques and
they provide a basic starting point for mechanical disaggregation and enzyme digestion.
The protocols can be followed for different tissue types and used as a baseline for
establishing optimal conditions for disaggregation.

Mechanical disaggregation of tissue
Introduction

Mincing or chopping tissue in liquid medium releases cells from the supporting matrix;
the isolated cell population often includes large numbers of red blood cells and the
viability of nucleated cells may be low as a result of mechanical trauma. However, most
disaggregation procedures begin with a mechanical step to reduce the tissue to small
fragments, providing a larger surface area for exposure to the digesting enzymes and
facilitating penetration of enzymes into the tissue. Soft tissues can be minced finely

MECHANICAL DISAGGREGATION OF TISSUE

Table 3.1

Tissue

53

A summary of methods used for disaggregating different tissues [1]
Description of disaggregation procedure

Epidermis

Cold trypsinization to separate dermis and epidermis followed by pipetting and
scraping of separate layers to release keratinocytes

Breast

Recovery of cells from early lactation and post-weaning milk

Cervix

As epidermis or initiation of explant cultures from chopped punch biopsies and
harvesting of epithelial cells migrating from explants

Liver

Perfusion of blood vessels with a low concentration of collagenase

Pancreas

Digestion with a mix of trypsin and collagenase and filtration to separate acini
from single cells

Kidney

Digestion of finely chopped kidney with collagenase. Differential sedimentation to
separate heavier tubules and glomeruli from stromal cells

Bronchus

Growth of epithelial monolayers from bronchial explants using specialized media
and modified growth surface

Prostate

Digestion of minced tissue with collagenase

Muscle

Digestion of minced tissue with collagenase

Cartilage

Consecutive digestion of chopped fragments with hyaluronidase, then trypsin,
then collagenase

Bone

Digestion of chopped trabecular bone with collagenase and trypsin

Endothelium

Addition of collagenase to lumen of isolated, intact blood vessel with its free ends
ligated to retain solution whilst digestion takes place

Brain

Trypsinization of minced tissue

with scissors and harder tissues chopped with opposing scalpel blades. Further release
of cells from minced tissue is achieved by vigorous pipetting of the smaller fragments
in the suspending fluid, creating shear forces strong enough to separate cells from the
fragments.

PROTOCOL 3.1
Tissue disaggregation by mechanical mincing
or chopping

Introduction
The biohazards associated with the tissue
must be ascertained and appropriate equipment used for handling it [2–5]. In the following protocols, a Class II cabinet is used,
protecting both user and tissue from contamination. The practice of aseptic technique is recommended because it ensures
that stored media retain sterility and the
risk of spurious results from the presence
of micro-organisms is minimized. If cells
are to be cultured, it is a necessity.

Equipment
All equipment coming into direct contact
with tissue must be sterile.
Dissecting scissors (Note: Curved scissors
are easier to use in a Petri dish than
straight scissors because they can be laid
flat along the surface of the dish and
thus provide a more extensive cutting
surface.)
Forceps
Disposable scalpels
Glass Petri dishes (Note: Dissecting instruments damage plastic dishes and debris
may traumatize the cells.)
Pastettes (short-form and long-form)
Universal containers (conical-bottomed)
with labels showing volume gradations
Rack for universal containers

Bench centrifuge
Refrigerator
Class II safety cabinet

Reagents
Media coming into direct contact with cells
must be sterile.
Hanks balanced salt solution without calcium and magnesium (HBSS) (Note: HBSS
is purchased either as a single-strength
solution or as a 10 × strength solution.
It is more economical to make up singlestrength solution from 10 × strength using
tissue culture grade sterile water and
adding 5 ml of sterile 7.5% sodium bicarbonate per litre [final concentration of
0.37 g of sodium bicarbonate per litre].)
Storage medium (Note: HBSS has a low
nutrient content and, if cells are to be
stored for several hours, their viability may
be impaired. A variety of culture media are
available which can be supplemented with
serum to give a semi-defined formulation.
More frequently used media include MEM,
TC199 and RPMI 1640 [6]. If a fully
defined formulation, is required, serum-free
media can be used [7].)

Procedure
• Place the tissue into the glass Petri dish
and moisten its surface with a small
volume of HBSS.

PROTOCOL 3.1

• Dissect away fat, necrotic tissue and connective tissue using a scalpel or scissors and forceps and discard it. (Necrotic
tissue is creamy-yellow with a soft, friable texture; it may contain foci of pus.)
• Add a further small volume of HBSS to
the tissue and cut it into small fragments.
(Note 1: It is easier to cut or mince the
tissue if the volume of liquid is kept small
because the fragments then stay on the
surface of the dish and cannot float away
from the dissecting instruments. Note 2:
Mince soft tissue with scissors and chop
harder tissue with two opposed scalpel
blades.)
• Tilt the dish to an angle of ∼30◦ from
the horizontal and allow the medium and
released cells to wash down into the
angle of the dish. Use a sterile pastette to
aspirate the cell suspension and transfer
it to a sterile universal container.
• Add a further small volume of HBSS to
the dish with a pastette and wash it over
the fragments and surface to release and
recover more cells.
• Repeat the last three steps two more times,
aiming to reduce the tissue to fragments

55

∼2 mm across. Pool the released cells
from the three mincing/chopping steps.
• Centrifuge the cell suspension at 1000
rpm for 5 min. (Note 1: g = 1.12R
(rpm/1000)2 , where R = radius of
rotor arm from centre of rotor to centre of centrifuge bucket. Note 2: If the
final cell suspension is of low viability it
may be enhanced by keeping the recovered cells at 4 ◦ C and also centrifuging
at this temperature. Note 3: Released
cells from a mechanically produced suspension may be of low viability because
damaged cells separate more easily from
the surrounding matrix and the physical
forces involved damage cells. However,
some tissues are disaggregated effectively with mechanical methods.)
• Decant the supernatant from the cell
pellet and resuspend the cells in 10 ml of
storage medium. Store in the refrigerator
at 4 ◦ C. (Note: The volume of medium
added should be increased to 20 ml if the
cell pellet is ≥5 ml.)
• Go to either Protocol 3.8 for cell count
and viability determination or to Protocols 3.2–3.4 for enzyme disaggregation.

PROTOCOL 3.2
Tissue disaggregation by warm trypsinization

Introduction
Trypsin has been used for disaggregating
tissue for many years [8]. The enzyme
damages cells if exposure is prolonged
and care must be taken to minimize this
when devising tissue-specific protocols.
Trypsinization can be carried out at 37 ◦ C
(warm trypsinization) or at 4 ◦ C (cold
trypsinization) [9]. DNA released from
damaged cells becomes viscous and its
presence impairs the recovery of free
cells. DNAse is therefore included at low
concentrations to digest DNA and reduce
viscosity. Serum contains trypsin inhibitors
and these must be washed from the tissue
before digestion is started. Conversely,
the action of trypsin is neutralized by
the addition of serum. Under serum-free
conditions, soybean trypsin inhibitor can
be used instead.

Equipment
All equipment which comes into contact
with cells must be sterile.
Wide-necked glass conical flask with a cap
made of a double layer of foil extending
∼4 cm down the neck of the flask
Spatula or teaspoon (Note: A teaspoon is
convenient for handling larger volumes
of tissue.)
Magnetic stirrer bar (Note: Soak in 70%
ethanol/30% water and rinse in sterile
HBSS to sterilize before use.)

Hotplate/magnetic stirrer (with the heat
setting adjusted to maintain a temperature of ∼37 ◦ C or a shaking water bath
set at ∼37 ◦ C. (Note 1: Care needs to be
taken with a hot plate because of the risk
of overheating. To avoid using the heater
element the hotplate can be put into an
incubator set at 37 ◦ C and disaggregation carried out using only the magnetic
stirrer. In the absence of a mechanical means of agitating the enzyme/tissue
mixture the flask can be incubated at
∼37 ◦ C and shaken gently by hand at
5 min intervals. Note 2: A water shaker
bath is the most efficient method for
maintaining temperature and minimizing
mechanical damage during disaggregation.)
Pastettes (long-form and short-form)
Universal containers (conical-bottomed)
with a label showing volume gradations
Rack for universal containers
Bijoux
Bench centrifuge
Refrigerator
Freezer (−20 ◦ C) for reagent storage

Reagents
All reagents must be sterile.
Trypsin – 2.5% (Note: Thaw out 100 ml of
stock solution (2.5%) and store as 10 ml
aliquots in sterile universal containers at
−20 ◦ C.)
DNAse – 0.4% (Note: Make up stock
solution of DNAse Type I in HBSS at

PROTOCOL 3.2

0.4% and filter-sterilize through a sterile
0.22µ filter membrane (eg. Millipore).
Store as 1 ml aliquots in sterile bijoux
containers at −20 ◦ C.)
Hanks balanced salt solution without calcium and magnesium (HBSS)

57

• Add ∼10 volumes of 0.25% trypsin/
0.004% DNAse (pre-warmed to ∼37 ◦ C)
to ∼1 volume of tissue. (Note: 100 ml of
solution should be sufficient for three to
four trypsinizations of a piece of tissue
which was originally about 2 cm3 in
volume.)

HBSS or storage medium (see Protocol
3.1) containing 10% serum (e.g. fetal
calf or calf) (Note: Soybean trypsin
inhibitor can be used instead of serum
if serum-free conditions are being used.)

• Re-cap the flask with the aluminium
foil lid and place it on the stirrer. Set
the stir speed to keep the fragments
in suspension; there should be a small
vortex with no frothing.

70% methanol/30% water

• Carry out trypsinization for 20–30 min.

Procedure
• Thaw out a 10 ml aliquot of 2.5%
trypsin and add to 90 ml of HBSS to
give a working concentration of 0.25%
trypsin. Mix well by swirling the bottle
gently. (Note: Do not invert the bottle
to mix because it increases the risk of
contamination around the neck due to
leakage.)
• Thaw out a 1 ml aliquot of DNAse and
add to the 100 ml solution of 0.25%
trypsin in HBSS to give a working
concentration of 0.004%.
• Rinse the minced fragments from
mechanical disaggregation in 3 × 10 ml
washes of HBSS to remove trypsin
inhibitors in the serum and discard the
washings. (Note: Viable cells may be
recovered from mechanical disaggregation (see Protocol 3.1) but this must be
confirmed by cell counts and viability
determinations.)
• Transfer the tissue mince from the Petri
dish to the conical flask containing a
sterile magnetic stirrer bar. (Note: Use
the sterile spatula or teaspoon to do this.
Use of a wide-necked conical flask makes
it easier to drop the fragments to the
bottom of the flask without losing them
around the neck of the flask.)

• Remove the flask from the stirrer and
allow the larger undigested fragments to
settle. Remove the foil cap and carefully
decant the enzyme solution containing
released cells into a universal container.
This is most easily done by tilting the
flask to allow the fragments to settle
into the angle of the flask and using
either a long-form pastette or a 10 ml
pipette with a bulb to aspirate the cell
suspension from the fragments.
• Add an equal volume of serumcontaining medium to the universal to
neutralize the effects of the trypsin.
(Note: 50 ml centrifuge tubes can be
substituted for universals.)
• Centrifuge the universal or centrifuge
tube containing released cells at
1000 rpm for 5 min and resuspend the
cells in medium. Label as T1 and store
at 4 ◦ C.
• Add fresh, pre-warmed 0.25% trypsin/
0.004% DNAse to the flask and repeat
the last two steps twice more (T2 and
T3). (Note: Trypsinization is complete
when only fluffy white fragments of
connective tissue remain.)
• Go to Protocol 3.8 for cell counting and
viability. Determine the viability of the
individual harvests and pool those with
high cell yield and viability.

PROTOCOL 3.3
Cold trypsinization

Equipment

Bijoux

All equipment that comes into direct
contact with cells must be sterile.

Bench centrifuge

Wide-necked glass conical flask with a cap
made of a double layer of foil extending
∼4 cm down the neck of the flask
Spatula or teaspoon (Note: A teaspoon is
convenient for handling larger volumes
of tissue.)
Magnetic stirrer bar (Note: Soak in 70%
ethanol/30% water and rinse in sterile
HBSS to sterilize before use.)
Hotplate/magnetic stirrer, with the heat setting adjusted to maintain a temperature
of ∼37 ◦ C or a shaking water bath set at
∼37 ◦ C. (Note 1: Care needs to be taken
with a hot plate because of the risk of
overheating. To avoid using the heater
element the hotplate can be put into an
incubator set at 37 ◦ C and disaggregation carried out using only the magnetic
stirrer. In the absence of a mechanical means of agitating the enzyme/tissue
solution the flask can be incubated at
∼37 ◦ C and shaken gently by hand at 5
min intervals. Note 2: A water shaker
bath is the most efficient method for
maintaining temperature and minimizing
mechanical damage during disaggregation.)
Pastettes (long-form and short-form)
Universal containers (conical-bottomed)
with a label showing volume gradations
Rack for universal containers

Refrigerator
Freezer (−20 ◦ C) for reagent storage

Reagents
All reagents must be sterile.
Trypsin – 2.5% (Note: Thaw out 100 ml of
stock solution (2.5%) and store as 10 ml
aliquots in sterile universal containers at
−20 ◦ C.)
DNAse – 0.4% (Note: Make up stock
solution of DNAse Type I in HBSS at
0.4% and filter-sterilize through a sterile
0.22µ filter membrane (e.g. Millipore).
Store as 1 ml aliquots in sterile bijoux
containers at −20 ◦ C).
Hanks balanced salt solution without calcium and magnesium (HBSS)
HBSS or storage medium (see Protocol
3.1) containing 10% serum (e.g. fetal
calf or calf) (Note: Soybean trypsin
inhibitor can be used to maintain serumfree conditions.)

Procedure
• Follow the steps for mechanical disaggregation (Protocol 3.1) to reduce the
tissue to fragments.
• Prepare a 100 ml working solution of
0.25% trypsin in HBSS (10 ml of 2.5%

PROTOCOL 3.3

stock + 90 ml HBSS) and add 1 ml of
0.4% DNAse to give a final concentration of 0.004%.
• Rinse the tissue fragments in 3 × 10 ml
of HBSS to remove trypsin inhibitors
and discard the washings.
• Transfer the tissue mince to a sterile
universal and add ∼5 volumes of 0.25%
trypsin/0.004% DNAse. Store overnight
at 4 ◦ C; store the remainder of the
prepared working solution of 0.25%
trypsin/0.004% DNAse at 4 ◦ C also.
• The following day warm the unused
working enzyme solution to ∼37 ◦ C
and transfer the tissue and enzyme

59

solution in the universal to a widenecked conical flask. Add the warmed
trypsin/DNAse (∼10 volumes per 1
volume of tissue) and carry out the warm
trypsinization procedure as described in
Protocol 3.2. (Note 1: The overnight
soaking of tissue in trypsin minimizes
proteolytic damage and speeds up the
release of cells from the connective
tissue matrix. One trypsinization step
may be enough to release all the cells.
Note 2: Trypsinization is complete when
only fluffy white fragments of connective
tissue remain.)
• Go to Protocol 3.8 for cell counts and
viability determination.

PROTOCOL 3.4
Disaggregation using collagenase or dispase

Collagenase and dispase (neutral protease)
are less harmful to cells than trypsin and
digestion with these enzymes can be carried
out in the presence of serum. Contaminating
fibroblasts are more likely in a collagenase
digest because it is more effective against
the connective tissue matrix in which the
fibroblasts are found; this may be irrelevant
if cells are not to be cultured, since there
will be no opportunity for fibroblast overgrowth. Collagen exists in several molecular
forms, the main ones being Type I–Type
V. Type I, found in skin, tendon, bone, cartilage, ligaments and internal organs, constitutes ∼90% of the total collagen of the
body. Type IV is found predominantly in
basal lamina [10]. Collagenase Type Ia and
collagenase Type IV are mainly used for
tissue disaggregation, though crude collagenase is sometimes recommended because
it contains small amounts of non-specific
proteases which contribute to matrix breakdown. Enzyme activity is given as units per
gram of enzyme and this is given on the specification sheet for the batch. The enzyme
is usually diluted to give a defined number of units per ml. Examples of concentrations used for different tissues are shown in
Table 3.2.

Equipment
All equipment which comes into direct
contact with cells must be sterile.
Tissue culture flasks (25 or 75 cm2 )
Spatula or teaspoon for transferring tissue
to flask

Pastettes (long-form and short-form)
Universal containers (conical-bottomed)
with a label showing volume gradations
Rack for universals
Bench centrifuge
Refrigerator
Freezer
Sterile 0.45µ and 0.22µ filter assemblies
20 ml plastic syringe

Reagents
All reagents must be sterile.
Hanks balanced salt solution without calcium and magnesium (HBSS)
Collagenase (crude, Type I or IV) (Note 1:
Dissolve the contents of the entire bottle
in HBSS to give a concentration 10× the
working concentration required. Filtersterilize it through 0.45µ and 0.22µ
filters using the plastic syringe. Dispense
into aliquots suitable for the amount of
tissue to be disaggregated and store at
−20 ◦ C. Note 2: Do not use serum in the
diluting medium because it is difficult to
filter-sterilize when the protein content is
high. Note 3: Follow the same procedure
to prepare a stock solution of dispase.)
Incubation medium (see Protocol 3.1 for
notes on storage medium) containing
10% serum (e.g. fetal calf or calf)

Procedure
• Transfer the fragments from mechanical
disaggregation into a culture flask using

PROTOCOL 3.4

61

Table 3.2 Type and concentration of collagenase and dispase used for the disaggregation of different tissues

Enzyme

Concentration

Tissue

Collagenase
Collagenase Type Ia
Collagenase Type Ia
Dispase
Collagenase Type I

400–600 U/ml
200 U/ml
300 U/ml
1 U/ml
1 mg/ml

Bladder cancer
Brain tumours
Colon tumours

11
12
13
14

Collagenase Type IV
Collagenase
Dispase
Crude collagenase
Collagenase Type I

0.1%
100 U/ml
5 U/ml
200 U/ml
675 U/ml

Normal and malignant
gastric epithelium
Lung tumours
Myoepithelium

15
16

General
Prostate

17
18

either a sterile spatula or teaspoon. Use
a size of flask appropriate to the volume
of tissue (aim to add ∼10 volumes
of enzyme solution per 1 volume of
tissue fragments). (Note: Culture flasks
provide a sterile non-toxic environment
for disaggregation; use a 25 cm2 flask
for 10 ml and a 75 cm2 flask for 25 ml
incubation volumes.)
• Make a ten-fold dilution of the thawed
stock solution of collagenase (or dispase) in the incubation medium. Add
∼10 volumes of the enzyme medium to
1 volume of tissue in the culture flask.
• Incubate the flask horizontally in a
37 ◦ C incubator overnight. (Note: Different media have different buffering capacities and the metabolic activity and the
incubation period need to be taken into
consideration when deciding about the
medium to use. Phenol red is used as
a pH indicator and the buffering system is based on bicarbonate concentration. Hanks = 0.35 g/l: Earle  s = 2.2
g/l; Dulbecco  s = 3.75 g/l. HBSS is suitable when metabolic activity and CO2
production is low and a low buffering
capacity is sufficient. Earle’s is used
when tissue/cells are more metabolically
active and a higher buffering capacity is

Reference

needed; most culture media are based on
Earle’s salts.)
• The following day use a wide-bore
pastette to aspirate the fragments several times and release loosened cells.
Check the flask under an inverted phasecontrast microscope for cell release;
continue digestion if cell yield is low
and/or cells can still be seen within the
tissue fragments. (Note: If the medium
becomes viscous, add DNAse at 0.004%
as in Protocols 3.2 and 3.3)
• When digestion has been completed,
transfer the cell suspension to a universal container or 50 ml centrifuge tube
(depending on volume) and centrifuge
at 1000 rpm for 5 min.
• Discard the supernatant and resuspend
the cell pellet in culture medium.
• Go to Protocol 3.8 for cell counting and
viability determination.

Isolation of cells from body
fluids – Anne Wilson
Introduction

Body fluids are a source of cells for a number of normal and pathological conditions.

62

CELL CULTURE

Cells can be recovered from breast milk,
urine, blood, and effusions resulting from a
variety of pathologies. Abnormal accumulations of fluid in the pleural and abdominal cavities may occur in cancer and

such fluids contain both cancer cells and
inflammatory cells. Volumes vary from
20 ml up to 5 l, though a large volume
is not necessarily indicative of a high cell
yield.

PROTOCOL 3.5
Recovery of cells from effusions

Equipment
All equipment coming into direct contact
with cells must be sterile.
50 ml centrifuge tubes
Pastettes (long-form and short-form)
Universal containers (conical-bottomed)
with labels showing volume gradations
Racks for universal containers and centrifuge tubes
Bench centrifuge
Bottles for waste liquid disposal

Reagents
All reagents must be sterile.
Hanks balanced salt solution without calcium and magnesium (HBSS)
Storage medium (see Protocol 3.1)

Procedure
• Dispense the fluid into the centrifuge
tubes and centrifuge at 1500 rpm for
20 min.

• Pour off the supernatant into a waste
bottle for disposal according to local
protocols for the disposal of biohazardous waste.
• Resuspend the cell pellets in 5 ml of
HBSS or storage medium and transfer
into universal containers, pooling the
pellets from several tubes.
• Go to Protocol 3.8 for determination of
cell number and viability.

Removal of red blood cells – Anne
Wilson
Introduction

Red blood cells released during tissue
disaggregation may be removed either by
snap lysis, use of a lysis buffer or by
isopycnic centrifugation. The latter method
has the advantage of removing red blood
cells and dead cells at the same time,
thus increasing the viability of the cell
population [19].

PROTOCOL 3.6
Removal of red blood cells by snap lysis

Equipment

Procedure

All equipment coming into direct contact
with cells must be sterile.

• Centrifuge the cell suspension at 1000
rpm for 5 min and discard the supernatant.

Universal containers (conical-bottomed)
with a label showing volume gradations
Pastettes (long-form and short-form)
Bench centrifuge

Reagents
All reagents must be sterile.
Culture-grade water
Double strength HBSS (Dispense 20 ml of
10× HBSS into a bottle and add 80 ml
of culture-grade water. Mix gently and
add 1 ml of 7.5% sodium bicarbonate to
buffer to pH 7.4. Store at 4 ◦ C.)
Storage medium (see Protocol 3.1) containing 10% serum (e.g. fetal calf or
calf)

• Add 10 ml of culture-grade water to
the cell pellet and pipette it gently up
and down several times to resuspend
the cells. (Note: Cells vary in their
ability to withstand hypotonicity. Keep
the exposure time down to <15 s.)
• Immediately add an equal volume of
buffered 2× HBSS to restore tonicity
and mix the cell suspension gently with
a pastette.
• Centrifuge again at 1000 rpm for 5
min and check the cell pellet for red
blood cells. Repeat the procedure if they
are still present in significant numbers.
Otherwise resuspend the cleaned cell
pellet in storage medium.
• Go to Protocol 3.8 for cell counts and
viability determination.

PROTOCOL 3.7
Removal of red blood cells (rbc) and dead
cells using isopycnic centrifugation

Introduction
The removal of red blood cells by snap
lysis has already been described but rbc
may also be removed using isopycnic
centrifugation. This method has the added
advantage that dead cells are removed with
the rbc and the percentage viability of the
cell population is thus increased [19].

Equipment
Universal containers (conical-bottomed)
with labels showing volume gradations
Pastettes (long-form and short-form)
10 ml graduated pipettes and bulb or
pipetting device
Bench centrifuge

Reagents
Lymphoprep or similar
Culture medium

Procedure
• Resuspend the cells at a high cell concentration ∼ 5 × 106 /ml–107 /ml. Add
10 ml of Lymphoprep to a universal
container and carefully layer over ∼5 ml
of cell suspension using either a pastette
or a 10 ml pipette. Hold the universal at
an angle and slowly trickle the cell suspension down the side of the universal
rather than directly onto the surface of

the Lymphoprep. The aim is to get a
clean boundary between the two liquids
to achieve optimal separation.
• Centrifuge the tubes at 1000 rpm for 20
min with the brake off. (Note: A gentle
slowing of the centrifuge maintains a
clean boundary between the Lymphoprep
and the culture medium.)
• Carefully remove the containers from
the centrifuge and observe the interface
between the two liquids. There will be
a creamy yellow band of cells visible.
Red blood cells and dead cells form a
pellet at the bottom of the container.
• Use a pastette to remove the viable cell
layer at the interface and transfer to a
universal container.
• Add fresh culture medium to the harvested cells and mix well. Centrifuge at
1000 rpm for 5 min and repeat twice to
wash the Lymphoprep from the cells.
• Resuspend the cells in a known volume
of medium and carry out cell counting
and viability determinations (see Protocol 3.8).

Cell counting and cell
viability – Anne Wilson
The number of cells in a cell suspension is usually determined microscopically,
though a Coulter counter can be used [20].
Viability of the cells is determined using

66

CELL CULTURE

a dye exclusion method. These vary in
sophistication but are usually based on the
principle that dead cells take up vital dyes
whereas living cells with intact membranes
exclude them. The ratio of stained and
unstained cells thus gives a reasonable estimate of the cell viability. However, cells
may be metabolically impaired and dying
yet still exclude the dye, thus overestimating viability [21, 22].
Other problems may result from the
presence of large clumps of cells, especially from the disaggregation of epithelial tissue. These may be too big to go
under the coverslip of the counting chamber, resulting in underestimation of cell
number. For cloning experiments in which
single cells are required, their exclusion

may also give inaccurate information on
the purity of a single cell suspension.
Clumps can be broken down by passing the
cell suspension through needles of decreasing gauge several times, but this tends
to reduce viability. Another way around
the problem is to lyse the cells, stain the
released nucleii with crystal violet and
carry out a nuclear count instead of a whole
cell count.
The most commonly used vital dye
is trypan blue, though others such as
erythromycin and nigrosin [23] may be
used. A range of commercial kits designed
for cytotoxicity testing are available, using
a variety of end points for assessing
cytotoxicity and viability [24], some based
on different fluorescent dyes [25, 26].

PROTOCOL 3.8
Quantitation of cell counts and viability

Equipment
Inverted phase-contrast microscope with
×10 objective
Universal containers (conical bottomed)
with labels showing volume gradations
Improved Neubauer
chamber

haemocytometer

Coverslips for chamber (Note: The coverslips are thicker than those used for
standard histology, but still break easily
if pressure is not distributed evenly when
applying the coverslip. It is a good idea
to carry a stock of spares.)
Bijoux or equivalent plastic container for
small volumes, e.g. test tube or centrifuge tube

the central grid and slide the coverslip on horizontally from the edge using
firm pressure with both thumbs. The
coverslip is correctly positioned when
Newton’s rings (rainbow colours) can
be seen on either side adjacent to the
central marked area. (Note 1: The depth
of the improved Neubauer chamber is
0.1 mm when the coverslip is correctly
positioned; the calculation for determining the cell number is based upon a
volume of 0 .1 × 1 × 1 mm3 . The calculated cell number will be wrong if the
coverslip is incorrectly positioned. Note
2: If a different type of chamber is used,
check the product information for calculation of cell numbers.)

(100–

• Centrifuge the cell suspension at
1000 rpm for 5 min and discard the
supernatant. Resuspend the cells in a
known volume of medium.

Sterile graduated pipettes, 1–10 ml, with
bulb or automatic pipetting device

• Mix the suspension by aspirating it up
and down several times with a pastette
to make sure that the cells are evenly
dispersed.

Pastettes (long-form and short-form)
Variable volume
250 µl)

micropipette

Sterile tips for micropipettes

Reagents
Trypan blue – 1% (w/v)
HBSS or storage medium (see Protocol
3.1)

Procedure
• Prepare the chamber for counting.
Lightly moisten the area either side of

• Take 250 µl of the mixed cell suspension up with a micropipette and transfer
it to a bijou. Use a clean pipette tip
to transfer the same volume of 1% trypan blue solution to the cell suspension.
Mix it well by flicking the bijou several times with the thumb and forefinger.
Immediately take up a drop of the cell
suspension into the tip of a pastette and
gently place it at the very edge of the
coverslip adjacent to the counting area.

68

CELL CULTURE

Capillary action will draw the cell suspension under the coverslip, filling the
area between the central and side gullies. Repeat this on the other side of the
coverslip. (Note: If the coverslip is not
positioned correctly both chambers and
the gully either side of the chambers will
flood with cell suspension and accurate
cell counting will not be possible.)
• Place the chamber on the microscope
platform and move it around until you
have located the central grid of 25 small
squares bounded by three parallel lines.
Count the total number of cells (stained
and unstained) in these 25 squares.
(They are each subdivided into 16
smaller squares to facilitate counting.)
In order to avoid counting the same
cell twice, count the cells on the top
line, the left-hand line and the centre
of each small square bounded by triple
lines. Use a tally counter if the numbers
are large. (Note 1: The area counted
depends upon the cell density. If the
cell number reaches ∼100 in the central
square this is sufficient for accuracy. If
the cell density is much lower, count
the total number of cells in the four
corners and take an average. For further
accuracy it is advisable to repeat the
total cell count and take an average of
the two readings. Note 2: If you are
using phase contrast on the inverted
microscope, live and dead cells can be
distinguished without staining. Live cells
are brightly refractile with a distinct
outline; dead cells are flat and grey with
an uneven edge.)
• When you have counted the total number of cells, repeat the counts in the
same areas, counting only the bluestained (dead) cells. Calculate the average number of dead cells and subtract from the total number of cells
to obtain the number of live cells.
(Note: Accuracy can be confirmed by

repeating the count on unstained cells
only.)
• The viability of the cell population is
calculated using the formula:
Viability =

number of live cells
number of live + dead cells
× 100%

• The concentration of cells in the cell
suspension is calculated as follows:
Average number of cells in one large
square (25 small squares) × 104
= no. of cells/ml
(Note: This is either the number of cells in
the central large square or the mean of the
counts in the four large corner squares.)
• The total number of cells in the cell
suspension = no. of cells/ml × total
volume.
• The total number of live cells in the
suspension = total number of cells × %
viability (Note: If you are calculating
the number of cells from the trypan blue
stained population, remember to allow
for the twofold dilution factor introduced
by diluting the cell suspension in the
trypan blue solution.)
• Example: (see Figure3.1)
Volume of cell suspension = 20 ml
Total cell count of live cells in 4 corner
squares = 160
Total cell count of live and dead cells in 4
corner squares = 200
Mean cell count of live cells in one
large square = 40
Mean cell count of live and dead cells in
one large square = 50
Viability of cell population
= 40/50 × 100%
= 80%

PROTOCOL 3.8

69

Figure 3.1 A haemocytometer chamber (see Protocol 9, worked example). Live cells are clear and
dead cells black

Concentration of viable cells
50 × 104 × 80
=
cells/ml
100
= 40 × 104 viable cells/ml
= 4 × 105 viable cells/ml
Multiply this ×2 to allow for dilution
factor = 8 × 105 viable cells/ml
Total number of cells in original cell
suspension = 8 × 105 × 20
= 16 × 106 cells
To adjust the cell number to 106 /ml, centrifuge the cell suspension at 1000 rpm for
5 min. Pour off the supernatant and resuspend the cells in 16 ml of medium. Confirm the cell concentration by recounting
the number of cells.

To adjust the cell number to 1.5 × 105 /ml:
Original cell count = 8 × 105 /ml, dilution
factor = 8/1.5 = 5.3
Therefore dilute 1 ml of 8 × 105 /ml to
5.3 ml.

Use of cell cultures – Anne Wilson
Introduction

A wide range of cell lines representing
diverse cell types and species are available
commercially from national collections in
Europe and America (ECACC, ATCC,
DSmZ). In theory, cells grown in culture
provide a continuous, replicate supply of
material of a homogeneous characterized
cell population. However, precautions need

70

CELL CULTURE

to be taken to ensure that the latter is true
in practice. Cross-contamination of cell
lines can occur during culture and the line
may not therefore be as described [27, 28].
Particular attention needs to be paid to
this possibility if lines are exchanged
between laboratories rather than obtained
from commercial sources. Isoenzymes,
karyotypes and DNA fingerprinting are
all appropriate tools for speciating cell
lines [29–31]. A wide range of antibodies
are also available for the immunocytochemical identification of phenotypic characteristics such as cytoskeletal proteins,
surface markers and biosynthetic products.
Cell lines in long-term culture can show
drifts in both phenotype and genotype.
When using cell lines for a series of related
experiments it is advisable to use cells
from similar passage numbers. Generally
these are within 10 passages and once the
stock has passed this number fresh working
stock should be thawed out for use.
Guidelines for handling cancer cell lines
have been published by UKCCR [32].

Continuous cultures of cell lines may
become contaminated with mycoplasma.
The presence of these micro-organisms
affects a number of cell properties. Surface changes may alter the antigenicity of
cells and their presence results in competition for a variety of metabolites needed
for DNA synthesis, protein synthesis and
other essential metabolic pathways. Signs
of contamination include a decrease in
growth rate, increased acidity of medium,
deterioration of cells and the appearance
of a grainy background. There are several different species found in culture and
assay for the detection of mycoplasma
should be a regular routine during maintenance of cell lines in long-term culture.
A number of methods are available for
detecting mycoplasma in culture, the simplest being the use of Hoechst 33258,
a fluorescent stain which binds to DNA
and reveals the presence of extracellular
and extranuclear DNA [33]. A variety of
commercially available kits can also be
obtained [34].

PROTOCOL 3.9
Recovery of cells from monolayer cultures

Equipment
All equipment coming into direct contact
with cells must be sterile.
Class II cabinet
Incubator set at 37 ◦ C
Tissue culture flasks
Universal containers (conical-bottomed)
with labels showing volume gradations
Pastettes (long-form and short-form)
Inverted phase contrast microscope with
×10 objective
Water bath set at 37 ◦ C
Waste bottle for spent culture medium
Permanent black marker pen

Reagents
All reagents must be sterile.
Hanks balanced salt solution without calcium and magnesium (HBSS)
Culture medium appropriate to cell type
Trypsin/versene solution (1–2 ml/25 cm2 )
(Note 1: If this has been purchased
as a 10× strength solution, thaw out
stock, dilute to 1× strength in HBSS and
dispense 5 ml aliquots into sterile bijoux.
Store at −20 ◦ C.)

Procedure
• Switch on the Class II cabinet 10 min
before starting and swab down its surfaces with 70% methanol/30% water.

Any equipment to be used in the cabinet should be placed towards the back so
that air flow is not obstructed and sterility is maintained.
• Warm the reagents to be used to 37 ◦ C.
• Remove the flasks for harvesting from
the incubator and check them for health
under the microscope.
• Decant the spent medium into a sterile
bottle for waste medium and rinse the
monolayer gently with 3 × 5 ml washes
of HBSS, pouring the wash medium
from the flask into the waste bottle after
each rinse. If the medium dribbles down
the neck of the flask use a tissue soaked
in 70% alcohol/30% water to wipe it off.
• Add 1–2 ml of trypsin-versene to the
flask, re-cap it and tilt the flask horizontally in several directions to ensure
the entire cell monolayer is bathed in
enzyme solution.
• Place the flask horizontally into the
incubator for 2–5 min.
• Remove it and check visually for cell
detachment. If the cells have become
rounded and are detaching from the
cell surface this will be visible to the
naked eye. If the cells are still attached
return the flask to the incubator for several more minutes and check again for
detaching cells. (Note: Cell lines vary
in the speed with which they detach;
times may vary from 1 to 20 min. Harvesting procedure is usually specified
in details accompanying purchased cell
lines.)

72

CELL CULTURE

• Once the cells have begun to detach add
∼5–10 ml of culture medium containing serum to the flask. Re-cap it and tap
the side of the flask against the palm
of your hand several times; the shearing
forces cause further detachment of the
cells. Use the microscope to check for
complete detachment of cells.
• Use a pastette or pipette to dispense the
detached cells into a universal. Rinse the
surface of the flask with another 5 ml of
medium and transfer the remainder of
the detached cells into the universal container. Check the flask under the microscope to make sure that all the cells have
detached and been recovered.
• Centrifuge the cells at 1000 rpm for
5 min and resuspend them in a known
volume of medium for cell counts
and viability determination (see Protocol 3.8).

Notes

1 Familiarize yourself with the normal
appearance of the cells in the different stages of culture so that you
notice abnormalities. These may be
due to a number of factors including: pH too acid or too alkaline, nutrient deficiency due to infrequent media
changes, cells seeded at too low a density in the starting culture, cells left in
stationary phase for too long, contamination by micro-organisms (bacteria, yeast, fungi, mycoplasma), crosscontamination with another cell line,
or natural drift in phenotype and/or
genotype.

2 Cells should be harvested at the
same time point in the life of the
culture, ideally when they are reaching
the end of the exponential growth
phase and before the culture has
become stationary, though this may be

dependent upon the state of the cells
required for subfractionation.


3 Take the following precautions to
avoid cross-contamination between
cell lines: (a) Handle one cell line
at a time. (b) Use separate media,
solutions, pipettes and waste medium
disposal bottles for each cell line.
(c) Never put a pipette that has been
in contact with cells back into a
medium or reagent bottle. (d) Clean
the cabinet before handling the next
cell line. (e) Handle fast-growing cell
lines (e.g. HeLa) that grow from a
small inoculum of cells last.)

Cryopreservation – Anne Wilson
Stocks of cells can be kept for long periods
by freezing them down and storing them in
liquid nitrogen.
Critical factors in the successful freezing of cells include the rate of freezing,
the type and concentration of cryoprotectant and the cell concentration [35–39].
Although optimal results are obtained
using a programmable cell freezer it is possible to control the rate of freezing in other
ways. These include the use of a thickwalled polystyrene box stored in a −80 ◦ C
freezer or a special device designed to fit
into the neck of a liquid nitrogen cell storage bank, thus holding the cells in vapour
phase and allowing them to cool down
slowly. These methods do not give such
a high viability on recovery of cells from
frozen stock as does the programmable
freezer. Avoidance of ice crystal formation within the cell is critical and this
is minimized in several ways, including
incorporation of a cryoprotectant such as
dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) or glycerol, an
increased serum concentration, a high cell
number and a controlled slow rate of freezing. For most mammalian cells, the optimum rate is −1 ◦ C/min. DMSO at 10%
is the most commonly used cryoprotectant

PROTOCOL 3.9

and the protocol outlined here describes
its use. However, it may be toxic to some
cells. (Note: DMSO is a polar solvent and
can penetrate the human skin, together
with any substances dissolved in it. Take
care when handling it and wear protective
gloves.)

73

The method of recovery of cells is also
critical and should aim to avoid osmotic
shock. Frozen cells need to be thawed
quickly to 37 ◦ C and then diluted very
slowly in culture medium.

PROTOCOL 3.10
Freezing cells

Equipment
All equipment coming into direct contact
with cells must be sterile.
Plastic freezing vials (2 ml)
Pastettes (long-form and short-form)
Universal containers (conical-bottomed)
with labels showing volume gradations
Black permanent marker pen
Waste bottle for medium
Improved Neubauer haemocytometer
chamber with coverslip
Bench centrifuge
Inverted phase contrast microscope with
×10 objective
Programmable cell freezer or
Thick-walled polystyrene box or
Device for neck of liquid nitrogen cell
bank or storage vessel
Dewar flask with vented lid suitable for the
storage of liquid nitrogen
Liquid nitrogen cell bank
Storage vessel for liquid nitrogen
Trays or straws for storing ampoules in cell
bank
Face protection
Insulated protective gloves
Long forceps
Micropipette (1–5 ml)
Tips for micropipette

Reagents
All reagents must be sterile.

Hanks balanced salt solution without calcium and magnesium (HBSS)
Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO)
Culture medium containing 10–20% serum
1% Trypan blue
Liquid nitrogen in Dewar flask

Procedure
• Determine the viability and cell count
of the population for freezing using
Protocol 3.8.
• Calculate the volume of diluent needed
to resuspend the cells at 5 × 106 /ml.
• Prepare this volume of a 10% solution
of DMSO in culture medium and mix
well.
• Label the appropriate number of freezing vials clearly with the date, pass number and cell type using the black marker
pen.
• Centrifuge the cell suspension at 1000
rpm for 5 min, discard the supernatant
and resuspend the cells in the required
volume of 10% DMSO. Mix well.
• Dispense the cell suspension as 1.8 ml
aliquots into the freezer tubes using a
micropipette and cap them securely.
• For programmable freezing the vials can
be transferred directly to the freezer and
the freezing cycle started (see manufacturer’s instructions).
• Transfer the vials to the long-term storage facility when freezing is complete.

PROTOCOL 3.10

• For freezing with a device for the neck
of the cell bank or storage vessel, try the
following as a starting point: Keep the
filled freezing vials at 4 ◦ C for 60 min,
transfer to the freezing device and keep
in vapour phase overnight, then transfer
them to the long-term storage facility.
• For freezing with a polystyrene box,
try the following as a starting point:

75

Keep the filled freezing vials at 4 ◦ C for
60 min, transfer to the box and hold the
box at −20 ◦ C for 60 min, transfer the
box to −80 ◦ C overnight, then transfer
them to the long-term storage facility.
(Note: Frozen cells can be stored at
−80 ◦ C for several months.)

PROTOCOL 3.11
Thawing cells

Equipment
All equipment coming into direct contact
with cells must be sterile.
Water bath set at 37 ◦ C
Protective face mask
Insulated protective gloves
Long forceps
Universal containers (conical-bottomed)
with labels showing volume gradations
Watch with second hand
Pastettes (long-form and short-form)
Bench centrifuge
Dewar flask for storage of liquid nitrogen

Reagents
All reagents must be sterile.
Culture medium warmed to 37 ◦ C
Liquid nitrogen in Dewar flask
70% methanol/30% water

Procedure
• Half-fill the Dewar flask with liquid
nitrogen.
• Remove vials from the nitrogen cell
bank and transfer to the Dewar flask
containing liquid nitrogen for transport
to the lab. (Note: There is a risk of
vials exploding when removed from the
nitrogen bank. Protective face mask and
gloves must be worn until the vial has
been completely thawed.)

• Remove one freezing vial from the flask
using forceps.
• Holding the vial at arm’s length, plunge
it into the water bath and agitate the vial
in the water to thaw it quickly and bring
it up to 37 ◦ C.
• Immerse the thawed vial in 70%
methanol/30% water to sterilize it and
wipe dry with a tissue. (Note: Make sure
you have previously noted the details
written on the side of the vial in case they
get washed off.)
• Remove the lid of the vial in the Class II
cabinet and transfer the thawed contents
of the vial into a universal container,
using a pastette.
• Take up some warmed culture medium
into the pastette and add one drop
(∼100 µl) to the cell suspension. Mix it
gently and add another drop ∼15 s later.
Continue until the volume has been
doubled. Then add ∼500 µl every 15 s
with gentle mixing until the volume has
doubled again. Complete the dilution
by adding 1000 µl every 15 s up to
∼16 ml. (Note: The rate of addition of
medium is gradually increased as the
volume increases because the risk of
osmotic shock decreases.)
• When dilution is complete, centrifuge
the cell suspension at 1000 rpm for
5 min and resuspend in 15–20 ml
medium. Mix gently and centrifuge
again at 1000 rpm for 5 min. Repeat this
step to wash off residual DMSO.

PROTOCOL 3.11

• Resuspend the cells in a known volume
of medium and determine cell number
and viability using Protocol 3.8.

(PMNs), Boyum [40, 41] therefore used
an isoosmotic density barrier solution of
metrizoate and a polysaccharide (Ficoll)
of density 1.077–1.078 g/ml. The polysaccharide is included to aggregate the erythrocytes and so make them easier to sediment. Blood (diluted 1 : 1 with saline) is
layered over the barrier and the mononuclear cells are harvested from the interface
after centrifugation.
More recently metrizoate has been replaced by the chemically similar diatrizoate (see Figure 3.2) and there are several commercially available media (e.g.
Lymphoprep, Ficoll-Hypaque and
Histopaque) that have the same density

Isolation of human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells – John Graham
Introduction

Using a density barrier
The density of most human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
is <1.078 g/ml. In order to separate
these cells from the denser erythrocytes and polymorphonuclear leukocytes
I

77

CH3

CH3COHN

NCOCH3
I

a

CH3COHN

NHCOCH3

I

I

b

COOH
CH3
CH2OH

I

I
COOH

CO

I

NCH2 CH(OH)CH2 OH

CHCH2 NHCO
OH

c
I

I
CONHCH2 CHCH2 OH
OH
CH3

CH2 OH

I

CHCH2 NHCO
OH

CO

CH3
OH

CO

NCH2 CHCH2 N

CH2 OH

I

CONHCH2 CH

d

OH
I

I
I
CONHCH2 CHCH2 OH
OH

I
CONHCH2 CHCH2 OH
OH

Figure 3.2 Molecular structure of iodinates density gradient media: (a) metrizoate, (b) diatrizoate,
(c) Nycodenz, (d) iodixanol

78

CELL CULTURE

(1.077 g/ml) and contain 9.6% (w/v) diatrizoate and 5.6% polysucrose (or Ficoll).
The only difference between the media
is the endotoxin level – this is lower
(<1 EU/ml) in Lymphoprep than in
other comparable commercial media.
There is, however, evidence that the
polysaccharide may interact with the surface of lymphocytes [42]. Moreover, the
presence of an impermeant ion (diatrizoate) in the medium may also affect the
Gibbs-Donnan equilibrium of ions across
the membrane. An alternative medium
was therefore developed which was nonionic and contained no polysaccharide.
This isoosmotic medium comprises 14.1%
(w/v) Nycodenz, 0.44% NaCl and 5 mM
Tricine-NaOH, pH 7.0 [43, 44]. It is available commercially as NycoPrep 1.077;
it has the same density as Lymphoprep
and separation of the PBMCs is achieved
in exactly the same manner, although in
the absence of a polysaccharide a slightly
longer centrifugation time is required to
achieve satisfactory pelleting of the erythrocytes.
The density barrier can alternatively
be produced by dilution of one of
the commercial general-purpose media,
Universal
(60%,
w/v
NycoPrep
Nycodenz) or OptiPrep (60% w/v
iodixanol). See Figure 3.2 for the molecular structure of Nycodenz and iodixanol.

Using a mixer technique
An alternative strategy, devised by Ford
and Rickwood [45], considerably simplifies the procedure. A 19% (w/v)
Nycodenz solution (ρ = 1.100 g/ml) was
added to an equal volume of whole blood
in order to raise the density of the plasma
in whole blood to 1.077 g/ml. During centrifugation at 1500g for 30 min at 20 ◦ C
the erythrocytes and polymorphonuclear
leukocytes (PMNs) will sediment while
the PBMCs float to the top and they

are recovered from the meniscus and the
medium below it. The ease of operation
makes the mixer–flotation technique particularly attractive when handling large
numbers of potentially pathogenic samples.
Recoveries and purity of PBMCs
isolated by flotation are almost identical to
those obtained with Lymphoprep. Kaden
et al. [46] compared Lymphoprep with a
mixer based on Nycodenz; these workers
found that the PBMC harvests were
essentially identical by both techniques.
A commercial solution (NycoPrep
Mixer) is no longer produced and the highdensity solution for mixing with the blood
must be produced by dilution of either
NycoPrep Universal or OptiPrep. A
convenient alternative is simply to add a
smaller volume of OptiPrep (1.32 g/ml)
itself – the lower osmolality of OptiPrep
compared to NycoPrep Universal allows
the use of this strategy and it is the one
that is described below.
An interesting observation is that if the
blood has to be stored before fractionation,
then, as long as the density of the blood
is raised by addition of the dense medium
immediately after drawing, the loss of
recovery and purity of the PBMCs that is
observed with density barrier techniques is
much less marked. This is probably related
to the fact that once the density of the
plasma has been raised, the PBMCs do not
settle out upon standing [47].

Using a barrier flotation technique
In a third alternative (a variation of the
mixer technique), the blood is adjusted
to a density considerably higher than that
of the PBMCs (ρ = 1.090 g/ml) and layered beneath a ρ = 1.078 g/ml density
barrier. As with the mixer, the PBMCs
float to the surface, but this is the only
system in which the cells do not band

PROTOCOL 3.11

adjacent to the plasma-containing sample layer. In both of the other techniques
the PBMCs are heavily contaminated by
platelets (thrombocytes). In this method
the great majority of platelets remain in the

79

plasma layer [48]. The low-density barrier
thus acts as a ‘buffer-zone’ between the
PBMCs and all the other blood components – erythrocytes, PMNs, platelets and
plasma proteins.

PROTOCOL 3.12
Purification of human PBMCs on a density
barrier

Reagents
Anticoagulant: 100 mM EDTA or 3.8%
1
citrate 
Hepes-buffered saline (HBS): 0.85% (w/v)
2
NaCl, 10 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.4 
Lymphocyte separation medium (e.g.
Lymphoprep or NycoPrep 1.077) or
OptiPrep diluted with HBS (5 vol. +
17 vol. respectively)

Equipment
Low-speed bench centrifuge (preferably
temperature controlled) with swingingbucket rotor to take 15 ml clear screwcapped polystyrene centrifuge tubes
Plastic Pasteur pipettes
Syringe (5–10 ml) and metal filling can3
nula (optional) 

Procedure
1. Collect venous blood using either EDTA
(2 mM final concentration) or citrate
(0.38% final concentration) as anticoagulant.
2. Dilute blood with an equal volume of
4
HBS by repeated gentle inversions. 
3. Using a plastic Pasteur pipette, layer
6 ml of this diluted blood over 3 ml
of the chosen medium in the centrifuge
5
tube. 

4. Centrifuge at 700g for 15 min
(Lymphoprep) or 700g for 20 min
(NycoPrep 1.077 or iodixanol solu6 
7
tion) at 20 ◦ C. 
5. Allow the rotor to decelerate using a
slow deceleration program or without
8
the brake. 
6. Collect the cells at the interface using a
Pasteur pipette.
7. Dilute with two volumes of HBS and
harvest the cells at 200–500g for
15 min.

Notes

1 Heparin is also suitable but the most
widely used anticoagulant is EDTA or
citrate.

2 Tricine-buffered saline or any suitable
balanced salt solution is permissible.

3 A syringe and metal cannula can be
used to underlay the blood with the
medium (step 3) – the preferred method
particularly for larger volumes.

4 High yields (>95%) of PBMCs are
only obtained if the whole blood is
diluted with saline. With undiluted
blood yields are reduced to <85%
because the interface between the
sample and the medium is less stable
and there is a tendency for the blood to
‘stream’ through the medium, carrying

PROTOCOL 3.12

erythrocytes and mononuclear cells
into the pellet.


5 For larger volumes use 20 ml of
diluted blood over 10 ml of medium
in a 50 ml tube.

6 The longer time is recommended
for density barriers not containing
polysaccharide.

81

◦

7 If the separation is executed at 4 C
add another 5 min centrifugation time.


8 Slow smooth deceleration is recommended. Rapid changes in the rpm
create vortices in the liquid and
‘swirling’ of the pellet and banded
cells.

PROTOCOL 3.13
Purification of human PBMCs using a mixer
technique

Reagents
Anticoagulant: 100 mM EDTA or 3.8%
1
citrate 
Hepes-buffered saline (HBS): 0.85% (w/v)
2
NaCl, 10 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.4 
OptiPrep

5. Collect the PBMCs from the meniscus
downwards to about 1 cm from the cell
6
pellet. 
6. Dilute the collected material with two
volumes of buffered-saline and pellet
the cells at 250–500g for 5–10 min.

Notes
Equipment
Low-speed bench centrifuge (preferably
temperature controlled) with swingingbucket rotor to take 15 ml clear screwcapped polystyrene centrifuge tubes
Plastic Pasteur pipettes

Procedure
1. Collect venous blood using either EDTA
(2 mM final concentration) or citrate
(0.38% final concentration) as anticoagulant.
2. Mix whole blood gently but thoroughly
(by repeated inversion) with OptiPrep
(10 vol. + 1.25 vol. respectively) in a
suitable capped centrifuge tube (15 ml
3
tubes for 5–10 ml samples). 
3. Layer approx 0.5 ml of HBS on top
and centrifuge at 1500gav for 30 min at
4
20 ◦ C. 
4. Allow the rotor to decelerate using a
slow deceleration program or without
5
the brake. 


1 Heparin is also suitable but the most
widely used anticoagulant is EDTA or
citrate.

2 Tricine-buffered saline or any suitable
balanced salt solution is permissible.

3 The actual increase in density of the
plasma will depend on the haematocrit
of the blood, if contamination of the
PBMCs by PMNs is unacceptable, the
amount of OptiPrep added should be
reduced. If the yield of PBMCs is very
low, the amount of OptiPrep added
should be increased.

4 The layer of HBS on top of the
blood is not critical to the separation,
but it facilitates the harvesting of the
PBMCs from the meniscus.

5 Slow smooth deceleration is recommended. Rapid changes in the rpm
create vortices in the liquid and
‘swirling’ of the pellet and banded
cells.

6 Approximately 90% of the PBMCs are
in the top third of the plasma.

PROTOCOL 3.14
Purification of human PBMCs using a barrier
flotation technique

Reagents
Anticoagulant: 100 mM EDTA or 3.8%
1
citrate 
Hepes-buffered saline (HBS): 0.85% (w/v)
2
NaCl, 10 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.4 
OptiPrep

Equipment
Low-speed bench centrifuge (preferably
temperature controlled) with swingingbucket rotor to take 15 ml clear screwcapped polystyrene centrifuge tubes
Plastic Pasteur pipettes
Syringe (5–10 ml) and metal filling can3
nula (optional) 

4. Prepare the ρ = 1.078 g/ml density barrier solution by diluting 5 ml of working solution with 9.6 ml of HBS.
5. Using a syringe and metal cannula,
underlayer 5 ml of the density barrier
with 5 ml of blood in a 15 ml centrifuge
tube.
6. Layer approx 0.5 ml of HBS on top
and centrifuge at 700 gav for 30 min at
4 
5
20 ◦ C. 
7. Allow the rotor to decelerate using a
slow deceleration program or without
6
the brake. 
8. The PBMCs band on the top of the
1.078 g/ml barrier. Remove the band
with a pipette.

Notes
Procedure
1. Collect venous blood using either EDTA
(2 mM final concentration) or citrate
(0.38% final concentration) as anticoagulant.
2. Make a working solution of 40% (w/v)
iodixanol: dilute 4 ml of OptiPrep
with 2 ml of HBS.
3. Adjust the plasma of whole blood
to approx ρ = 1.095 g/ml by adding
2.7 ml of the working solution to 10 ml
of whole undiluted blood and mix by
repeated gentle inversion.


1 Heparin is also suitable but the most
widely used anticoagulant is EDTA or
citrate.

2 Tricine-buffered saline or any suitable
balanced salt solution is permissible.

3 A syringe and metal cannula is the
preferred method for underlayering
the medium with the blood (step 5)
but a Pasteur pipette may be used
for overlayering the blood with the
medium.

4 The layer of HBS on top of the
blood is not critical to the separation,

84

CELL CULTURE

but it facilitates the harvesting of the
PBMCs from the meniscus.


5 The separation may be executed at
4 ◦ C.

6 Slow smooth deceleration is recommended. Rapid changes in the rpm
create vortices in the liquid and
‘swirling’ of the pellet and banded
cells.

12.

13.

14.

References
1. Freshney, R. I. (1987) Culture of Animal
Cells. A Manual of Basic Technique, 2nd edn,
pp. 257–288. Wiley-Liss.
2. James, J. J., Johnstone, L. and Milman, A.
(1997) Laboratory Manager. Croner Publications Ltd.
3. Health Services Advisory Committee (1991)
Safe Working and the Prevention of Infection
in Clinical Laboratories. HMSO, London.
4. Health Services Advisory Committee (1991)
Safety in Health Services Laboratories. Safe
Working and the Prevention of Infection in
Clinical Laboratories. Model Rules. HMSO,
London.
5. Howie Report (1978) Code of Practice
for Prevention of Infection in Clinical
Laboratories and Post Mortem Rooms.
HMSO, London.
6. Freshney, R. I. (1987) Culture of Animal
Cells. A Manual of Basic Technique, 2nd edn,
pp. 57–84. Wiley-Liss.
7. Karmiol, S. (2000) Development of serumfree medium. In: Animal Cell Culture.
A Practical Approach (John R. W. Masters,
ed.), pp. 105–121. Oxford University Press.
8. Waymouth, C. (1974) To disaggregate or not
to disaggregate. Injury and cell disaggregation, transient or permanent? In vitro, 10,
97–111.
9. Freshney, R. I. (1987). Culture of Animal
Cells. A Manual of Basic Technique, 2nd edn,
pp. 115–118. Wiley-Liss.
10. Alberts, B., Bray, D., Lewis, J., Raff, M.,
Roberts, K. and Watson, J. D. (1983) In:
Molecular Biology of the Cell, pp. 673–715.
Garland Publishing Inc.
11. X Fu, V., Schwarze S. R., Reznikoff, C. A.
and Jarrard, D. F. (2004) In: Culture of

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.

23.

24.

25.

Human Tumor Cells (Roswitha Pfagner and
R. Ian Freshney, eds), pp. 101–123. WileyLiss.
Darling, J. L. (2004) In: Culture of Human
Tumor Cells (Roswitha Pfagner and R. Ian
Freshney, eds), pp. 349–372. Wiley-Liss.
Whitehead, R. H. (2004) In: Culture of
Human Tumor Cells (Roswitha Pfagner and
R. Ian Freshney, eds), pp. 67–80. WileyLiss.
Park, J-G., Ku, J-L., Kim, H-S., Park, S-Y.
and Rutten, M. J. (2004) In: Culture of
Human Tumor Cells (Roswitha Pfagner and
R. Ian Freshney, eds), pp. 23–66. WileyLiss.
Wu, R. (2004) In: Culture of Human
Tumor Cells (Roswitha Pfagner and R. Ian
Freshney, eds), pp. 1–21. Wiley-Liss.
Barsky, S. H. and Alpaugh, M. L. (2004) In:
Culture of Human Tumor Cells (Roswitha
Pfagner
and
R. Ian Freshney,
eds),
pp. 221–260. Wiley-Liss.
Freshney, R. I. (1987) Culture of Animal
Cells. A Manual of Basic Technique, 2nd edn,
pp. 122–124. Wiley-Liss.
Freshney, R. I. (1987) Culture of Animal
Cells. A Manual of Basic Technique, 2nd edn.
pp. 268–270. Wiley-Liss.
Vries, J. E., Bentham, M. and Rumke, P.
(1973) Separation of viable from non-viable
tumor cells by flotation on a Ficoll-triosil
mixture. Transplantation, 15, 409–410.
Freshney, R. I. (1987) Culture of Animal
Cells. A Manual of Basic Technique, 2nd edn.
pp. 268–270. Wiley-Liss.
Roper, P. R. and Drewinko, B. (1976) Cancer Res., 36, 2182.
Weisenthal, L. M., Lalude, A. O. T. and
Miller, J. B. (1983) In vitro chemosensitivity of human bladder cancer. Cancer, 51,
1490–1496.
Kaltenbach, J. P., Kaltenbach, M. H. and
Lyons, W. B. (1958) Nigrosin as a dye for
differentiating live and dead ascites cells.
Exp. Cell Res., 15, 112–117.
Wilson, A. P. (2000) In: Animal Cell Culture, 3rd edn, (John R. W. Masters, ed.),
pp. 185–186. Oxford University Press.
Rotman, B. and Papermaster, B. W. (1966)
Membrane properties of living mammalian
cells as studied by enzymatic hydrolysis of
fluorogenic esters. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA,
55, 134–141.

PROTOCOL 3.14

26. Patel, D. (1999) Viable cell counting using
ethidium bromide and acridine orange.
In: Multimedia Methods in Cell Biology
(J. R. Harris and D. Rickwood, eds), p. 91.
Chapman & Hall, CRCnetBase.
27. Gartler, S. M. (1967) Genetic markers as
tracers in cell culture. In: Second Biennial
Review Conference on Cell, Tissue and Organ
Culture. NCI Monographs, pp. 167–195.
28. Nelson-Rees, W. and Flandermeyer, R. R.
(1977) Inter- and intraspecies contamination
of human breast tumour cell lines HBC and
Br Ca5 and other cell cultures. Science, 195,
1343–1344.
29. Hay, R. J. (1992) Cell line preservation and
characterisation. In: Animal Cell Culture
(R. Ian Freshney, ed.), IRL Press, Oxford.
30. Freshney, R. I. (1987) Animal Cell Culture.
A Manual of Basic Techniques, 2nd edn,
pp. 169–185. Wiley-Liss.
31. Macy, M. (1978) Identification of cell line
species by isoenzyme analysis. Man. Am.
Tissue Culture Assoc., 4, 833–836.
32. UKCCR (1999) Guidelines for the Use of
Cell Lines in Cancer Research. Published by
UKCCR, PO Box 123, Lincoln’s Inn Fields,
London WC2A 3PX.
33. Chen, T. R. (1977) In situ detection of
mycoplasma contamination in cell cultures by
fluorescent Hoechst 33258 staining. Exp. Cell
Res., 104, 255.
34. Wilson, A. P., Garner, C. M. and Hubbold,
L. (1999) Hoechst staining for the detection
of mycoplasma contamination. In: Multimedia Methods in Cell Biology (J. R. Harris and
D. Rickwood, eds), p. 182. Chapman & Hall,
CRCnetBase.
35. Ashwood-Smith, M. J. and Farrant, J. (1980)
Low Temperature Preservation in Medicine
and Biology. Pitman Medical.

85

36. Foreman, J. and Pegg, D. E. (1979) Cell
preservation in a programmed cooling
machine: the effects of variations in
supercooling. Cryobiology, 16, 315–321.
37. Green, A. E., Athreya, B., Lehr, H. B. and
Coriell, L. L. (1967) Viability of cell cultures
following extended preservation in liquid
nitrogen. Proc. Soc. Exp. Biol. Med., 124,
1302–1307.
38. Harris, L. W. and Griffiths, J. B. (1977)
Relative effects of cooling and warming rates
on mammalian cells during the freeze–thaw
cycle. Cryobiology, 14, 662–669.
39. Leibo, S. P. and Mazur, P. (1971) The role of
cooling rates in low-temperature preservation.
Cryobiology, 8, 447–452.
40. Boyum, A. (1964) Nature, 204, 793–794.
41. Boyum, A. (1968) Scan. J. Lab. Clin. Invest
Suppl., 97, 51–76.
42. Feucht, H. E., Hadan, M. R., Frank, F. and
Reithmuller, G. (1980) J. Immunol Methods,
38, 43–51.
43. Ford, T. C. and Rickwood, D. (1982) Anal.
Biochem. 123, 293–298.
44. Boyum, A. (1983) In: Iodinated Density Gradient Media – a Practical Approach (Rickwood, D., ed.), Oxford University Press,
pp. 147–171.
45. Ford, T. C. and Rickwood, D. (1990) J.
Immunol. Methods 134, 237–241.
46. Kaden, J., Schönemann, C., Leverenz, S. and
Koch, B. (1994) Allergologie Jahrgang, 17,
429–433.
47. Ford, T. C. and Rickwood, D. (1992) Clin.
Chim. Acta, 206, 249–252.
48. Ahmed, Y., Walton, L. J. and Graham, J. M.
(2004) 12th International Congress of Immunology, Montreal, Abstr. No. 1758.

4
Isolation and Functional Analysis
of Organelles
John Graham

Protocol 4.1
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol
Protocol

4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7

Protocol 4.8
Protocol 4.9
Protocol 4.10

Protocol 4.11
Protocol 4.12
Protocol 4.13
Protocol 4.14
Protocol 4.15
Protocol 4.16
Protocol 4.17
Protocol 4.18

Isolation of nuclei from mammalian liver in an
iodixanol gradient (with notes on cultured cells)
Isolation of metaphase chromosomes
Isolation of the nuclear envelope
Nuclear pore complex isolation
Preparation of nuclear matrix
Preparation of nucleoli
Isolation of a heavy mitochondrial fraction from rat
liver by differential centrifugation
Preparation of a light mitochondrial fraction from
tissues and cultured cells
Purification of yeast mitochondria in a discontinuous
Nycodenz gradient
Purification of mitochondria from mammalian liver or
cultured cells in a median-loaded discontinuous
Nycodenz gradient
Succinate–INT reductase assay
Isolation of lysosomes in a discontinuous Nycodenz
gradient
β-Galactosidase (spectrophotometric assay)
β-Galactosidase (fluorometric assay)
Isolation of mammalian peroxisomes in an iodixanol
gradient
Catalase assay
Analysis of major organelles in a preformed iodixanol
gradient
Separation of smooth and rough ER in preformed
sucrose gradients

Cell Biology Protocols. Edited by J. Robin Harris, John Graham, David Rickwood
 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-84758-1

98
100
102
104
106
107
108
110
112
114
116
117
119
120
121
123
124
127

88

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

Protocol 4.19 Separation of smooth and rough ER in a self-generated
iodixanol gradient
Protocol 4.20 NADPH-cytochrome c reductase assay
Protocol 4.21 Glucose-6-phosphatase assay
Protocol 4.22 RNA analysis
Protocol 4.23 Isolation of Golgi membranes from liver
Protocol 4.24 Assay of UDP-galactose galactosyl
transferase
Protocol 4.25 Purification of human erythrocyte ‘ghosts’
Protocol 4.26 Isolation of plasma membrane sheets from rat liver
Protocol 4.27 Assay for 5 -nucleotidase
Protocol 4.28 Assay for alkaline phosphodiesterase
Protocol 4.29 Assay for ouabain-sensitive Na+ /K+ -ATPase
Protocol 4.30 Isolation of chloroplasts from green leaves or pea
seedlings
Protocol 4.31 Measurement of chloroplast chlorophyll
Protocol 4.32 Assessment of chloroplast integrity

129
131
132
133
134
136
137
139
141
143
144
145
147
148

Introduction
This chapter is concerned primarily with the purification of the major subcellular membranes and organelles and organelle components from mammalian tissues and cultured
cells and from plant tissues; it therefore features nuclei, mitochondria, lysosomes, peroxisomes, Golgi, smooth and rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER), plasma membrane and
chloroplasts. The protocols are primarily concerned with the isolation of these organelles
on a preparative basis, while Chapter 5 is concerned with analytical gradients for studies
on membrane trafficking and cell signalling.
With few exceptions, subcellular organelles cannot be purified satisfactorily from a
tissue or cell homogenate by differential centrifugation alone (see below); instead, the
pelleted material from differential centrifugation is further purified in a density gradient,
usually on the basis of buoyant density but occasionally on the basis of sedimentation
velocity.

Homogenization
For most purposes, an isoosmotic medium containing 0.25 M sucrose, 1 mM EDTA,
10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 may be used for any soft tissue or cultured animal cell. There
are a number of minor variations such as adding EGTA instead of, or in addition to,
EDTA and substituting Tris by an alternative organic buffer (Hepes or Tricine). Such
modifications do not materially affect the result of the fractionation procedure; they are
normally introduced to be more compatible with some subsequent add-on procedure or
analysis. Others, summarized in Table 4.1, are more critical to the isolation of a particular
organelle or use of a particular tissue or cell type. The presence of divalent cations
is detrimental to the functioning of mitochondria hence EDTA is regularly included
in media for the isolation of these organelles (and also lysosomes and peroxisomes).
Mannitol-containing media (sometimes also supplemented with K+ ) are also suited to

89

HOMOGENIZATION

the preservation of oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria. On the other hand, media
omitting any chelating agent but containing K+ and Mg2+ ions are essential for the
preservation of nuclear structure. Omission of EDTA is also common in the isolation of
rough ER, while inclusion of 0.1% ethanol promotes good preservation of peroxisome
structure and function. High K+ media are also often used if the homogenate tends to be
rather gelatinous (e.g. skeletal muscle). For a more detailed commentary on organellespecific media, see ref. 2.
The tissue or cell type often dictates the homogenization hardware and the homogenization medium (Table 4.1). Most soft tissues can be disrupted using a Potter-Elvehjem
(Teflon-glass) homogenizer driven by a high-torque electric motor (at 500–700 rpm).
For hard tissue such as skeletal muscle to be homogenized by this device, it is often
first softened using protease treatment. This approach is widely used for isolation of
organelles such as mitochondria [4, 5], but for the isolation of other membranes such
as plasma membrane from muscle, a Polytron (rotating blades) homogenizer is more
commonly used [12, 13].
Cultured cells grown as a monolayer can often be disrupted using a tight-fitting Dounce
homogenizer (all glass) in an isoosmotic medium (see Table 4.1), but a ball-bearing
homogenizer (cell-cracker) or several passages through a 25-gauge syringe needle are
frequently used, often more effective, alternatives for any type of cultured cell. The
ball-bearing homogenizer is recognized as not only effective in disrupting these cells,
but at the same time delicate organelles such as lysosomes seem well preserved [14].
For more information on these devices, see ref. 2.

Table 4.1

Homogenization media

Homogenization medium
0.2 M mannitol, 50 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM,
Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.4
100 mM KCl, 20 mM MOPS, 5 mM MgSO4 , 1 mM ATP,
5 mM EDTA, 0.2% bovine serum albumin
0.1 M sucrose, 10 mM EDTA, 46 mM KCl, 100 mM
Tris-HCl, pH 7.4
0.21 M mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 10 mM EDTA, 10 mM
Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, containing 2.4 mg trypsin/100 ml
0.25 M sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% ethanol, 10 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 7.5
0.25 M sucrose, 25 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2 , 20 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 7.4
0.32 M sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.4
0.25 M sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM triethanolamine-acetic
acid, pH 7.6
15 mM KCl, 1.5 mM Mg(OAc), 1 mM DTT, 10 mM
Hepes-KOH, pH 7.5, adjusted to 75 mM KCl, 5 mM
Mg(OAc), 1 mM DTT, 45 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.5 after
homogenization
1.5 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2 , 5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, adjusted
to 1 mM EGTA after swelling but before homogenization

Application

Refs

Liver mitochondria

1, 2

Muscle mitochondria

3

Muscle mitochondria

4

Muscle mitochondria

5

Peroxisomes

6

Nuclei

7

Brain mitochondria,
synaptosomes
Monolayer cells

2
8

Cultured cells

9, 10

Lymphocytes

11

90

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

Some suspension culture cells, particularly those containing a very high nucleus :
cytoplasm volume ratio, such as lymphocytes or Jurkat cells, are often impossible to
disrupt by any means, unless they are first swollen in a frankly hypoosmotic medium
(see Table 4.1). This means that the medium may not be ideally suited to organelle isolation. The method that employs a hypoosmotic magnesium acetate solution (Table 4.1)
incorporates a strategy for minimizing possible deleterious effects of the medium. After
the cells have been swollen in a large volume of the buffer, they are pelleted and
most of the liquid removed prior to homogenization [9, 10]; in this way the isoosmotic
cytosol is minimally diluted, and so affords some protection to the released organelles.
Further protection is provided by immediate addition of a hyperosmotic medium to
return the homogenate to an isoosmotic condition. This approach might be used with
any method using a hypoosmotic medium. Frequently, however, the less satisfactory
option of pelleting the organelle prior to suspension in a suitable isoosmotic medium is
chosen.

Differential centrifugation
Differential centrifugation [15] is used to prepare crude fractions of subcellular particles
from homogenates by imposing a series of centrifugations at sequentially increasing
g-forces and/or centrifugation times, the supernatant from each step being passed to the
next round of centrifugation. It is often a necessary first step subsequent to a purification
of one or more organelles on a density gradient. Routinely it involves four centrifugations
and it separates particles mainly by size (sedimentation velocity):
1. 500–1000g for 5–10 min (nuclear pellet)
2. 3000g for 10 min (heavy mitochondrial pellet)
3. 12 000–15 000g for 10–20 min (light mitochondrial pellet)
4. 100 000g for 45–60 min (microsomal pellet)
There are two problems with differential centrifugation: poor recoveries and contamination of pellets by smaller particles. In step 1 for example, the nuclei at the top of the
sample are exposed, initially at least, to the lowest g-force and have the furthest to travel,
and they will therefore not become part of the stable pellet during the centrifugation.
On the other hand, smaller particles (e.g. mitochondria), initially close to the bottom
of the tube, which have the shortest distance to travel and are exposed to the highest
g-forces, will become part of the pellet. These problems are most severe in swingingbucket rotors because of their long sedimentation path lengths and consequent large
differences between gmin and gmax . Fixed-angle rotors, of the same tube volume, have
much shorter sedimentation path lengths and are the recommended ones for differential
centrifugation.
The contamination of a pellet by smaller particles can be reduced by ‘washing’.
This involves resuspending the pellet in the homogenization buffer before repeating the
centrifugation and combining the two supernatants for the next round of centrifugation.
Sometimes the washing is repeated. The procedure of washing has its own attendant
problems: unless the resuspension of the pellet is carried out very gently (preferably

DENSITY GRADIENT CENTRIFUGATION

91

in a loose-fitting Dounce homogenizer, using very few slow strokes of the pestle), the
organelles in the pellet themselves can be further disrupted. It is also time consuming.
Nevertheless there are a few cases where differential centrifugation is the only purification procedure; the preparation of the so-called ‘heavy mitochondrial fraction’ from
rat liver or beef heart is one of them (see Protocol 4.7). In this case, the ability of differential centrifugation to produce a mitochondrial fraction of acceptable purity, rapidly
and under isoosmotic conditions in a ‘mitochondrial-friendly medium’, is essential to
the retention of coupled oxidative phosphorylation. The use of a density gradient might
provide additional purity, but the additional time and the stress imposed on the organelles
by the increased hydrostatic pressure associated with higher g-forces needed for density
gradient centrifugation, can cause a serious loss of functional integrity.
Differential centrifugation is also important simply because it does separate particles
mainly by size. Buoyant density gradient purification of peroxisomes or lysosomes for
example is almost invariably carried out on a light mitochondrial fraction (see Protocol
4.8 ) to eliminate smaller particles that may have similar densities. For the same reason
intact stacks of Golgi membranes are similarly purified from a 5000g fraction of a liver
homogenate (see Protocol 4.23 ). On the other hand, unless they are first removed, large
rapidly sedimenting particles in homogenates may disturb shallow gradients designed to
fractionate smaller low-density particles.
Equipment

With the exception of the microsomal pellet, all differential centrifugation can be executed in a refrigerated high-speed centrifuge. To minimize the contamination of pellets
by smaller particles (see above) fixed-angle rotors are preferred to swinging-bucket rotors
(of the same tube volume) because of their shorter sedimentation path length and the
smaller difference in g-force between the meniscus and the bottom of the tube [15, 16].
Clearly the smaller the angle of the rotor (to the vertical) the more efficient the separation, but the other effect of a smaller angle – the tendency of the pellet to be less
compact and well-defined is a disadvantage. In practice, rotors with angles of approx
30◦ represent a happy medium. The only exception to this preference for a fixed-angle
rotor is the formation of the nuclear pellet (step 1); swinging-bucket rotors tend to be
used for this step simply because it has routinely been carried out in low-speed centrifuges, which are predominantly fitted with such rotors. Moreover, the difference in
sedimentation rate between the nuclei and the next largest organelles (mitochondria) is
so large, that rotor type is less important.

Density gradient centrifugation
It is now widely recognized, particularly for some of the larger organelles (nuclei,
mitochondria, lysosomes, peroxisomes), which can be pelleted at relatively low g-forces
(1000–15 000g), that the use of viscous, hyperosmotic sucrose gradients at g-forces
of more than 100 000g in long sedimentation path length swinging-bucket rotors, is
both inconvenient and potentially deleterious to the organelles. Consequently, there is
a pronounced trend to the use of low-viscosity gradient media such as Nycodenz or
iodixanol [17], whose gradients have a much lower osmolality than those of sucrose (or

92

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

even be isoosmotic). Although the traditional swinging-bucket rotor is still widely used
for density gradient centrifugation, the short sedimentation path length of vertical or nearvertical rotors not only reduces the centrifugation time, it also minimizes considerably
the hydrostatic pressure imposed on the particles in the gradients. The new protocols in
this chapter reflect these trends and concerns. The means by which discontinuous and
continuous gradients are prepared and how they are harvested is too large a subject to
be considered in this text; ref. 18 contains detailed accounts of these procedures.
Some protocols take the advantage of the ability of some of the modern density
gradient media to form self-generated gradients. The colloidal silica particles in Percoll
can form such gradients at g-forces above 20 000g, while other gradient media such as
iodixanol, which is a true solute, requires g-forces in excess of 180 000g. Because
some of the colloidal silica particles will pellet during the centrifugation, vertical rotors
(normally the most efficient rotors for such gradients) are not recommended for selfgenerated Percoll gradients – fixed-angle rotors are more commonly used.
A disadvantage of Percoll gradients is that it is normally a requirement to remove the
colloidal silica particles prior to any analysis; the particles are light scattering and can
interfere with any spectrophotometric measurements; they also cause irregular banding
of proteins in SDS-PAGE. Moreover, removal of the silica colloid by sedimentation can
also lead to the loss of organelles into the gel pellet that is formed [19]. With the exception of spectrophotometric assays in the UV, if the organelle is at a sufficiently high
concentration to permit direct analysis on the gradient harvest, then it is usually unnecessary to remove solutes such as sucrose, Nycodenz or iodixanol. If solute removal is
required then the organelles can simply be sedimented from the gradient harvest after
dilution with two volumes of buffer, without loss of material [20].

Nuclei and nuclear components (see Protocols 4.1–4.6)
Nuclei

Detergent-free methods for the purification of nuclei have routinely involved the pelleting
of the organelles from a crude nuclear pellet suspension, through a dense (approx 2 M)
sucrose barrier. The nuclei lose water to the grossly hyperosmotic medium and attain
a density >1.32 g/ml. Pelleting the nuclei is thus the only option since this is the
limiting density of sucrose solutions. The high viscosity of the solutions also requires a
g-force, normally of 100 000g or higher, for at least 1 h. It is possible that DNA–protein
interactions become destabilized by the loss of water and the high hydrostatic pressure
at the bottom of the tube. On the other hand, in a discontinuous gradient of iodixanol
(centrifuged at 10 000g for 20 min), which is close to being isoosmotic, the nuclei
exhibit a much lower density (approx 1.23 g/ml) and can therefore band at an interface.
The method, developed for mammalian liver [20–23] has been used for other tissues
such as brain [24–26], a wide variety of cultured cells including CHO cells [27], HeLa
cells [28], HFK cells [29], human fibroblasts [30–32], human carcinoma cells [33] and
non-mammalian sources such as mussel [34] and wheatgerm [35].
Nuclear components

Isolation of the nuclear envelope poses a problem; should the relatively intact nuclear
envelope ‘ghost’ or the totally fragmented nuclear envelope be considered the desired

MITOCHONDRIA (SEE PROTOCOLS 4.7, 4.9 AND 4.10)+

93

product? In the former situation, both inner and outer nuclear membranes and their
interconnecting pore complexes are likely to be present, together with the nuclear lamina and perhaps some residual heterochromatin. In the second situation, fragmentation of
the nuclear envelope, for instance by high salt extraction or heparin treatment, may separate the two nuclear membranes and produce damage to the nuclear pore complexes, but
contamination with residual heterochromatin is likely to be less. For nuclear envelope
isolation, it is usual to decondense the chromatin at low ionic strength or slightly raised
pH in the absence of divalent cations prior to deoxyribonuclease (DNase) digestion,
whereas for the production of the nuclear matrix, the DNase digestion is performed on
condensed chromatin within which nucleoli are retained. The nuclear matrix elements are
apparently destroyed under the low ionic strength decondensation and DNase digestion
conditions and are released from the nuclear envelope. Nevertheless, these two apparently contradictory approaches enable different subnuclear fractions to be produced. It
is generally assumed that the outer nuclear membrane bears considerable similarity to
rough ER. Studies on the isolated nucleolus have been overshadowed by other investigations in recent years, but the isolation of this subnuclear organelle is undoubtedly
required before detailed macromolecular information can be obtained to complement the
vast amount of data from in situ antibody labelling studies on the nucleolus.

Mitochondria (see Protocols 4.7, 4.9 and 4.10)
Common sources of mitochondria for respiratory studies are rat liver and beef heart. In
these studies, yield of organelle is not the primary consideration, which is, instead, that
the method should be as rapid and gentle as possible. Preparation of a ‘heavy fraction’
of mitochondria using a favourable medium and a g-force of only 3000g conform to
these requirements (Protocol 4.7 ). A more complete recovery of the mitochondria from
a ‘heavy + light mitochondrial’ fraction can be obtained by density gradient centrifugation. Because of the high osmolality of sucrose gradients, mitochondria, lysosomes
and peroxisomes have density ranges that overlap considerably. Isoosmotic gradients of
both Percoll [36], Nycodenz [37] and iodixanol [20] provide far superior resolution.
The density of mitochondria in Nycodenz is slightly higher than in iodixanol, thus
improving their resolution from the lighter lysosomes. As yeast mitochondria are now
widely used in many functional and structural studies, Protocol 4.9 describes the widely
used purification of these mitochondria in Nycodenz gradients [38]. Often resolution
has been improved by flotation from a bottom-loaded discontinuous gradient and such
a method has been introduced for yeast mitochondria [39]. It has been observed with
mammalian mitochondria, however, that by placing the crude mitochondrial fraction at
the bottom of the gradient, the high hydrostatic pressure can cause some partial disruption of the mitochondrial structure [40], hence the development of the median loading
strategy described in Protocol 4.10 [41, 42]. See also Protocol 4.17, which describes
gradients for purifying all the major organelles from a light mitochondrial fraction.
Enzyme markers

Any easily measurable component of the tricarboxylic acid cycle can be used as
a functional marker, the most frequently used being succinate dehydrogenase with

94

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

either the native electron acceptor (cytochrome c) or an artificial one, such as
p-iodonitrotetrazolium violet (INT). The latter is certainly the easier to use; reduction
of cytochrome c requires the use of cyanide to inhibit reoxidation by oxygen.

Lysosomes
Sucrose gradients only provide optimal separation of rat liver mitochondria and lysosomes if the density of the latter is perturbed by loading with Triton WR1339 [43]. In
both Percoll [44] and iodinated density gradients [20, 37] the density of lysosomes is
sufficiently distinct that their isolation is relatively easy. Note, however, that in Percoll,
lysosomes are denser than mitochondria, while in iodinated density gradient media, they
are lighter. A simple flotation through a discontinuous gradient of metrizamide, originally
described by Wattiaux and Wattiaux-De Coninck [39], has more recently been adapted
to Nycodenz by Olsson et al. [45] as metrizamide is no longer available commercially.
Although Percoll is popular for the purification of lysosomes, the higher relative enrichment of lysosomes enzyme markers in the Nycodenz prepared organelles makes this
the method of choice (see Protocol 4.12 ). Because, in the discontinuous gradient, the
lysosomes band at the top interface, the harvesting of the organelles is very easy. See
also Protocol 4.17, which describes gradients for purifying all the major organelles from
a light mitochondrial fraction.
Enzyme markers

Acid phosphatase [46] is the classical marker for lysosomes. Although very easy to
assay, the presence of this enzyme in the cytosol makes this marker less than satisfactory. Use of one of the lysosomal enzymes associated with the breakdown of glycosylated
molecules such as β-galactosidase or β-N -acetylglucosaminidase has become more popular. For most of these enzymes, the p-nitrophenol derivative is commercially available,
making spectrophotometric assay by measurement of the released nitrophenol very easy
(Protocol 4.13 ). An alternative fluorometric assay, which is rather more sensitive, is
also given (Protocol 4.14 ).

Peroxisomes
Except in Percoll, peroxisomes tend to be the densest of the organelles in the light mitochondrial fraction in any density gradient medium since they do not have an enclosed
osmotic space as the limiting membrane is permeable to small molecules. Thus in
sucrose, Nycodenz and iodixanol peroxisomes attain a density that is essentially that
of the membrane itself, but it is only in the iodinated density gradient media that they
are easily resolved from both mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, which are less
dense in Nycodenz and iodixanol (particularly in the latter), than in sucrose [20, 37].
In Percoll, on the other hand, although peroxisomes are distinctively less dense than
the other organelles of the light mitochondrial fraction, they co-band with the endoplasmic reticulum [47]. Iodixanol gradients are now therefore the gradients of choice for the
isolation of mammalian peroxisomes (Protocol 4.15 ). However, because Nycodenz

ROUGH AND SMOOTH ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM (ER)

95

has been available for a much longer time than iodixanol, a huge literature on the use
of these gradients for the purification of both mammalian and yeast peroxisomes exists.
Some of these methods are summarized in the extensive Notes section in Protocol 4.15.
See also Protocol 4.17, which describes gradients for purifying all the major organelles
from a mammalian light mitochondrial fraction.
Enzyme markers

Peroxisomes contain many enzymes associated with lipid metabolism but the most
commonly used marker is catalase. Catalase oxidizes H2 O2 to oxygen and water; it
is routinely assayed by back titration of the residual H2 O2 , which forms a stable yellow
product with titanium oxysulfate (see Protocol 4.16 ). This method is easier to execute
than the alternative one using potassium permanganate.

Rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
ER is often analysed along with other membrane compartments such as Golgi, endosomes and the trans-Golgi network (TGN) during studies into membrane trafficking and
cell signalling (see Chapter 5). Protocols 4.18 and 4.19 in this chapter, by contrast, are
concerned primarily with the bulk (preparative) isolation of these membranes.
The microsome fraction (see ‘Differential centrifugation’ above) will contain, in addition to the membrane vesicles derived from the smooth and rough ER, contaminating
organelles that failed to sediment at 15 000g, together with core structures from peroxisomes, which have lysed during the previous manipulations. The smooth vesicle fraction
will also contain vesicles derived from other sources such as the Golgi and TGN. Rough
ER and smooth ER can be effectively separated in a continuous sucrose gradient [48]
as described in Protocol 4.18. To resolve the rough ER from the peroxisomal cores (and
other contaminating organelles), the density of the RER vesicles is reduced by stripping
off the ribosomes with pyrophosphate and they are purified on a second continuous
sucrose density gradient [48]. As both the SER and RER band broadly, the method
may offer some scope for subfractionation of both membranes. Protocol 4.19 offers an
alternative method for separating these membranes in a self-generated iodixanol gradient.
Enzyme and chemical markers

Commonly used markers for the endoplasmic reticulum were worked out for rat liver,
notably NADPH-cytochrome c reductase (Protocol 4.20 ) and glucose-6-phosphatase
(Protocol 4.21 ). Kidney is the only other tissue in which glucose-6-phosphatase has a
clear functional role, yet there are a number of instances where it has been used as a
marker for the endoplasmic reticulum from cultured cells, even though there is no clear
reason why it should be present in such cells. Glucose-6-phosphatase is determined by
the measurement of the released Pi using one of many of the standard protocols using
molybdate [49]. NADPH cytochrome c reductase is determined by measuring the production of reduced cytochrome c [50]. Inclusion of rotenone in the assay avoids any
interference from mitochondrial electron transport. It is normal to use a recording spectrophotometer to monitor the rate of increase of A550 over a short period of about 5 min.

96

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

Another enzyme which is associated with the early processing of the oligosaccharide
chains of glycoproteins in the endoplasmic reticulum is ß-D glucosidase which is sometimes used as an endoplasmic reticulum marker, particularly in cultured cells [51]. A
simple chemical assay for RNA (rough ER) is given in Protocol 4.22.

Golgi membranes
Golgi membranes are often analysed along with other membrane compartments such as
ER, ERGIC (the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment) and endosomes and during studies
into membrane trafficking and cell signalling (see Chapter 5). Protocol 4.23. in this
chapter, by contrast, is concerned primarily with the bulk (preparative) isolation of these
membranes from rat liver; it uses a medium containing dextran to promote the retention
of Golgi stacks during homogenization. The intact Golgi stacks from mammalian liver
can be sedimented at 5000g and subsequently purified by banding at a 1.2 M sucrose
barrier [52]. Subsequently the Golgi can be “unstacked” by hydrolysing the dextran with
a mixture of amylases.
Enzyme marker

Galactosyl transferase is the most widely used marker for the Golgi membranes but it
is strictly only a marker for the trans-Golgi where it is involved in the terminal galactosylation of oligosaccharide chains of glycoproteins. All methods use UDP-galactose
radiolabelled in the sugar moiety as the donor; the methods vary in the type of acceptor.
One method uses N-acetyl-glucosamine as an artificial acceptor and the radiolabelled
product, N-acetyllactosamine, must be separated from the UDP-galactose by passing
through a small Dowex ion exchange resin [53] - this is a simple technique but very
tedious with large numbers of samples. The method described in Protocol 24 uses
ovalbumin as the acceptor; the radiolabelled product from the incubation is simply
TCA-precipitated onto a filter disc, washed, dried and counted [54].

Plasma membrane (see Protocols 4.25 and 4.26)
As with ER and Golgi, the plasma membrane is often analysed along with other membrane compartments such as endosomes and the trans-Golgi network (TGN) during
studies into membrane trafficking and cell signalling (see Chapter 5). Protocols 4.25
and 4.26 in this chapter, by contrast, are concerned primarily with the bulk (preparative) isolation of these membranes. There are two principal sources for bulk isolation of
mammalian plasma membrane that have been used for studies of membrane composition,
function and architecture: the human erythrocyte and rat liver. The human erythrocyte
membrane in particular is easy to isolate by hypotonic lysis [55] and the lack of internal organelles means that density gradient fractionation is not required (Protocol 4.25 ).
Bacterial limiting membranes also pose relatively few problems [56]. Structures such as
desmosomes, tight junctions or an extensive cytoskeleton, effectively stabilize certain
plasma membrane domains from polarized tissues against fragmentation during homogenization. Thus, the contiguous membrane of rat liver or the brush border of intestinal

CHLOROPLASTS (SEE PROTOCOL 4.30)

97

epithelial cells may also be isolated relatively easily, in the form of sheets, which are
rapidly sedimenting and easily separated from most other organelles and membrane
vesicles. Protocol 4.26 describes the isolation of the contiguous membrane from rat
liver [57].
Plasma membrane analysis using enzyme markers (Protocols 4.27–4.29)

Routine functional analysis of plasma membrane relies on enzyme assays, principally
for Na+ /K+ -ATPase, 5 -nucleotidase, alkaline phosphatase or alkaline phosphodiesterase.
There is considerable variation in levels of these enzymes in plasma membranes from
different sources and in the case of cells from polarized tissues; they are often domainspecific. Thus, the Na+ /K+ -ATPase is readily measured in the human erythrocyte membrane, much less easily measured in the plasma membrane from cultured cells and
considerably enriched in the basolateral domains (compared to apical domains) from
polarized cells. Alkaline phosphatase, alkaline phosphodiesterase and 5 -nucleotidase are
ubiquitous, highly enriched in apical domains and easier to measure than the Na+ /K+ ATPase.

Chloroplasts (see Protocol 4.30)
There are two approaches to the isolation of chloroplasts: (1) by mechanical disruption
of green leaves or (2) more gentle disruption of protoplasts prepared from the plant
tissue [58]. Due to the fragility of chloroplasts, the former is restricted to soft green
leaves, such as those of spinach. Tissues rich in oxalate, phenolics or starch cannot
be used. The advantage of the mechanical shear method (Protocol 4.30 ) is that large
amounts of material can be processed quickly, but for the best preparations, it is necessary
to remove partially disrupted chloroplasts using a Percoll gradient. The protoplast
method can be used with a wide range of tissues, but it is lengthy, expensive and
inconvenient for large amounts of chloroplasts.
Chloroplast functional assays

To determine the integrity of the chloroplast preparation it is normal to perform two
assays: measurement of the chlorophyll content (Protocol 4.31 ) and the rate of oxygen
evolution in the presence of ferricyanide and NH4 Cl (to uncouple electron flow) before
and after hypoosmotic disruption of the chloroplasts (Protocol 4.32 ).

PROTOCOL 4.1
Isolation of nuclei from mammalian liver
in an iodixanol gradient (with notes
on cultured cells)

Reagents
OptiPrep (60%, w/v, iodixanol, ρ = 1.32
g/ml)
OptiPrep Diluent (OD): 150 mM KCl,
30 mM MgCl2 , 120 mM Tricine-KOH,
pH 7.8
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 25 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2 ,
1
20 mM Tricine-KOH, pH 7.8. 
Add protease inhibitors to the OptiPrep
diluent and HM as required.

Equipment
High-torque overhead electric motor (thyristor-controlled)
Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer, 20–40 ml,
2
clearance ∼0.07 mm 
High-speed centrifuge with swingingbucket rotor with approx. 15 or 50 ml
tubes
Syringe with metal cannula (internal diam3
eter approx. 0.8 mm) 
Nylon gauze

Procedure [20]
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.
1. Prepare a 50% (w/v) iodixanol working solution: dilute 5 vol. of OptiPrep with 1 vol. of OD.

2. Gradient solutions: Prepare two gradient solutions of 30 and 35% (w/v)
iodixanol by diluting 50% (w/v) iodixanol working solution with HM
(6 vol. + 4 vol. and 7vol. + 3vol. respectively). Keep on ice.
3. Excise the liver and chop with scissors
to produce a fine mince.
4. Transfer approx. half of the liver to
the Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer in
20 ml of HM and disrupt the tissue
using approx. eight strokes of the
4
pestle rotating at approx. 500 rpm. 
5. Repeat with the other half of the liver
mince.
6. Filter through the nylon gauze.
7. Adjust the homogenate to 25% (w/v)
iodixanol by mixing with and equal
volume of the 50% iodixanol working
5
solution. 
8. Transfer 10–15 ml of the homogenate
to a 50 ml tube and underlayer with
10 ml each of the 30 and 35% iodixanol gradient solutions.
6
9. Centrifuge at 10 000gav for 20 min. 

10. The nuclei band at the 30/35% iodixanol interface, using a syringe and
metal cannula aspirate the nuclei.
11. Dilute the suspension with two volumes of HM and pellet the nuclei at
2000g for 10 min.

PROTOCOL 4.1

Notes
This procedure will take about 1 h.


1 This homogenization medium has
probably a wide application to mammalian tissues and to a few cultured cells, e.g. X57 clonal striatal cells [59], but it is probably unsuitable for many cultured
cells. Using an isoosmotic sucrosecontaining medium, such cells can
often only be disrupted in the presence of EDTA, which is not ideally suited to the recovery of intact
nuclei. In such cases, the use of
a divalent cation-containing hypoosmotic medium may be preferred.
Some examples are: 10 mM MgCl2 ,
1 mM KCl, 5 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH
7.4 for CHO cells [27], 1.5 mM
MgCl2 , 10 mM KCl, 10 mM HepesNaOH, pH 7.6 for human fibroblasts
and endothelial cells [30] and 2.5 mM
MgCl2 , 1.5 mM KCl, 5 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 7.4 for lymphocytes [11].

2 If cultured cells are being used rather
than a soft tissue such as liver, a
Dounce (tight-fitting, Wheaton type
A) homogenizer, ball-bearing homogenizer or syringe fitted with a 23 or
25 gauge needle should be substituted.
The optimal conditions for the homogenization of cultured cells vary with
the type of cell; different media and
homogenization devices will have to
be tested for their suitability. In the
authors’ experience, nitrogen cavitation, although very effective for most

99

cell types, tends to render the nuclei
rather fragile. The aim is to obtain
at least 90% cell rupture while maintaining nuclear integrity (as judged by
phase contrast microscopy).


3 Flat-tipped metal filling cannulas can
be obtained from most surgical equipment supply companies.

4 Optimal homogenization conditions
need to be worked out for any particular cell type. The number of passes
of the pestle of a Dounce homogenizer should not exceed 20 and either
4–5 passes through the ball-bearing
homogenizer or 12 passes through a
syringe needle should be sufficient.

5 In the case of cultured cells which
have been homogenized in a hypoosmotic medium, it is common to
pellet the nuclei at 800–2000g for
5–10 min before resuspending in the
liver homogenization medium. Where
possible it may acceptable instead to
adjust the composition of cultured cell
homogenate to that of the liver homogenization medium.

6 It is rarely necessary to adjust the centrifugation parameters. The efficacy of
the separation depends more on the
rapid rate of sedimentation rather than
on their buoyant density and smaller
nuclei may require an increase in centrifugation time to 30 or 40 min. Only
for mussel nuclei [34] were the gforce and time increased significantly
(100 000g for 1 h).

PROTOCOL 4.2
Isolation of metaphase chromosomes [60]

Reagents
Colcemid
Hexylene glycol buffer: 1 M hexylene
glycol, 0.5 mM CaCl2 , 0.1 mM PipesNaOH, pH 6.8
Gradient solutions: 28, 58 and 60% (w/v)
1
Nycodenz in hexylene glycol buffer 
Dimethyldichlorosilane (1% in carbon
tetrachloride)

Equipment

cells for 20 min at 4 ◦ C prior to pelleting them by centrifugation at 300g for
5 min.
4. Wash the cells by suspending them in
the hexylene glycol buffer and pellet
them as in step 3.
5. Resuspend the cells in the same buffer
(cell concentration <2 mg/ml) and incubate them for 10 min at 37 ◦ C before
lysing the cells by passing the cell
suspension several times through a 23gauge needle. Monitor cell lysis by
3
phase contrast microscopy. 

Low and high-speed centrifuge
High-speed centrifuge with swingingbucket rotor for 15 ml tubes
Corex tubes (15 ml) for swinging-bucket
rotor
Syringe with 23-gauge needle
Phase contrast microscope
Two-chamber gradient maker or Gradient
2
Master 

6. Pellet the chromosomes by centrifugation at 2000g for 10 min.

Procedure

9. The metaphase chromosomes can be
stained by one of the banding methods
described in the literature [61].

1. Treat the Corex tubes with dimethyldichlorosilane for 5 min; then dry and
bake at 60 ◦ C for 24 h.

7. Make a 10 ml gradient in the treated
Corex tubes from equal volumes of 28
and 58% Nycodenz and underlayer
with the chromosome pellet suspended
in 60% Nycodenz.
8. Centrifuge at 16 300g for 10 min [60].
The chromosomes band at approx.
1.23 g/ml, approx two-thirds way down
the gradient.

2. Arrest the cultured cells in metaphase
by the addition of 0.06 µg/ml of colcemid to the culture medium and incubate for 3 h.

Notes

3. Selectively detach the metaphase cells
by gentle shaking and cool the detached


1 Wray [60] used metrizamide, which
is no longer commercially available.

The procedure will takes about 5 h, including the incubation with colcemid.

PROTOCOL 4.2

Nycodenz, which is a very similar
iodinated density gradient solute, has
been substituted.


2 If neither of these devices is available,
make a discontinuous gradient from

101

28, 38, 48 and 58% Nycodenz and
allow it to diffuse.


3 Other homogenization techniques are
permissible, for example nitrogen cavitation at 250 psi (17 bar).

PROTOCOL 4.3
Isolation of the nuclear envelope
J. Robin Harris
Reagents
Deoxyribonuclease I
KCl (1 M in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4)
MgCl2 (1 M stock solution)
PMSF (1 M stock solution in dried ethanol)
Purified nuclei (see Protocol 4.1 )
Buffer: 2 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4
Envelope suspension buffer (ESB): 0.25
sucrose, 2 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4
Gradient solutions: 1.0 M, 1.5 M, 1.8 M,
2.0 M sucrose in 2 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4
All solutions (except the MgCl2 ) should
contain 0.1 mM PMSF

Equipment
Abbé refractometer
High-speed centrifuge with fixed-angle
rotor and tubes
Ultracentrifuge with fixed-angle and
swinging-bucket rotors (and tubes)
Phase contrast microscope
UV spectrophotometer (silica cuvettes)

Procedure [62–65]
Except where indicated carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.
1. Swell/decondense nuclear chromatin by
incubation of purified nuclei in buffer
for 10 min, followed by centrifugation

at ∼10 000g for 10 min. Resuspend the
1
pellet in buffer and repeat twice. 
2. Resuspend the gelatinous pellet of
swollen nuclei in buffer containing deoxyribonuclease I (10 µg/ml).
Incubate at room temperature for
30 min with mixing. Halfway through
the incubation adjust the suspension to ∼0.1 mM MgCl2 . The gelatinous nature of the chromatin should
be rapidly lost as DNA cleavage
occurs. Monitor the production of
nuclear ‘ghosts’ by phase contrast
2
microscopy. 
3. Centrifuge at ∼60 000g for 30 min in a
fixed-angle or swinging-bucket rotor.
4. Resuspend the pellet of crude nuclear
envelopes in buffer and centrifuge
again. Repeat this step several times
until the release of DNA, monitored
by the absorbance of the supernatant at
3
280 nm, has reached a low plateau. 
5. Optionally, wash the nuclear envelope
with the KCl solution to assist the
removal of ionically bound proteins,
histones in particular, followed by cen4
trifugation at ∼60 000g for 30 min. 
6. Resuspend the washed nuclear envelope in ESB and overlay on a step
gradient made from the four gradient solutions, in a swinging-bucket
rotor. Centrifuge for several hours (or
overnight) to band the nuclear envelope
5 
6
isopycnically. 

PROTOCOL 4.3

7. The purified envelopes should band predominantly at the 1.5 M/1.8 M sucrose
interface. Carefully remove the nuclear
envelope layer from the gradient using
a Pasteur pipette.
8. Monitor the integrity of the nuclear
envelope by phase contrast microscopy
and by negative staining and/or thin
section electron microscopy using the
agarose embedment procedure (Proto7
col 2.8 ). 
9. Perform the required biochemical analysis on the purified preparation, for
example SDS-PAGE and enzymology;
endogenous peroxidase is a reasonable
marker enzyme for the nuclear envelope
from rat liver, Mg-ATPase and many
ER enzymes are also present [66].

Notes
This procedure will take approximately 1
working day.


1 Removal of divalent cations causes
chromatin and nucleolar decondensation. This is necessary to enable
a reasonably complete removal of

103

chromatin from the nuclear envelope
to be achieved.


2 A trace amount of Mg2+ is required
for DNase I activity; addition of
MgCl2 ensures a more complete digestion of DNA.

3 The partially purified nuclear envelope
obtained at this stage may be sufficient
for many requirements.

4 High-salt washing usually causes considerable disruption of nuclear envelopes/nuclear ‘ghosts’. This may be
acceptable for many investigations.

5 Use the refractometer to produce accurate sucrose molarities.

6 If a considerable quantity of heterochromatin remains bound to the
nuclear envelope, the membrane may
appear at the 1.8 M/2.0 M sucrose
interface.

7 Only electron microscopy can provide
evidence for the presence of inner and
outer nuclear membranes, absence of
residual heterochromatin and nuclear
matrix and nuclear pore integrity.

PROTOCOL 4.4
Nuclear pore complex isolation
J. Robin Harris
Reagents
Heparin
PMSF (1 M stock solution in ethanol)
Purified nuclear envelope (Protocol 4.3 )
Extraction buffer (EB): 1% Triton X-100
in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 0.1 mM
PMSF
Tris solutions: 2 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4,
10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4
Gradient solutions: 0.25 M sucrose and
1.5 M sucrose in 10 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 7.4
Adjust all solutions to 0.1 mM PMSF.

Equipment
Gradient collector 
1
High-speed centrifuge with fixed-angle
rotor and tubes
Two-chamber gradient maker or Gradient
Master
Ultracentrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
and tubes
Ultrasonicator (probe-type, with timer)

Procedure [67]
1. Extract the nuclear envelope for 30 min
2
at 4 ◦ C with EB. 
2. Centrifuge at 20 000g for 30 min to
pellet loosely the nuclear pore complexlamina [68]. Resuspend the pellet gently in 2 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) and
repeat the centrifugation.

3. Resuspend the pellet in a small volume
(i.e. 1 ml) of 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4)
and ultrasonicate, with the sample in an
ice-bath. Repeated short treatments (e.g.
10 s) are desirable, followed by cooling
3
periods, because of sample heating. 
4. Monitor the disruption of the nuclear
envelope/nuclear pore complex release
by preparing negatively stained specimens, e.g. using 2% ammonium molybdate (pH 7.0) or 5% ammonium molybdate-0.1% trehalose (pH 7.0) for EM
study (see Protocol 2.2 ) with immediate
assessment and continuation of ultrasonication, if required.
5. Layer the sample onto a 0.25–1.5 M
sucrose-10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4) linear density gradient and centrifuge at
4
∼60 000g for 1–2 h at 4 ◦ C. 
6. Collect fractions from the sucrose gra5
dient. 
7. Monitor the content of the fractions by
EM of negatively stained specimens to
locate the position on the sucrose gradient to which the nuclear pore complexes
have sedimented, with assessment of
their integrity.
8. Perform SDS-PAGE of the gradient
fractions to monitor the protein sepa6
ration achieved. 

Notes
This procedure will take approximately 4 h.

PROTOCOL 4.4


1 The Beckman Fraction Recovery System is a commonly used device.

2 The preparation of nuclear pore complexes can be performed with intact
nuclear envelope, but some membranes will remain attached to the pore
complexes.

3 Ultrasonication can damage proteins,
but may leave some lamins attached to
the nuclear pore complexes. Treatment
of yeast nuclear pore complex lamina with heparin has also been found
to successfully separate the pore complex [69], but heparin has been found
to cause structural damage to nuclear
pore complexes in other systems.

4 The separation is by sedimentation
velocity but the centrifugation time is
not critical. Ideally, the nuclear pore
complexes should sediment approx.
two-thirds of the way down the cen-

105

trifuge tube. If the centrifugation is
performed using a total nuclear envelope ultrasonicate, membrane fragments derived from the inner and outer
nuclear membranes can be recovered
from the gradient. This may present
the possibility of assessing the two
nuclear membranes individually, by
isopycnic centrifugation.


5 The Beckman Fraction Recovery System can be used to collect fractions
dense end first by tube puncture or low
density end first by upward displacement with a dense medium or (if this
device is not available) by very careful pipetting directly from the top of
the tube.

6 Supernatants and pellets can be monitored for DNA, RNA and protein
(SDS-PAGE) at all stages of the procedure, if desired.

PROTOCOL 4.5
Preparation of nuclear matrix [68–70]

Reagents
Ammonium sulphate (1 M and 0.2 M
in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 0.2 mM
MgCl2 )
Magnesium chloride (1 M stock solution)
PMSF (1 M stock solution in dried ethanol)
Purified nuclei (see Protocol 4.1 ) in
0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH
7.4, 5 mM MgCl2
DNase I
Tris-HCl (1 M stock solution, pH 7.4)
Suspension buffer (SB): 5 mM MgCl2 ,
10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 (containing
0.1 mM PMSF)
Triton X-100

extracted nuclear pellet in a small volume (e.g. 5 ml) of SB.
3. Digest the nuclei with DNase I (30
1
U/mg DNA) for 30 min. 
4. Increase the salt concentration by slowly adding the 1 M ammonium sulphate
solution to a final ionic strength of 0.6
(0.2 M ammonium sulphate); make up
to 40 ml with the 0.2 M ammonium
sulphate solution and incubate for 30
2
min. 
5. Centrifuge at 1000g for 15 min to pellet the nuclear matrices. Discard the
supernatant.

Equipment

6. Resuspend the pellet in SB. Monitor the
product by phase contrast microscopy
and thin section electron microscopy.

3

Low-speed centrifuge with fixed-angle
rotor and tubes

Notes
The procedure will take about 3 h.

Procedure
Bring all solutions to, and carry out all
operations at, 0–4 ◦ C.
1. Add Triton X-100 to the purified nuclear suspension to a concentration of
1%. Incubate for 30 min with mixing
by pipette (avoid foaming).
2. Centrifuge at 1000 g for 10 min and
discard the supernatant. Resuspend the


1 Note that the nuclear chromatin has
not been decondensed.

2 Alternatively, NaCl can be used for
the high salt extraction.

3 Nucleoli should be visible within the
less dense matrix, together with intact
nuclear pore complex lamina.

PROTOCOL 4.6
Preparation of nucleoli [65, 71]

Reagents

mal optics with methylene blue (0.1%)
stained material. Disruption of all the
nuclei usually requires 40–60 s of total
sonication time.

Suspension buffer (SB): 0.34 M sucrose,
0.05 mM MgCl2 , 10 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 7.5
Density barrier: 0.88 M sucrose, 0.05 mM
MgCl2 , 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5
Include protease inhibitors in these solutions as required

4. In a centrifuge tube, underlayer the
sonicate with half the volume of the
density barrier solution and centrifuge
at 2000 g for 20 min and harvest the
1 
2
pellet of nucleoli. 

Equipment

Notes

Refrigerated low-speed or high-speed centrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
Ultrasonicator
Light microscope (phase contrast or normal optics)

The procedure should take approx. 90 min.

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.
1. Suspend the purified nuclei (see Protocol 4.1 ) in SB.
2. Sonicate the suspension for 10–15 s,
followed by a rest period of 30–40 s.
3. Monitor the nuclear breakage under the
microscope; use phase contrast or nor-


1 An alternative to the gradient is to
pellet the nucleoli at 10 000g for
15 min; then resuspend the pellet in
5 mM MgCl2 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH
7.4. Repeat this washing until the
release of DNA and non-nucleolar
matrix proteins reaches a minimal
level.

2 Monitor the product by RNA and
DNA analysis, SDS-PAGE and thin
section electron microscopy after the
addition of low gelling temperature
agarose.

PROTOCOL 4.7
Isolation of a heavy mitochondrial fraction
from rat liver by differential centrifugation

Reagents
Mannitol buffer: 0.2 M mannitol, 50 mM
sucrose, 10 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA,
1
10 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.4 

Equipment
Glass rod
Dounce homogenizer, 20–30 ml (loosefitting, Wheaton type B)
High-torque overhead motor (thyristor controlled)
High-speed centrifuge with fixed-angle
rotor (to take 40–50 ml tubes)

3. Transfer the liver to a beaker on ice
and mince it finely with scissors (the
pieces of liver should be no more than
∼3 mm3 in size). Suspend the mince
in the mannitol buffer (approx. 4 ml
per g of liver).
4. Decant half the liquid and mince into
the Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer, and
homogenize using five to six up-anddown strokes of the pestle (rotating at
∼700 rpm). Repeat with the other half
5
of the sample. 
5. Divide the homogenate between two
centrifuge tubes and centrifuge at
6
1000g for 10 min. 

Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer, 20–40 ml,
clearance ∼0.07 mm

6. Decant the supernatant and keep on
ice. Resuspend the pellet in ∼30 ml
of buffer using two to three strokes
of the pestle of the Potter-Elvehjem
7
homogenizer and repeat step 5. 

Syringe with metal cannula (internal diameter approx. 0.8 mm)

7. Decant and combine the supernatants
and recentrifuge at 1000g for 10 min.

Procedure

8. Remove the supernatants using a
metal cannula attached to a 20 ml
8
syringe. 

Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge (40–50
ml tubes) 
2

The volumes given are for a liver of
approx. 10 g. After step 2 carry out all
operations at 0–4 ◦ C.
1. Starve a male rat overnight to deplete
3
the glycogen. 
2. Sacrifice the animal by cervical dislocation and quickly excise the liver and
4
weigh it. 

9. Centrifuge the supernatants at 4000g
for 15 min.
10. Remove the 4000g supernatant using
the metal cannula and syringe, keeping
the tip of the cannula as close to
the meniscus as possible in order to
remove as much of the floating lipid
9
as possible. 

PROTOCOL 4.7

11. Also carefully aspirate the loosely
packed pinkish material on top of the
more compact brown pellet and wipe
the inside of the tube with a tissue to
remove any adhering lipid.
12. Add ∼10 ml of buffer to each tube and
crudely resuspend the pellet using a
glass rod.
13. Complete the resuspension using two
to three gentle strokes of the pestle of
the Dounce homogenizer.
14. Make up to the original volume with
buffer and decant into new tubes.

109


4 For respiratory studies, it is obviously
important to avoid any anaesthetic
techniques in sacrificing the animal.
Decapitation is a useful alternative,
which also serves to exsanguinate the
liver, but whatever technique is used,
it must be carried out by a trained,
licensed individual.

5 Do not force the pestle through any
compacted tissue pieces at the bottom
of the homogenizer; lower the glass
vessel to resuspend the tissue in the
vortex from the revolving pestle.

16. Finally, resuspend the purified heavy
mitochondria in a suitable medium
compatible with the subsequent analysis.


6 It is advisable not to fill the tubes of
any rotor, a swinging bucket rotor in
particular, completely full, because of
the problems associated with use of
these rotors (see ‘Differential centrifugation’ above).

Notes


7 Washing the nuclear pellet will recover
any trapped mitochondria.

10
15. Repeat steps 9–14 three times. 

This procedure will take approx. 1.5 h.


1 For other tissues, such as beef heart, a
sucrose/succinate/EDTA/Tris buffer is
common – see ref. 72.

2 Steps 5 and 7 could be executed using
a high-speed centrifuge rather than a
low-speed centrifuge.

3 Starving the animal must be carried out
in accordance with national animal care
requirements.


8 Removal of this supernatant with a
syringe, rather than by decantation,
reduces contamination by nuclei from
the pellet.

9 The presence of free fatty acids can
cause uncoupling, so it is important
to remove as much as possible of the
lipid.

10 The washing procedure removes contaminating lysosomes.

PROTOCOL 4.8
Preparation of a light mitochondrial fraction
from tissues and cultured cells

Reagents
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Hepes1
NaOH, pH 7.4 
Add protease inhibitors to the above
medium as required
Phosphate buffered saline (cells only)

Equipment

chopper) and transfer to the PotterElvehjem homogenizer with HM (use
10 ml medium for every 2.5 g tissue).
Homogenize using approx. six strokes
5
of the pestle (500–700 rpm). 
2. For cells: Wash 1–3 × 108 cells in
5 ml of phosphate buffered saline and
again with 5 ml of HM. Suspend the
cells in 3 ml of HM and homogenize
in a ball-bearing homogenizer using
6 
7
five passes. 

Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge with
swinging-bucket rotor for 30–40 ml
2
tubes 

3. Pellet the nuclei, cell debris and any
unbroken cells by centrifuging at 800g
for 10 min.

High-speed centrifuge with fixed-angle
rotor for 30–40 ml tubes

4. Decant or aspirate (use a syringe and
cannula) the supernatant and retain on
ice.

For liver: Potter-Elvehjem (Teflon and
glass) homogenizer (30–40 ml) attached
to a high-torque overhead motor (thyris3
tor controlled) 
For cells: Ball-bearing homogenizer or
3
syringe with 23- or 25-gauge needle 
Dounce homogenizer (loose fitting, Wheaton type B)
Syringe (20 ml) with metal cannula (inter4
nal diameter approx. 0.8 mm) 

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.
1. For liver: Mince the tissue very
finely with scissors (or with a tissue

5. Resuspend the pellet in 10 ml (5 ml
for cells) of HM using two to three
gentle strokes of the pestle of a loosefitting Dounce homogenizer. 
8
6. Repeat the centrifugation and combine
the supernatants.
7. Centrifuge the combined supernatants
at 3000g for 10 min. 
9
8. Centrifuge the supernatant from step 7
10
at 15 000g for 10 min. 
9. Resuspend the light mitochondrial pellet in 10 ml (5 ml for cells) of HM
using two to three gentle strokes of
the pestle of a loose-fitting Dounce
8
homogenizer. 

PROTOCOL 4.8

10. Centrifuge at 15 000 g for 10 min.
11. Resuspend the pellet in a suitable
medium for analysis or further processing. Use this for Protocols 4.10,
4.12, 4.15 and 4.17.

Notes
This procedure will take approx. 2 h.


1 Any suitable buffered isoosmotic
0.25 M sucrose solution may be used,
with or without EDTA. If the aim is
to isolate peroxisomes, include 0.1%
ethanol.

2 The pelleting of the nuclei, etc. (step
3), although often carried out in a lowspeed centrifuge, may alternatively be
performed in the high-speed fixedangle rotor.

3 For more information on homogenizing
cells and tissues, see ref. 2.

4 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be obtained
from any surgical equipment supplies
company.

5 Most soft tissues can be homogenized in a Potter-Elvehjem homoge-

111

nizer, but alternatives such as the Polytron homogenizer have been used.


6 For the isolation of organelles from
cultured cells, the ball-bearing homogenizer is considered to offer the gentlest means of disruption [14]. Alternatives are passage through a syringe
needle or a tight-fitting Dounce homogenizer.

7 Always monitor the efficacy of the
homogenization by phase contrast
microscopy.

8 Resuspension of the pellet must be carried out under the mildest of conditions.

9 This step to remove the heavy mitochondria may be omitted.

10 A variety of centrifugation conditions have been used for isolation
of the light mitochondrial fraction;
RCFs of 12 000–20 000g and times
of 10–20 min are the most common.
Check the recovery of the required
organelle and modify as required.
Always use the minimum g-force to
give an adequate recovery.

PROTOCOL 4.9
Purification of yeast mitochondria in a
discontinuous Nycodenz gradient [38]

Reagents
Yeast spheroplast preparation in sorbitol
1
buffer 
Nycoprep Universal (60% w/v Nycodenz)
Nycodenz working solution: 50% w/v
Nycodenz
Sorbitol buffer: 0.6 M sorbitol, 20 mM
Mes-KOH, pH 6.0
Sorbitol buffer (2×): 1.2 M sorbitol, 40
mM Mes-KOH, pH 6.0
Suspension buffer (SB): 0.6 M sorbitol,
20 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.4
Add protease inhibitors as required to the
buffers

Equipment
High-speed centrifuge with 8 × 50 ml
fixed-angle rotor
Ultracentrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
(approx. 12–13 ml tubes)
Dounce homogenizer (approx. 40 ml tightfitting, Wheaton type A)
Dounce homogenizer (approx. 40 ml
loose-fitting, Wheaton type B)
Syringe (20 ml) with metal cannula (inter2
nal diameter approx. 0.8 mm) 

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.

1. Homogenize the spheroplasts using 15
strokes of the pestle of the tight-fitting
Dounce homogenizer.
2. Dilute with an equal volume of sorbitol buffer and centrifuge in the fixedangle rotor at 1500g for 5 min.
3. Decant the supernatants and retain.
4. Resuspend the pellets to the original
volume with sorbitol buffer and repeat
steps 1 and 2.
5. Combine all the supernatants and centrifuge at 12 000g for 10 min.
6. Resuspend the crude mitochondrial
pellets in approx 40 ml sorbitol buffer
using a few gentle strokes of the pestle
of the loose-fitting Dounce homogenizer.
7. Remove any residual nuclei and debris
by centrifugation at 1500g for 5 min.
8. Remove the supernatants using the
syringe and cannula, taking care not to
disturb the loosely packed pellet. 
3
9. Centrifuge the supernatants at 12 000g
for 10 min and resuspend the pellets
(loose-fitting Dounce homogenizer) in
3
approx 4 ml of sorbitol buffer. 
10. Prepare two Nycodenz solutions of
18 and 14.5% (w/v) from 25 ml
of sorbitol buffer (2×) and 18 ml
(and 14.5 ml) of the 50% Nycodenz

PROTOCOL 4.9

working solution; make up each to
50 ml with water.
11. In tubes for the swinging-bucket rotor
load 5 ml of each of the Nycodenz
solutions and approx. 2 ml of the
crude mitochondrial suspension (top
up with sorbitol buffer if necessary).

4
12. Centrifuge at approx 200 000gav for
30 min. The purified mitochondria
band at the interface of the two
Nycodenz layers.
13. Harvest the band with the syringe and
metal cannula; dilute with 4 vol. of
SB; centrifuge at 12 000g for 15 min
and resuspend the pellet in SB.

113

Notes
This procedure will take approx. 2 h.


1 The spheroplast suspension from approx 25 g of packed yeast cells (wet
weight) should be approx. 35 ml.

2 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be obtained from any surgical equipment supplies company.

3 Decantation of the supernatant may
lead to contamination from the pellet
material.

4 See ref. 18 regarding the preparation
of discontinuous gradients.

PROTOCOL 4.10
Purification of mitochondria from mammalian
liver or cultured cells in a median-loaded
discontinuous Nycodenz gradient [41, 42]

Reagents
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Hepes1
NaOH, pH 7.4 
Nycoprep Universal
Nycoprep Universal diluent (NUD):
6 mM EDTA, 60 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH
7.4
Nycodenz working solution (50%, w/v):
Mix 5 vol. of Nycoprep Universal
with 1 vol. of NUD.
Light mitochondrial fraction (see Protocol
4.8 )
Include protease inhibitors in these solutions as required

2. Resuspend the washed light mitochondrial pellet (LMP) in HM (4–10 ml)
and mix with an equal volume of
Nycodenz working solution.
3. For 36–38 ml tubes, use a syringe with
metal cannula to underlayer (low density
end first) the following Nycodenz solutions: 2 ml of 20%, 7 ml of 23%, 10 ml
of LMP in 25%, 7 ml of 30%, and 5 ml
4 
5 
6
each of 34 and 40%. 
4. After centrifugation at 95 000 g for
2 h harvest the mitochondria from the
25/30% Nycodenz interface or unload
the entire gradient in a series of equal
7
volume fractions prior to analysis. 

Equipment

Notes

Ultracentrifuge and swinging-bucket rotor
with a tube capacity of approx. 38 ml,
smaller volume 17 ml or 13 ml tubes are
also acceptable
Syringe (10 ml) with metal cannula (inter2
nal diameter approx. 0.8 mm) 

The procedure will take approx. 4.5 h,
including preparation of the LMP.


1 Use the same HM as used in Protocol
4.8.

Procedure


2 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be
obtained from any surgical equipment
supplies company.

1. Dilute the Nycodenz working solution
with HM to produce gradient solutions
with Nycodenz concentrations of 40,
34, 30, 23 and 20% (w/v). Keep these
3
solutions at 0–4 ◦ C. 


3 The low-density end of the gradient is
probably ineffective at resolving any
Golgi membranes from the lysosomes.
For this an additional layer of 15%
Nycodenz might be layered on top.

PROTOCOL 4.10

115


4 For methods on the best ways of constructing discontinuous gradients, see
ref. 18.

Nycodenz, use 2 ml of this and
reduce the layer of 40% Nycodenz
to 3 ml.


5 Top up the tubes, if necessary, with
either 20% Nycodenz or HM,
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations for tube filling. If
using the additional layer of 15%


6 Scale down the volumes proportionally for smaller tubes.

7 See ref. 18 for more information on
harvesting and analysing gradients.

PROTOCOL 4.11
Succinate–INT reductase assay

Reagents
Ethyl acetate/ethanol/trichloroacetic acid
(EET) 5 : 5 : 1 (v/v/w)
p-Iodonitrotetrazolium violet (2.5 mg/ml
in phosphate buffer)
Phosphate buffer pH 7.4 (50 mM)
Substrate: 0.01 M succinate in phosphate
buffer

Equipment
Microcentrifuge with 1.5–2.0 ml tubes
Spectrophotometer (visible wavelength)
with 1 ml cuvettes (glass or EETresistant plastic)

Procedure [73]
1. Dilute fractions from a gradient with
an equal volume phosphate buffer and
sediment in a microcentrifuge at 4 ◦ C
for 5–10 min.
2. Resuspend the pellets by vortex mixing
1
in 0.3 ml of substrate. 
3. After incubation at 37 ◦ C for 10 min
add 0.1 ml of INT and incubate for a
2
further 10 min. 
4. Stop the reaction by addition of 1 ml of
EET.

5. Centrifuge any precipitate in a microcentrifuge for 2 min and measure the
absorbance of the supernatant at 490 nm
3 
4
against a suitable control. 

Notes
The procedure will take approx. 1 h.


1 Rather than centrifuging and resuspending a gradient fraction in substrate solution, small volumes of gradient fraction (<50 µl) may be added
directly to the substrate solution.
Nycodenz does not interfere with the
enzyme assay.

2 This incubation time may be extended
if the concentration of enzyme is
low.

3 Ideally, for each test incubation, a
control incubation should be set up
in which the substrate solution is
replaced by phosphate buffer. In most
cases, however, a single control containing substrate solution, buffer, INT
and EET is sufficient.

4 The molar extinction coefficient of
reduced INT is 19 300.

PROTOCOL 4.12
Isolation of lysosomes in a discontinuous
Nycodenz gradient

Reagents
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Hepes1
NaOH, pH 7.4 
Nycoprep Universal
Nycoprep Universal diluent (NUD):
6 mM EDTA, 60 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH
7.4
Nycodenz working solution (50%, w/v):
Mix 5 vol. of Nycoprep Universal
with 1 vol. of NUD
Add protease inhibitors to solutions as
required
Light mitochondrial fraction (see Protocol
4.8 )

Equipment
Ultracentrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
with a tube capacity of approx. 38 ml
(smaller volume 17 ml or 13 ml tubes
are also acceptable).
Syringe (10 ml) with metal cannula (inter2
nal diameter approx. 0.8 mm) 

26, 24 and 19% (w/v). Keep these
solutions at 0–4 ◦ C.
2. Resuspend the washed light mitochondrial pellet in HM (4–10 ml) and mix
with 2 vol. of Nycodenz working
solution.
3. For 36–38 ml tubes: Transfer 8 ml of
19% Nycodenz into each tube and
underlayer, using a syringe and metal
cannula, 7 ml each of the 24, 26 and
30% Nycodenz and 8–9 ml of the
light mitochondrial pellet suspension.

3 
4 
5
4. Centrifuge at 95 000g for 2 h and then
harvest the lysosomes from the 19/24%
Nycodenz interface or unload the
entire gradient in a series of fractions
6
prior to marker analysis. 

Notes
The procedure will take approx. 4.5 h,
including preparation of the LMP.


1 Use the same HM as used in Protocol
4.8.

Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.


2 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be obtained from any surgical equipment
supplies company.

1. Dilute the Nycodenz working solution
with HM to produce gradient solutions
with Nycodenz concentrations of 30,


3 For methods on the best ways of
constructing discontinuous gradients,
see ref. 18.

Procedure [45]

118

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES


4 Top up the tubes, if necessary, with
either 29% Nycodenz or HM,
according to the manufacturer’s recommendations for tube filling.

5 Scale down the volumes proportionally for smaller tubes.


6 See ref. 18 for more information on
harvesting and analysing gradients.

PROTOCOL 4.13
β-Galactosidase (spectrophotometric assay)

Reagents

4. Add 1 ml of stop buffer to tests.

Reaction buffer: 0.5% (w/v) Triton X-100,
0.05 M sodium-citrate-phosphate buffer,
pH 4.3

5. Remove any sedimentable material in a
microcentrifuge (1–2 min).

Stop buffer: 0.25 M glycine-NaOH, pH
1
10 
Substrate: 6 mM p-nitrophenyl β-D-galactopyranoside in reaction buffer

Equipment
Microcentrifuge with 1.5–2.0 ml tubes
Spectrophotometer (visible wavelength)
with 1 ml cuvettes

Procedure [73]
1. For each test, mix 0.5 ml of substrate
with a membrane fraction pelleted in
a microcentrifuge tube (see step 1 of
Protocol 4.11 ) or with up to 50 µl of a
2
membrane suspension. 
2. Set up controls as in step 1 and add 1 ml
3
of stop buffer immediately. 
3. Incubate tests at 37 ◦ C for 30 min.

6. Read the absorbance of tests vs controls
at 410 nm.

Notes
The procedure will take approx. 1 h.


1 Do not allow the pH of the stop buffer
to rise above 10 as this will cause
hydrolysis of the substrate.

2 If the sample is sufficiently concentrated, up to 50 µl of sample can be
added directly to the substrate solution. Dilute samples should first be
concentrated by pelleting in a microcentrifuge.

3 If none of the samples contributes to
the overall absorbance, it is permissible to use a single control without
membrane suspension. There is negligible hydrolysis of the substrate at pH
4.3 in the absence of enzyme.

PROTOCOL 4.14
β-Galactosidase (fluorometric assay)

Reagents
Reaction buffer: 100 mM sodium acetateacetic acid, pH 4.3, 100 mM KCl, 2%
Triton X-100, 5 mM DTT
Substrate: 1.7 mM 4-methylumbelliferylβ-D-galactoside (4-MUG) in reaction
buffer

Equipment

3. Mix with an equal volume of substrate
and incubate at 37 ◦ C for 1 h. Set up
sample blanks using 0.25 ml of reaction
1
buffer instead of substrate. 
4. Set up also a substrate blank.
5. After 1 h measure the fluorescence. 
2

Notes
This procedure will take approx. 2 h.

Fluorimeter, 355 nm emission, 460 nm excitation with cuvettes to take 200 µl
Microcentrifuge
Water bath at 37 ◦ C

Procedure [74]
1. After dilution with two volumes of
buffer, pellet the gradient fraction in the
microcentrifuge for 10 min at 0–4 ◦ C.
2. Suspend the pellet in 0.25 ml of reaction buffer. 
1


1 It will be necessary to run a few
trial assays to optimize the amount of
membrane required; determine that the
rate of reaction is linear with time and
membrane concentration. The assay
is approx. 5–10 times more sensitive
than the spectrophotometric assay (see
Protocol 4.13 ).

2 The substrate blank should read no
more than 10 fluorescence units
against a value of at least 500 units
for the test.

PROTOCOL 4.15
Isolation of mammalian peroxisomes
in an iodixanol gradient

Reagents
OptiPrep (60% iodixanol)
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% (v/v) etha1
nol, 5 mM Mops pH 7.2. 
Diluent: 6 mM EDTA, 0.6% ethanol, 30 mM
Mops, pH 7.2
1 M sucrose
Add protease inhibitors to HM and diluent
as required
Light mitochondrial fraction prepared
using HM (see Protocol 4.8)

Equipment
Dounce homogenizer (10 ml, loose-fitting,
Wheaton type B)
Two-chamber gradient maker or Gradient
Master
Syringe (5 ml) with metal cannula (internal
2
diameter approx. 0.8 mm) 
Ultracentrifuge and 30–40 ml fixed-angle
rotor capable of approx. 100 000g, with
thick-walled tubes of approx 30 ml
capacity
Gradient collector (e.g. Beckman Fraction
Recovery System)

Procedure [75]
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.

1. Make up the following gradient solutions from OptiPrep, diluent, 1 M
sucrose and water using respectively,
these ratios by volume: 50% (w/v)
iodixanol (5 + 0.6 + 0.4 + 0.0), 40%
iodixanol (4 + 0.6 + 0.7 + 0.7) and
20% iodixanol (2 + 0.6 + 1.1 + 2.3).

3 
4 
5
2. Resuspend the light mitochondrial pellet in HM using a loose-fitting Dounce
homogenizer (two to three strokes of
the pestle). Adjust to a volume of about
0.5 ml per g of tissue.
3. Use a two-chamber gradient maker or
a Gradient Master to prepare a linear
gradient from 9 ml each of 20 and
40% iodixanol solutions in thick-walled
polycarbonate tubes for the fixed-angle
rotor and, using the syringe and metal
cannula, underlayer each gradient with
6 
7
2 ml of 50% iodixanol. 
4. Layer 3 ml of the suspension over each
gradient and centrifuge at 105 000gav
for 1 h.
5. Allow the rotor to decelerate from
1000 rpm without the brake and collect
the gradient in 1 ml fractions, dense end
first. Alternatively, collect the peroxisomes that band approx. two-thirds of
the way down the gradient, using the
8
syringe and metal cannula. 

122

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

Notes

1 Use this HM to prepare the light mitochondrial fraction.

2 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be obtained from any surgical equipment
supplies company.

3 The use of the four components to prepare the gradient solutions assures that
each is isoosmotic.

4 Van Veldhoven et al. [75] developed
this method for rat liver. Iodixanol
gradients (15–45%) have also been
used in vertical rotors for mouse [76]
and human liver [77]. The shorter
sedimentation path length of a vertical
rotor permits the use of considerably
lower g-forces (31 000g for 75 min).
This may improve the retention of
functional integrity of the organelles.
On the other hand, a 4–30% iodixanol
gradient at 100 000g for 17 h has been
used for CV1 cells [78].

5 Gradients covering a similar density range are used with Nycodenz:

for yeast, 15–42.5% at 174 000g for
75 min [79] and 15–36% at 100 000g
for 1 h [80]; and for rat liver, gradients vary from 25–50% [81] to
15–48% [82] and centrifugation conditions from 60 000g for 75 min [81]
to 35 000g for 75 min [83]. Many of
these methods employ a vertical rotor.


6 If neither of these devices is available, mix equal volumes of the 20 and
40% iodixanol solutions to produce
an additional 30% iodixanol solution. Create a discontinuous gradient
from 6 ml each of the three solutions
and allow a continuous gradient to
be formed by diffusion overnight at
0–4 ◦ C.

7 See ref. 18 for more information about
making gradients.

8 Use either tube puncture or aspiration from the bottom of the tube
to collect the gradient. See ref. 18
for more information about harvesting
and analysing gradients.

PROTOCOL 4.16
Catalase assay

Reagents
Peroxide stock: 30 mM H2 O2 in T-BSA 
1
Sample buffer: 2 vols. T-BSA + 1 vol. 2%
Triton X-100
Titanium oxysulfate (2.25 g/l) in 1 M
2
H2 SO4  
T-BSA: 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.0 containing 0.1% (w/v) bovine serum albumin

5. After exactly 1 min, add 1.0 ml of titanium oxysulfate and microcentrifuge
(∼13 500g) for 2 min.
6. Allow all tubes to reach room temperature and measure the absorbance at
405 nm against a blank containing
0.54 ml of T-BSA and 1 ml of titanium
5
oxysulfate. 

Notes
Equipment
Microcentrifuge with 2.0 ml microcentrifuge tubes
Spectrophotometer

Procedure [84]
Carry out all procedures on ice in 2 ml
microcentrifuge tubes and keep all solutions on ice.
1. Make up the assay mixture freshly by
diluting 8.5 ml of stock peroxide to
100 ml with T-BSA.
2. Add 1.0 ml of titanium oxysulfate to
0.5 ml of assay mixture and measure
the absorbance at 405 nm; it should be
∼1.5. If it is not, then adjust the H2 O2
concentration accordingly.
3. Mix 10 µl of sample with 30 µl of
sample buffer; for the reagent control,
3 
4
use 40 µl of sample buffer. 
4. Add 0.5 ml of assay mixture to all
tubes; do this in batches of six tubes
only.

This procedure will take approx. 1 h.
◦

1 Keep the stock peroxide at 4 C.


2 Titanium oxysulfate is highly corrosive.

3 The enzyme is very active in mammalian liver fractions: peroxisomerich fractions may have to be diluted
up to 100× with sample buffer.

4 It is usually unnecessary to use a blank
for each fraction; if it is deemed necessary, then set up duplicate samples
(step 4) and add the titanium oxysulfate before the assay mixture to one of
each pair.

5 The titanium oxysulfate reacts with
the H2 O2 remaining after the incubation; thus if all the substrate had
been used up, the absorbance would
be close to zero. The reagent control absorbance measures the substrate
concentration at zero time.

PROTOCOL 4.17
Analysis of major organelles in a preformed
iodixanol gradient

Reagents
OptiPrep (60% w/v iodixanol)
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM HepesNaOH, pH 7.4
OptiPrep Diluent (OD): 0.25 M sucrose,
6 mM EDTA, 120 mM Hepes-NaOH,
pH 7.4
Iodixanol (50%, w/v) working solution
(IWS): 5 vols. OptiPrep + 1 vol.
1
OD 
Add protease inhibitors to HM and OD as
required
Light mitochondrial fraction prepared using
HM (see Protocol 4.8)

Equipment
Dounce homogenizer (loose-fitting, Wheaton type B)
Two-chamber gradient maker or Gradient
Master
Syringe (5 ml) with metal cannula (internal
2
diameter approx. 0.8 mm) 
Ultracentrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
(tube capacity of approx. 17 ml)
Gradient collection device for harvesting
gradient low-density or high-density end
3
first 

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.

1. Dilute IWS with HM to produce gradient solutions with iodixanol concentrations of 19 and 27% (w/v). Keep these
4
solutions on ice until required. 
2. Resuspend the light mitochondrial pellet in approx 3.0 ml of HM using the
loose-fitting Dounce homogenizer (two
to three strokes of the pestle).
3. Adjust the suspension to 30% iodixanol
by mixing with IWS.
4. Use a two-chamber gradient maker
or a Gradient Master to prepare a
linear gradient from 6 ml each of the
two gradient solutions in tubes for the
5
swinging-bucket rotor. 
5. Using the syringe and metal cannula
layer 3–4 ml of the suspension (step 3)
beneath the gradient.
6. Layer 1–2 ml of HM on top of the gradient to fill the tube to about 3 mm
from its top and centrifuge in a suitable swinging-bucket rotor at approx
70 000gav for 1.5–2 h.
7. Collect the gradient in 1 ml fractions
low-density end first by upward displacement with a dense medium or by
aspiration from the meniscus. Alternatively, collect dense end first by tube
puncture or by carefully introducing a
narrow metal cannula (connected to a
peristaltic pump) to the bottom of the
3 
6 
7
tube. 

PROTOCOL 4.17

125

Table 4.2 Fractionation of major organelles in iodixanol gradients: variations of sample and gradient
conditions

Gradient input1

Tissue/cell
Brain (mouse)
Glioblastoma
Glomerular epithelial
H4 neuroglioma
HEK293
HEK293
Human carcinoma
Human liver
Human epithelial
MDCK
Vero

Gradient2

17 000g/10 min pellet from PNS
15 000g/10 min pellet from PNS
100 000g/1 h pellet from PNS
17 000g/10 min pellet from PNS
3000g PNS
PNS
PNS underlaid in 35% iodixanol
Light mitochondrial pellet
17 000g/10 min pellet from PNS
17 000g pellet from PNS
3000g supernatant

10–30
10–30
2.5–25 (d)
10–30
10–30
10–30(d)
1–30
13–45
10–30
10–30
2.5–30 (d)

RCF (time)

Ref.

52 000g (90 min)
52 000g (90 min)
100 000g (3 h)
52 000g (90 min)
30 000g (16 h)
100 000g (3 h)
100 000g (1.5 h)
33 000g (75 min)
52 000g (90 min)
100 000g (1 h)
126 000g (25 min)

85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95

PNS = post-nuclear supernatant; unless stated all samples layered on top of gradient.
Figures are % (w/v) iodixanol; d = discontinuous gradient.
RCF = relative centrifugal force.
1
2

1.2

30

25
1.15

1.1

15

Density (g/ml)

% Distribution

20

10
1.05
5

0

1

3

5

7
9
11
Fraction number

13

15

1

Figure 4.1 Fractionation of a mammalian liver light mitochondrial fraction by flotation: percentage
distribution of enzyme markers. Light mitochondrial fraction layered in 30% iodixanol beneath a
19–27% iodixanol gradient; centrifuged at 70 000g for 1.5 h. White bars, β-galactosidase; hatched
bars, succinate dehydrogenase; black bars, catalase

Notes

1 This solution is approx. isoosmotic.

2 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be obtained
from any surgical equipment supplies
company.


3 The most satisfactory method for collecting low-density end first is by aspiration from the meniscus using the
Labconco Auto Densi-flow gradient
unloader, but upward displacement
with a dense medium such as Maxidens, introduced to the bottom of

126

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

the gradient by tube puncture, is
satisfactory. The Beckman Fraction
Recovery System incorporates a good
tube puncture device. This can also be
used for collection dense end first.


4 There are variations to the density
range of the gradient used in this
protocol. The 19–27% iodixanol gradient is optimal for rat liver; some
other examples are summarized in
Table 4.2. In nearly all cases, the sample was layered on top of the gradient
rather than beneath it, even though in
the latter format the resolution is probably greater.


5 If neither of these devices is available create a discontinuous gradient
from 3 ml each of 19, 22, 25 and
27% iodixanol and allow a continuous gradient to be formed by diffusion
overnight at 0–4 ◦ C. For more information on the formation of gradients,
see ref. 18.

6 For more information about the harvesting and analysis of gradients, see
ref. 18.

7 A typical result with rat liver is shown
in Figure 4.1.

PROTOCOL 4.18
Separation of smooth and rough ER in
preformed sucrose gradients [48]

Reagents
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 10 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.4
Gradient solutions: 13.6, 17.5, 50 and
51.5% (w/v) sucrose in 10 mM HepesNaOH, pH 7.4
Rough ER suspension medium (RSM)
70% (w/v) sucrose, 3 mM imidazoleHCl, pH 8.2
Stripping solution: 68% (w/v) sucrose,
40 mM pyrophosphate, 3 mM imidazole
-HCl, pH 8.2
Light mitochondrial supernatant: Protocol
4.8 (using the above HM) as far as step 8
Include protease inhibitors in the solutions
as required

Equipment
Dounce homogenizer (20–30 ml loosefitting, Wheaton type B)
Two-chamber gradient maker or Gradient
Master
Syringe (5 or 10 ml) and metal cannula 
1
Ultracentrifuge with 8 × 39 ml fixed-angle
rotor (with open-topped thick-walled
tubes) and 14–17 ml swinging-bucket
rotor

Procedure
The method is designed for approx 10 g of
rat liver. Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.

2

1. Centrifuge the 15 000g supernatant at
100 000g for 40 min.
2. Discard the supernatant and resuspend
the microsomal pellet in 20 ml of
the homogenization medium using the
3
Dounce homogenizer. 
3. Using a two-chamber gradient maker
or Gradient Master, prepare 17.5–
50% (w/v) sucrose gradients in tubes
for the swinging-bucket rotor (for
4
17 ml tubes make a 5 ml gradient). 
4. Underlayer the gradient with 2 ml of
51.5% sucrose using the syringe and
metal cannula.
5. Layer 10 ml of the microsomal suspension on top and centrifuge at
100 000g for 16 h.
6. Harvest the smooth ER band by removing the top 15 ml of the gradient using a syringe and metal cannula
and concentrate (after dilution with an
equal volume of HM) by centrifugation at 100 000g for 1 h.
7. Resuspend the pellet of rough microsomes (from the gradient tube) in the
residual medium (2 ml) and add 12 ml
of the RSM plus 5 ml of stripping
solution.
8. Prepare 13.6–50% (w/v) linear sucrose gradients (12 ml in 17 ml tubes)
and underlay each with the 5 ml of
5
sample. 

128

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

9. Centrifuge at 200 000g for 2 h.
10. The stripped RER vesicles band in the
bottom half of the gradient (27–50%
sucrose) while peroxisomal and mitochondrial contaminants are located
below this band.
11. Collect the band using a syringe and
metal cannula.
12. Dilute with 2 vols. of HM and pellet
at 100 000g for 1 h.

Notes
This procedure will take approx. 1.5 days.


1 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be obtained
from any surgical equipment supplies
company.


2 Although developed for rat liver the
method may be used for any tissue.

3 The rough ER in the 100 000g pellet
tends to make the latter gelatinous;
make sure this is well dispersed.

4 If neither of these devices is available
then allow a discontinuous gradient
(1 ml each of 17.5, 25.5, 32.5, 40.5
and 50% sucrose) to diffuse for approx
6 h. See ref. 18 for more information
about making gradients.

5 If neither a two-chamber mixer nor a
Gradient Master is available, allow
a discontinuous gradient (2.5 ml each
of 13.6, 22.6, 31.6, 41.6 and 50%
sucrose) to diffuse overnight. See ref.
18 for more information about making
gradients.

PROTOCOL 4.19
Separation of smooth and rough ER in a
self-generated iodixanol gradient

Reagents
OptiPrep (60% iodixanol)
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl
Light mitochondrial supernatant: Protocol
4.8 (using the above HM) as far as step 8
Include protease inhibitors in the HM as
required

Equipment
Ultracentrifuge with 8 × 39 ml fixed-angle
(with open-topped thick-walled tubes)
and a vertical or near-vertical rotor (e.g.
Beckman VTi65.1 or equivalent) and
1
suitable sealed tubes (approx 11 ml) 
Dounce homogenizer (20–30 ml loosefitting, Wheaton type B)
Gradient collection device for unloading
2
low-density end first 

Procedure [96]
The method is designed for approx. 10 g
of liver. Carry out all procedures at
3
0–4 ◦ C. 
1. Centrifuge the light mitochondrial
(15 000g) supernatant at 100 000g for
40 min.
2. Discard the supernatant and resuspend
the microsomal pellet in 30 ml of HM
4
using the Dounce homogenizer. 

3. Mix the microsome suspension with
half its volume of OptiPrep (final
iodixanol concentration 20%, w/v) and
transfer to 11.2 ml Optiseal tubes for
the Beckman VTi65.1 vertical rotor.
4. Centrifugation at 350 000gav for 2 h
at 4 ◦ C. Turn the brake off, or use
a slow deceleration program, during
below 2000 rpm.
5. Harvest the gradients by upward displacement with a dense medium in
5 
6 
7
0.5 ml fractions for analysis. 

Notes

1 Beckman Optiseal tubes are the
most convenient sealed tubes to use
and are the recommended ones for
this procedure. They are sealed by
a central plastic plug that can be
removed after centrifugation to allow
easy access to the gradient.

2 The tube puncture part of a Beckman Fraction Recovery System or
the Labconco Auto Densi-flow is the
recommended device for unloading
Optiseal tubes. Crimp or heat-sealed
tubes are less easy to unload and must
be collected dense end first.

3 Although developed for rat liver the
method may be used for any tissue.

4 The rough ER in the 100 000g pellet
tends to make the latter gelatinous;
make sure this is well dispersed.

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES
50

3

2.5

40

2
mg/frac

30
1.5
20
1
10

0.5

0

nmol NADPH/min/frac

130

1

3

5

7

9
11
13
Fraction number

15

17

19

0

Figure 4.2 Fractionation of rat liver microsomes in a self-generated iodixanol gradient. Starting
concentration of iodixanol = 20%; Beckman VTi65.1 vertical rotor at 350 000g for 2 h. Protein
) mg/fraction, phospholipids (
) mg/fraction, RNA (
) mg/fraction (×5),
(
)
NADPH cytochrome c reductase (


5 The bottom of the gradient is extremely
viscous, due to the high concentration
of iodixanol and the presence of RNA,
so collection of the gradient dense end
first is not really the best option.

6 For more information on the harvesting and analysis of gradients, see ref.
18.

7 A typical profile of major markers
for the SER and RER is given in
Figure 4.2. Protein, lipid and NADH

cytochrome c reductase profiles of
the gradient reveal two broad bands
of material. RNA increases gradually
in the lower third of the gradient,
the very sharp increase in the bottom fraction being accompanied by a
rapid fall in phospholipid and NADH
cytochrome c reductase. The SER is
thus distributed broadly in the top half
of the gradient, the RER in the bottom
third and ribosomes band in the last
fraction.

PROTOCOL 4.20
NADPH-cytochrome c reductase assay [50]

Reagents
Buffer: 50 mM phosphate, pH 7.7, containing 0.1 mM EDTA
Cytochrome c (25 mg/ml) in buffer (make
up fresh; keep on ice)
NADPH (2 mg/ml) in buffer (make up
fresh; keep away from light; keep on ice)
Rotenone: 1 mg/ml in ethanol

Equipment
Recording spectrophotometer (visible
1
wavelength) with 1 ml cuvettes. 

Procedure
The procedure is given for a single-beam
spectrophotometer linked up to a chart
recorder (0.2 absorbance units full-scale
deflection).
1. Bring the buffer to room temperature
and carry out all operations at this
temperature.
2. In a 1 ml cuvette add 50 µl of cytochrome c and 10 µl of rotenone to 1 ml

of buffer, then mix well with up to
50 µl of sample.
3. When the absorbance at 550 nm is
steady, add 0.1 ml of NADPH.
4. Mix well and continue to record the
absorbance until a linear increase in
value can be measured over a period
2
of 1–2 min. 

Notes

1 A dual-beam spectrophotometer is
perhaps the best instrument; if one is
available, replace the NADPH with
buffer in the blank cuvette. Single
beam instruments linked up to a chart
recorder (used in this procedure) will
probably be the most widely available.
Even non-recording spectrophotometers can be used, although the measurement is rather more tedious.

2 Calculate the enzyme activity in terms
of µmoles cytochrome c reduced; the
molar extinction coefficient of reduced
cytochrome c is 27 000.

PROTOCOL 4.21
Glucose-6-phosphatase assay [49]

Reagents
2.5% (w/v) Ammonium molybdate in
2.5 M H2 SO4
Fiske-Subbarow reducing solution (prepare
and store as per manufacturer’s instructions)
Substrate solution: 0.1 M glucose-6-phosphate
Buffer: 5 mM EDTA, 20 mM histidineHCl buffer pH 6.5
8% (w/v) Trichloroacetic acid (TCA), keep
ice-cold

Equipment
Centrifuge (low-speed refrigerated) with
swinging-bucket rotor to hold the assay
tubes
Spectrophotometer (visible wavelength)
1
Tubes, approx. 4 ml 
Water baths set at 37 and 100 ◦ C

Procedure
1. Prepare the test solution: mix substrate and buffer solution in the ratio
2.5 : 2 (v/v).
2. Add 50 µl of sample to 0.45 ml of the
test solution and mix. For each sample
also set up a control tube containing
only 0.45 ml of test solution.
3. Incubate the tubes at 37 ◦ C for 30 min.
4. Transfer the tubes to an ice/water bath;

5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

add 50 µl of sample to the control
tubes.
Add 2.5 ml of ice-cold TCA to all
tubes.
2
Keep at 0–4 ◦ C for 20 min. 
Centrifuge all the TCA containing
tubes at 1000g for 15 min at 4 ◦ C.
Remove 1 ml of supernatant to a new
tube.
Add 1.15 ml water, 0.25 ml of ammonium molybdate solution and 0.1 ml
of reducing solution.
Heat all tubes at 100 ◦ C for 10 min.
Cool and read absorbance of all test
solutions at 820 nm against the appropriate controls.

Notes
This procedure takes 2–3 h.


1 Enzyme assays based on the measurement of released phosphate can be a
problem if care is not taken to eliminate, as far as possible, phosphate contamination from the tubes and bottles
used for the reagents. Glass tubes and
glass containers must be acid-washed
and then rinsed three times in distilled
water before use. Plastic tubes used
for the incubation at 37 ◦ C need to be
checked for absence of phosphate.

2 Longer times are not harmful.

PROTOCOL 4.22
RNA analysis [97]

Reagents
Orcinol reagent: 0.5 g orcinol, 0.25 g
FeCl3 .6H2 O in 50 ml concentrated HCl
(make up freshly and keep at 4 ◦ C until
required)
Trichloroacetic acid (TCA) solution: 20%
(w/v) in water
RNA standard: 250 µg/ml in water

Equipment
Microcentrifuge and 1.5–2.0 ml microcentrifuge tubes
Water bath
Spectrophotometer

2. Transfer 0.5 ml of each RNA standard
(50–250 µg/ml) and a water blank to
microcentrifuge tubes.
3. Dilute gradient samples in microcentrifuge tubes to 0.5 ml with water.
4. Add TCA to all tubes so that the final
concentration is 5%.
5. Heat in a water bath at 90 ◦ C for
20 min.
6. Microcentrifuge for 2 min.
7. Transfer the supernatant to another tube
and add an equal volume of the orcinol
reagent.
8. After 20 min at 100 ◦ C, cool and mea1
sure the absorbance at 660 nm. 

Note
Procedure
1. Dilute RNA stock to give 50, 100, 150
and 200 µg/ml solutions.

The procedure will take approx. 1.5 h.


1 Neither Nycodenz nor iodixanol
interfere with this assay.

PROTOCOL 4.23
Isolation of Golgi membranes from liver [52]

Reagents
Homogenization buffer (HM): 0.5 M sucrose, 1% (w/v) dextran (Mr = 225 000)
in 0.05 M Tris-maleate, pH 6.4
Density barrier: 1.2 M sucrose, 0.05 M
Tris-maleate, pH 6.4
Include protease inhibitors in these two
solutions as required

Equipment
High-speed centrifuge with swingingbucket rotor for 30–50 ml clear plastic
1
tubes. 
Phase contrast microscope
Polytron homogenizer
Syringe (10 or 20 ml) and metal can2
nula 
Ultracentrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
for 17 ml tubes
Glass rod

3. Centrifuge for 15 min at 5000g and
very carefully aspirate the supernatant
4
using the syringe and cannula. 
4. The Golgi membranes are contained
in the upper (yellow-brown) portion of
the bipartite pellet; resuspend them in
some of the residual supernatant by very
gentle stirring with a glass rod. Be very
careful to avoid resuspension of the
lower part of the pellet, which contains
nuclei, some heavy mitochondria and
whole cells.
5. Transfer the resuspended Golgi material
to a new tube using the syringe and
cannula.
6. Adjust the concentration of the suspension with HM to 6 ml per 10 g liver and
layer over 2 volumes of 1.2 M sucrose
in a tube for the swinging-bucket rotor.
7. Centrifuge at 120 000g for 30 min.
8. Remove the Golgi membranes that
collect at the interface with a syringe
and cannula. 
5

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C. The
procedure is for a single rat liver (approx.
10 g).

Notes
This procedure will take approx. 1.5 h.

1. Mince the liver finely using a razor
blade and suspend in HM (about 10 g
liver per 20 ml buffer).


1 A fixed-angle rotor is not an option
because of the difficulty such a rotor
would pose for step 4.

2. Homogenize in a Polytron homogenizer set at 10 000 rpm (setting 1) for
3
30–50 s. 


2 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be
obtained from any surgical equipment
supplies company.

PROTOCOL 4.23


3 Use the Polytron in 10 s ‘bursts’,
interposed by 20 s ‘rests’ to avoid
any heating. Monitor the progress of
the homogenization by phase contrast
microscopy.

4 Keep the tip of the cannula close to
the meniscus.

5 The dextran in the HM maintains the
stacking of the Golgi tubules. If it
is necessary to isolate the various
domains from the Golgi, the stacks

135

must be disaggregated by hydroly
sis of the dextran. This is achieved
by incubating the isolated Golgi in
4–5 ml of HM with 3 mg each of αamylase Type X-A from Aspergillus
oryzae and α-amylase Type III-A from
barley for 45 min at 4 ◦ C. Destacking
is completed by gentle liquid shearing
through a Pasteur pipette (tip i.d. =
1 mm) or through a syringe with metal
cannula [98].

PROTOCOL 4.24
Assay of UDP-galactose galactosyl
transferase [54]

Reagents
Keep all solutions on ice.
Acceptor solution: 10 mM ATP, 5% (w/v)
ovalbumin in assay buffer (make up
fresh)
Assay buffer: 10 mM MnCl2 , 30 mM
2-mercaptoethanol, 0.1 M cacodylate
buffer, pH 6.2, containing 0.2% (w/v)
Triton-X100
TCA (10%, w/v)
UDP-gal:
12.5 mM
UDP-galactose
containing
UDP-[6-3 H]-galactose
(70 kBq/ml)
1
Scintillant 

2. Pin the discs to a polystyrene board,
making sure that the discs do not touch
the board.
3. Place 250 ml of 10% TCA in a beaker
in ice.
4. In 0.3 ml assay tubes (in an ice-water
bath), mix 50 µl of acceptor solution
with 50 µl sample and add 10 µl radiolabelled UDP-gal solution.
5. At zero time and after a 20 min incubation at 37 ◦ C transfer 50 µl of the
incubation mixture to a filter disc.
6. Plunge the discs into the ice-cold
2
TCA. 
7. Leave for at least 2 h, swirling the discs
occasionally.

Equipment
Filter paper discs (2.4 cm)
Ice-water bath
Plastic assay tubes (0.3 ml)
Polystyrene board with pins
Scintillation counter
Water bath at 37 ◦ C

8. Wash the discs in several changes of
distilled water; leave to dry overnight
at room temperature.
9. Count in a suitable scintillant.

Notes
This procedure will take 18–20 h.

Procedure


1 Any commercial scintillant for nonaqueous samples will suffice.

1. Prepare two filter paper discs (2.4 cm)
per sample (numbered lightly with
a pencil).


2 Do not allow the discs to float on the
TCA; the pencil mark is liable to come
off.

PROTOCOL 4.25
Purification of human erythrocyte
‘ghosts’ [55]

Reagents
Human blood (0.38% citrate or 1 mM
EDTA as anticoagulant)
Hypotonic buffer: dilute isotonic buffer
15.5× with distilled water
Isotonic buffer: mix 0.155 M NaH2 PO4
and 0.103 M Na2 HPO4 to pH 7.4

6. After removing the buffer from
the final wash, resuspend the erythrocytes in isotonic buffer (32 ml
final volume).
7. Place 28 ml of hypotonic buffer in
each of 16 tubes for the high-speed
centrifuge and from an automatic
pipette quickly add 2 ml of the washed
3
erythrocyte suspension. 

Equipment

8. Centrifuge at 20 000g for 20 min.

High-speed centrifuge with fixed-angle
rotor (8 × 50 ml)
Low-speed (refrigerated) centrifuge with
swinging-bucket rotor (50 ml tubes)
Wide-bore pipette attached to automatic
pipette-filler

9. Aspirate the supernatant and resuspend
the erythrocyte ‘ghost’ pellet in the
hypotonic buffer by gentle pipetting,
4
avoiding any hard-packed buttons. 

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C. The
procedure is for 30–40 ml of blood.

10. Repeat the centrifugation and washing
procedure three times.
11. Finally, resuspend the washed ‘ghosts’
in a suitable buffer.

Notes
The procedure will take approx. 3 h.

1. Centrifuge the blood in a capped tube
at 800g for 15 min. 
1


1 Operators need to be properly trained
in the handling of human blood.

2. Aspirate the plasma and buffy coat
into a trap containing disinfectant.


2 Significant numbers of leukocytes in
the final erythrocyte suspension can
cause serious aggregation due to lysis
of their nuclei during the hypotonic
buffer steps. It is therefore important
that as much of the leukocyte fraction, which forms the buffy coat, is
removed, even at the expense of losing some of the erythrocytes.

3. Add isotonic buffer to the original volume and gently resuspend the erythrocyte pellet using the wide-bore pipette.
4. Centrifuge the erythrocyte suspension
at 800g for 15 min.
2
5. Repeat steps 2–4 three more times. 

138

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES


3 Effective lysis of the erythrocytes only
occurs if the cells are rapidly exposed
to the hypotonic buffer.

4 The hard-packed button contains
aggregated material (debris, partially

disrupted leukocytes and leukocyte
nuclei). This must be avoided in
the resuspension of the erythrocyte
ghosts.

PROTOCOL 4.26
Isolation of plasma membrane sheets from rat
liver [56]

Reagents
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 1 mM MgCl2 , 10 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.4
Dense sucrose solution (DSS): 2.0 M
sucrose, 1 mM MgCl2 , 10 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.4
Include protease inhibitors in these two
solutions as required

Equipment
Dounce homogenizer (loose-fitting Wheaton type B, clearance 0.1–0.3 mm)
Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge with
swinging-bucket rotor for 50 ml tubes
Nylon mesh (750 µm pore size)
Refractometer
Syringe (20 ml) with metal filling cannula
Ultracentrifuge with 37–39 ml swingingbucket rotor and suitable tubes

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 4 ◦ C. The procedure is given for one liver from an adult
male rat.
1. Blanch the liver of an anaesthetized
rat by perfusing about 20 ml of HM
1
through the portal vein. 
2. Rapidly remove and weigh the liver,
then chop finely with scissors in a
2
beaker on ice. 

3. Suspend the mince in the HM (approx.
4 ml/g of liver).
4. Homogenize the liver (in two batches)
in the Dounce homogenizer using 10
strokes of the pestle. 
3
5. Filter the homogenate through the
nylon mesh to remove connective
tissue and unbroken cells; facilitate
filtration by gentle stirring with a
4
glass rod. 
6. Dilute the filtrate with HM to 5 ml/g
liver and divide between two 50 ml
tubes for centrifugation at 280g for
5 min.
7. Aspirate the supernatant using a
syringe and metal cannula. 
5 
6
8. Centrifuge the 280g supernatant at
1500g for 10 min; decant and discard
the supernatant.
9. Resuspend the pellet in 25 ml of HM
using the Dounce homogenizer (five
strokes of the pestle) and mix well
with 2 volumes of DSS. Adjust the
density if necessary to 1.18 g/ml by
checking the refractive index (η =
1.4106).
10. Divide the suspension between two
tubes for a Beckman SW 28 swingingbucket rotor and fill by overlayering
with about 2 ml of HM and centrifuge
at 113 000g for 1 h.

140

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

11. Collect the plasma membrane sheets,
which band at the interface, using a
syringe and metal cannula.
12. Dilute the suspension to 40 ml with
HM and harvest the membranes by
centrifugation at 3000g for 10 min.
13. Resuspend the pellets in the required
volume (approx 1 mg protein/ml) of a
suitable medium.

Notes
This procedure will take approx 3 h.


1 Cannulation of blood vessels of an experimental animal under anaesthesia

must be carried out by licensed and
trained operators.


2 Failure to mince the liver adequately
will result in difficult and irreproducible homogenization.

3 Avoid frothing during homogenization.

4 Do not squeeze the homogenate
through the filter.

5 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be
obtained from any surgical equipment
supplies company.

6 The pellet is very loosely packed; do
not decant the supernatant.

PROTOCOL 4.27
Assay for 5 -nucleotidase [99]

Reagents
Ammonium molybdate: 2.5%, w/v in
2.5 M H2 SO4
Buffer: 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5
Fiske-Subbarow reducing agent (make up
according to manufacturer’s recommendations)
1
Levamisole (1 mM): 240 µg/ml 
Substrate: 20 mM adenosine monophosphate (AMP); 20 mM MgCl2 , 0.2 M TrisHCl, pH 8.5
Trichloroacetic acid (TCA): 10%, w/v

Equipment
Microcentrifuge with 1.5 ml tubes
Plastic assay tubes (1.5 and 2.0 ml)
Spectrophotometer (visible wavelength)
Vortex mixer
Water bath set at 37 ◦ C

Procedure 
2
1. Dispense 0.7 ml of TCA in microcentrifuge tubes (two per sample) and
keep on ice.
2. On ice, adjust a resuspended membrane
pellet or gradient fraction (0.1 ml or
less) to 0.5 ml with buffer in assay tubes
and mix with 25 µl of levamisole if
required.
3. Add 0.5 ml of substrate to all tubes.

4. Transfer 0.3 ml from each tube to one
of the prepared TCA containing tubes
(zero time reading) and mix.
5. Incubate the remaining samples at
37 ◦ C for 30 min.
6. Transfer 0.3 ml of the suspension to
the remaining TCA containing tubes
and mix.
7. After a further 30 min on ice, remove
the precipitate in a microcentrifuge
(1 min).
8. Transfer 0.5 ml of the supernatant to a
2 ml plastic assay tube.
9. For a reagent blank use 0.5 ml from a
mixture of 0.7 ml of TCA and 0.2 ml
buffer.
10. To each assay tube, add 0.6 ml of
water, 125 µl molybdate solution and
50 µl of reducing agent, mixing well
after each addition.
11. Heat at 37 ◦ C for 20 min and then
measure the absorbance at 820 nm
against the appropriate reagent
3
blank. 

Notes

1 Levamisole inhibits the hydrolysis of
AMP by a non-specific alkaline phosphatase.

2 Enzyme assays based on the measurement of released phosphate can be a
problem if care is not taken to eliminate, as far as possible, phosphate con-

142

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

tamination from the tubes and bottles
used for the reagents. Glass tubes and
glass containers must be acid-washed
and then rinsed three times in distilled
water before use. Plastic tubes used
for the incubations need to be checked
for absence of phosphate.


3 Inorganic phosphate standards in the
range 20–200 nmol should be used in
calibrating the assay.

PROTOCOL 4.28
Assay for alkaline phosphodiesterase [100]

Reagents
Buffer: 50 mM glycine-NaOH, pH 9.8
NaOH (0.25 M)
MgCl2 (1.0 M)
Substrate: p-nitrophenylthymidine 5 -phosphate (5 mM) (make up fresh)

Equipment
Microcentrifuge
Plastic assay tubes (1.5 ml)
Vortex mixer
Water bath set at 37 ◦ C

Procedure
1. Prepare the assay solution by mixing
equal volumes of buffer and substrate
and to every 10 ml add 0.1 ml of 1 M
MgCl2 .
2. Add 0.5 ml assay solution to a resuspended pellet or gradient fraction (no
1
more than 50 µl). 
3. Incubate at 37 ◦ C for 20 min and stop
the reaction by adding 0.5 ml of NaOH
solution.

4. Set up a blank for each sample in
which the NaOH is added before the
assay reagent (zero time sample) and a
reagent blank containing assay solution
2
and NaOH. 
5. Microcentrifuge
(15 000 rpm)
for
2 min.
6. Measure the absorbance due to the
p-nitrophenol at 410 nm against the
reagent blank. The molar extinction
coefficient of p-nitrophenol is 9620.

Notes

1 If the membrane is at a sufficiently
high concentration, gradient samples
may be used directly in the assay
without removal of solutes such as
sucrose, Nycodenz or iodixanol.

2 It may be permissible to omit a
blank for each sample. The membrane
should contribute no significant light
scattering or absorbance at 410 nm in
NaOH.

PROTOCOL 4.29
Assay for ouabain-sensitive Na+/K+ -ATPase
[101]

Reagents
Phosphate reagent A: to 0.75 g ascorbic
acid in 25 ml 0.5 M HCl, add 1.25 ml
10% (w/v) ammonium heptamolybdate
with vigorous agitation
Phosphate reagent B: 3% (w/v) sodium-marsenite, 2% (w/v) trisodium citrate
(dihydrate) and 2% (v/v) acetic acid
Substrate A: 3 mM MgCl2 , 3 mM ATP,
130 mM NaCl, 20 mM KCl, 30 mM
histidine buffer, pH 7.5
Substrate B: as medium A plus 1 mM ou1
abain (0.73 mg/ml) 

Equipment
Microcentrifuge
Plastic assay tubes (4 ml)
Spectrophotometer (visible wavelength)
Vortex mixer
Water bath set at 37 ◦ C

Procedure 
2
1. For each sample set up two tubes
containing 1 ml each of substrates A
and B.
2. Bring the tubes to 37 ◦ C; add 25 µl of
sample to each tube and incubate for
3
5–10 min. 
3. Add 0.5 ml of phosphate reagent A to
each tube and transfer to an ice-water
bath for 6 min.

4. Return to 37 ◦ C and add 1.5 ml phosphate reagent B.
5. After 10 min, transfer 1.5 ml to a
microcentrifuge tube and centrifuge for
1 min.
6. Read absorbance of each supernatant at
850 nm. 
4

Notes

1 Ouabain inhibits specifically the Na+ /
K+ -ATPase.

2 Enzyme assays based on the measurement of released phosphate can be a
problem if care is not taken to eliminate, as far as possible, phosphate contamination from the tubes and bottles
used for the reagents. Glass tubes and
glass containers must be acid-washed
and then rinsed three times in distilled
water before use. Plastic tubes used
for the incubations need to be checked
for absence of phosphate.

3 The activity of the enzyme is very
variable; depending on the source of
the membrane, use a time that provides a measurable release of phosphate, while the substrate concentration remains non-rate-limiting.

4 The difference in the phosphate concentration between the two incubations (with and without ouabain) provides that due to the Na+ /K+ -ATPase.

PROTOCOL 4.30
Isolation of chloroplasts from green leaves or
pea seedlings [58]

Reagents

Procedure

Homogenization buffer (spinach): 330 mM
sorbitol, 10 mM Na2 P4 O7 (pyrophosphate), 5 mM MgCl2 , 2 mM sodium
1
isoascorbate, pH 6.5 
Homogenization buffer (pea): 330 mM
glucose, 5 mM MgCl2 , 0.1% (w/v)
bovine serum albumin (BSA), 0.1%
(w/v) NaCl, 0.2% (w/v) sodium isoascorbate, 50 mM phosphate buffer, pH
1
6.5 
Wash medium: 330 mM sorbitol, 2 mM
EDTA, 1 mM MnCl2 , 1 mM MgCl2 ,
50 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.6
40% (v/v) Percoll in wash medium

Pre-chill all equipment and solutions.
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C and use
3
approx. 50 g of chosen plant material. 

Equipment
Centrifuge (high speed) with swingingbucket rotor or fixed angle rotor (250 ml
polycarbonate tubes) and swingingbucket rotor for 15 ml polycarbonate
2
tubes 
Cheesecloth
Cotton wool
Safety razor blade
Muslin
Rotating blades homogenizer: e.g. Polytron, Ultra-Turrax or Waring Blender

1. Harvest the material at the start of
the light period and clean off any dirt
adhering to the plant material in cold
water and dry.
2. Devein the spinach leaves.
3. Chop the green leaves or aerial shoots
of peas very finely using razor blades
and then suspend in the appropriate homogenization buffer (approx.
150 ml).
4. Homogenize in a Polytron at top speed
4
for approx 5–10 s. 
5. Prepare two filters (A) from two layers
of muslin and (B) from a sandwich
of cotton wool between four layers of
5
cheesecloth. 
6. Position filter A over a 250 ml beaker
on ice.
7. Pre-wet the filter with the homogenization buffer and squeeze the
homogenate through the filter.
8. Pass the filtrate through filter B (do not
squeeze).
9. Centrifuge the filtrate at 1500–6000g
6
for 0.5–1.0 min. 

146

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

10. Decant the supernatant and remove
any material adhering to the tubes by
wiping with a tissue.
11. Slowly pour a little wash medium down
the side of the tube and gently swirl
the contents to resuspend any broken chloroplasts, which form a loosely
packed layer at the top of the pellet.
12. Decant the liquid and resuspend the
remaining pellet in a few ml of wash
medium, by very gentle agitation.
13. Dilute to the original volume of homogenate; repeat the centrifugation and
resuspend the pellet in 5 ml of wash
medium.
14. To remove damaged chloroplasts, layer
the suspension over 6 ml of the
Percoll solution and centrifuge at
6
2000–3000gav for 1 min. 
15. Resuspend the pelleted intact chloroplasts in wash medium.

Notes
The procedure will take approx. 1 h.


1 There is a great variety of homogenization media and choice of the appropriate medium will depend not only
on the material but also on subsequent
requirements. For more information,
see ref. 58.

2 It is important for chloroplast intactness that the inner surfaces of the
tubes are not scratched.

3 Some varieties of spinach, which have
high levels of oxalate and phenolics,
should be avoided (see ref. 58 for
more information).

4 Because of the delicacy of the organelles, homogenization times should be
kept to a minimum; it is preferable to
accept lower yields in the interest of
improved chloroplast integrity.

5 The muslin filter is critical as this
retains the nuclei and broken chloroplasts.

6 The centrifugation conditions need to
be optimized by the user.

PROTOCOL 4.31
Measurement of chloroplast chlorophyll [58]

Reagent

Procedure

Acetone

1. To 10–100 µl of chloroplast suspension, add water to a final volume of
1 ml.
2. Add 4 ml of acetone and mix well.
3. Centrifuge at 3000g for 2–3 min.
4. Measure absorbance of supernatant at
652 nm. A652 × 27.8 = µg chlorophyll
per ml of acetone extract.

Equipment
Glass centrifuge tubes, screw-capped
(6 ml)
High-speed centrifuge with swingingbucket rotor for 6 ml tubes
Spectrophotometer (visible wavelength)
with glass cuvettes (1 cm)

PROTOCOL 4.32
Assessment of chloroplast integrity [58]

Reagents
Suspending medium (SM): 660 mM sorbitol, 4 mM EDTA, 2 mM MnCl2 ,
2 mM MgCl2 , 100 mM Hepes-KOH,
pH 7.6
Potassium ferricyanide (500 mM): make
up fresh
DL-Glyceraldehyde (2 M)
NH4 Cl (500 mM)

Equipment
Illuminator (150 W bulb) with heat fil1
ter 
Oxygen electrode 
2

Notes

1 The heat filter may be a glass water
bottle.

2 Consult the manufacturer’s handbook
re operating instructions.

3 This is a measure of the rate of ferricyanide reduction by intact chloroplasts plus any broken organelles.

4 This is a measure of the rate of ferricyanide reduction by totally broken
chloroplasts. The percentage of intact
chloroplasts = [(rate 2 − rate 1)/
rate 2] × 100.

References
Procedure
1. To the electrode chamber add in the following order: 1 ml SM, 0.9 ml distilled
water, 0.1 ml of chloroplast suspension
(Protocol 4.30 ), 10 µl ferricyanide and
10 µl glyceraldehyde.
2. Illuminate the mixture in the electrode
chamber.
3. After 1 min, uncouple electron flow
from proton gradient development by
adding 10 µl NH4 Cl.
4. Measure the rate of oxygen evolution
3
(rate 1). 
5. Repeat steps 1–4, but in step 1 add
water to the chloroplast suspension first,
followed by SM and the other reagents
4
(rate 2). 

1. Graham, J. M. (1993) In: Methods in Molecular Biology, Vol. 19 (J. M. Graham and
J. A. Higgins, eds), pp. 29–40. Humana
Press, Totowa, NJ.
2. Graham, J. M. (1997) In: Subcellular Fractionation – a Practical Approach (J. M. Graham and D. Rickwood, eds), pp. 1–29. IRL
Press at Oxford University Press.
3. Chappel, J. B. and Perry, S. V (1954) Nature, 173, 1094–1095.
4. Bhattacharya, S. K. Thakar, J. H. Johnson,
P. L. and Shanklin, D. R. (1991) Anal. Biochem., 192, 344–349.
5. Bullock, G. Carter, E. E. and White, A. M.
(1970) FEBS Lett., 8, 109–111.
6. Volkl, A. and Fahimi, H. D. (1985) Eur. J.
Biochem., 149, 257–265.
7. Blobel, G. and Potter, V. R. (1966) Science,
154, 1662–1665.
8. Marsh, M., Schmid, S., Kern, H., Harms, E,
Male, P., Mellman, I. and Helenius, A.
(1987) J. Cell Biol., 104, 875–886.

PROTOCOL 4.32

9. Goldberg, D. E. and Kornfeld, S. (1983) J.
Biol. Chem., 258, 3159–3165.
10. Balch, W. E. and Rothman, J. E. (1985)
Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 240, 413–425.
11. Jones, D. R., D’Santos, C. S., Merida, I.
and Divecha, N. (2002) Int. J. Biochem. Cell
Biol., 34, 158–168.
12. Anyatonwu, G. I., Buck, E. D. and Ehrlich,
B. E. (2003) J. Biol. Chem., 278,45528–
45538.
13. Cai, X. and Lytton, J. (2004) J. Biol. Chem.,
279, 5867–5876.
14. Carlsson, S. R. and Fukuda, M. (1992)
Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 296, 630–639.
15. Graham, J. M. (2001) In: Biological Centrifugation, pp. 1–12. Taylor and Francis
Books Ltd, Oxford, UK.
16. Graham, J. M. (2001) In: Biological Centrifugation, pp. 15–42. Taylor and Francis
Books Ltd, Oxford, UK.
17. Graham, J. M. (2001) In: Biological Centrifugation, pp. 43–60. Taylor and Francis
Books Ltd, Oxford, UK.
18. Graham, J. M. (2001) In: Biological Centrifugation, pp. 61–84. Taylor and Francis
Books Ltd, Oxford, UK.
19. Osmundsen, H. (1982) Int. J. Biochem., 14,
905–914.
20. Graham, J., Ford, T. and Rickwood, D.
(1994) Anal. Biochem., 220, 367–373.
21. Provost, J. J., Fudge, J., Israelit, S., Siddiqi, A. R. and Exton, J. H. (1996) Biochem. J., 319, 285–291.
22. Hofer, T. and Moler, L. (2002) Chem. Res.
Toxicol., 15, 426–432.
23. Yamamoto, Y., Jones, K. A., Mak, B. C.,
Muehlenbachs, A. and Yeung, R. S. (2002)
Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 404, 210–217.
24. German, D. C., Ng, M. C., Liang, C-L.,
McMahon, A. and Iacopino, A. M. (1997)
Neuroscience, 81, 735–743.
25. Merritt, S. E., Mata, M., Nihalani, D.,
Zhu,C., Hu, X. and Holzman, L. B. (1999)
J. Biol. Chem., 274, 10195–10202.
26. Iuchi, S., Hoffner, G., Verbeke, P., Dijan, P.
and Green, H. (2003) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
USA, 100, 2409–2414.
27. Valenzuela, S. M., Martin, D. K., Por, S. B.,
Robbins, J. M., Warton, K., Bootcov, M. R.,
Schofield, P. R., Campbell, T. J. and Breit,S. N. (1997) J. Biol. Chem., 272, 12575–
12582.
28. Zippin, J. H., Farrell, J., Huron, D.,
Kamenetsky, M., Hess, K. C., Fischman, D.

29.

30.

31.

32.

33.
34.

35.

36.

37.
38.
39.

40.

41.
42.

43.

44.
45.

46.

149

A., Levin, L. R. and Buck, J. (2004) J. Cell
Biol., 164, 527–534.
Morrison, J. A., Klingelhutz, A. J. and RaabTraub, N. (2003) J. Virol., 77, 12276–
12284.
Sinzger, C., Kahl, M., Laib, K., Klingel, K.,
Rieger, P., Plachter, B. and Jahn, G. (2000)
J. Gen. Virol., 81, 3021–3035.
Qin, Z-H., Wang, Y., Kikly, K. K., Sapp,E.,
Kegel, K. B., Aronin, N. and DiFiglia, M.
(2001) J. Biol. Chem., 276, 8079–8086.
Kegel, K. B., Meloni, A. R., Yi, Y., Kim,
Y. J., Doyle, E., Cuiffo, B. G., Sapp, E.,
Wang, Y., Qin, Z-H., Chen, J. D., Nevins,
J. R., Aronin, N. and DiFiglia, M. (2002) J.
Biol. Chem., 277, 7466–7476.
Lu, Z., Ghosh, S., Wang, Z. and Hunter, T.
(2003) Cancer Cell, 4, 499–515.
Shaw, J. P., Large, A. T., Chipman, J. K.,
Livingstone, D. R. and Peters, L. D. (2000)
Marine Envir. Res., 50, 405–409.
Ford, T. C., Baldwin, J. P. and Lambert,S. J.
(1998) Plant Club Ann. Symp. York, UK.,
Abstr. 54.
Hovius, R., Lambrechts, H., Nicolay, K.
and de Kruijff, B. (1990) Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, 1021, 217–226.
Graham, J. M., Ford, T. and Rickwood, D.
(1990) Anal. Biochem., 187, 318–323.
Glick, B. J. and Pon, L. A. (1995) Meth.
Enzymol., 260, 213–223.
Meeusen, S., Tieu, Q., Wong, E., Weiss, E.,
Schieltz, D., Yates, J. R. and Nunnari, J.
(1999) J. Cell Biol., 145, 291–304.
Wattiaux, R. and Wattiaux-De Coninck, S.
(1983) In: Iodinated Density Gradient
Media – a Practical Approach (D. Rickwood, ed.), pp. 119–137. IRL Press at
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Okado-Matsumoto, A. and Fridovich, I.
(2001) J. Biol. Chem., 276, 38388–38393.
Teoh, M. L. T., Walasek, P. J. and Evans,
D. H. (2003) J. Biol. Chem., 278, 33175–
33184.
Leighton, F., Poole, B., Beaufay, H., Baudhuin, P., Coffey, J. W., Fowler, S. and de
Duve, C. (1968) J. Cell Biol., 37, 482–513.
Symons, L. J. and Jonas, A. J. (1987) Anal.
Biochem., 164, 382–390.
Olsson, G. M., Svensson. I., Zdolsek, J. M.
and Brunk, U. T. (1989) Virchows Archiv B
Cell Pathol., 56, 385–391.
Engstrom, L. (1961) Biochim. Biophys.
Acta, 52, 36–48.

150

ISOLATION AND FUNCTIONAL ANALYSIS OF ORGANELLES

47. Mannaerts, G. P., Van Veldhoven, P., Van
Broekhoven, A., Vanderbroek, G. and Debeer, L. J. (1982) Biochem. J., 204, 124–
134.
48. Amar-Costesec, A., Godelaine, D. and
Hortsch, M. (1988) In: Cell Free Analysis of Membrane Traffic (D. J. Morré,
K. E. Howell, G. M. C. Cook and W.
H. Evans, eds), pp. 211–225. Alan R Liss
Inc., New York.
49. Aronson, N. N. and Touster O. (1974) Meth.
Enzymol., 31, 90–102.
50. Williams, C. H. and Kamin, H. (1962) J.
Biol. Chem., 237, 587–595.
51. Balch, W. E., Dunphy, W. G., Braell, W. A.
and Rothman, J. E. (1984) Cell, 39, 405–416.
52. Morré, D. J., Cheetham, R. D. and Nyquist,
S. E. (1972) Prep. Biochem., 2, 61–66.
53. Fleischer, B., Fleischer, S. and Ozawa, H.
(1969) J. Cell Biol., 43, 59–79.
54. Beaufay, H., Amar-Costesec, A., Feytmans, E., Thines-Sempoux, D., Wibo, M.,
Robbi, M. and Berthet, J. (1974) J. Cell
Biol., 61, 188–200.
55. Dodge, J. T., Mitchell, C. and Hanahan,
D. J. (1963) Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 100,
119–130.
56. Poole, R. K. (1993) In: Methods in Molecular Biology, Vol. 19 (J. M. Graham and
J. A. Higgins, eds), pp. 109–121. Humana
Press, Totowa, NJ.
57. Scott, L., Schell, M. J. and Hubbard, A. L.
(1993) In Methods in Molecular Biology,
Vol. 19 (J. M. Graham and J. A. Higgins,
eds), pp. 59–69. Humana Press, Totowa,
NJ.
58. Whitehouse, D. G. and Moore, A. L. (1997)
in Subcellular Fractionation – a Practical
Approach (J. M. Graham and D. Rickwood,
eds), pp. 243–270. IRL Press at Oxford
University Press.
59. Kegel, K. B., Kim, M., Sapp, E., McIntyre, C., Castano, J. G., Aronin, N. and
DiFiglia, M. (2000) J. Neurosci., 20, 7268–
7278.
60. Wray, W. (1976) In: Biological Separations in Iodinated Density Gradient Media
(D. Rickwood, ed.), pp. 57–69. IRL Press
at Oxford University Press, Oxford.
61. Comings, D. E. (1978) In: Methods in Cell
Biology (G. Stein, J. Stein and L. J. Kleinsmith, eds), Vol XVII, pp. 115–132. Academic Press, London.

62. Harris, J. R. (1985) Micron Microscop. Acta,
16, 89–108.
63. Harris, J. R. and Milne, J. F. (1974) Biochem. Soc. Trans., 2, 1251–1253.
64. Harris, J. R. (1978) Biochim. Biophys. Acta,
515, 55–104.
65. Rickwood, D., Messent, A. and Patel, D.
(1997) In: Subcellular Fractionation – a
Practical Approach (J. M. Graham and
D. Rickwood, eds), pp. 71–105. IRL Press
at Oxford University Press.
66. Stubbs, G. and Harris, J. R. (1978) Biochem.
Soc. Trans., 6, 1172–1174.
67. Marshall, P. and Harris, J. R. (1979) Biochem Soc. Trans., 7, 928–929.
68. Dwyer, N. and Blobel, G. (1976) J. Cell
Biol., 70, 581–591.
69. Rout, M. P. and Blobel, G. (1993) J. Cell
Biol., 123, 771–783.
70. Belgrader, P., Siegal, A. J. and Berezney,
R. (1991) J. Cell Sci., 98, 281–291.
71. Higashinakagawa, T., Muramatsu, M. and
Sugano, H. (1972) Expt. Cell Res., 71,
65–74.
72. Rice, J. E. and Lindsay, J. G. (1997) In:
Subcellular Fractionation – a Practical
Approach (J. M. Graham and D. Rickwood,
eds), pp. 107–142. IRL Press at Oxford
University Press.
73. Graham, J. M. (1993) In: Methods in Molecular Biology, Vol. 19 (J. M. Graham and
J. A.Higgins, eds), pp. 1–18. Humana Press,
Totowa, NJ.
74. Young, D. C., Kingsley, S. D., Ryan, K. A.
and Dutko, F. J. (1993) Anal. Biochem.,
215, 24–30.
75. Van Veldhoven, P. P., Baumgart, E. and
Mannaerts, G. P. (1996) Anal. Biochem.,
237, 17–23.
76. Hunt, M. C., Solaas, K., Kase, B. F. and
Alexson, S. E. H. (2002) J. Biol. Chem.,
277, 1128–1138.
77. Solaas, K., Sletta, R. J., Soreide, O. and
Kase, B. F. (2000) Scand. J. Clin. Lab.
Invest., 60, 91–102.
78. Dunphy, J. T., Schroeder, H., Leventis, R.,
Greentree, W. K., Knudsen, J. K., Silvius,
J. R. and Linder, M. E. (2000) Biochim.
Biophys. Acta, 1485, 185–198.
79. Watkins, P. A., Lu, J-F., Steinberg, S. J.,
Gould, S. J., Smith, K. D. and Braiterman,
L. T. (1998) J. Biol. Chem., 273, 18210–
18219.

PROTOCOL 4.32

80. Thieringer, R., Shio, H., Han, Y., Cohen, G.
and Lazarow, P. B. (1991) Mol. Cell Biol.,
11, 510–522.
81. Wilcke, M. and Alexson, S. E. H. (1994)
Eur. J. Biochem., 222, 803–811.
82. Prydz, K., Kase, B. F., Bjorkhem, I. and
Pedersen, J. I. (1988) J. Lipid Res., 29,
997–1004.
83. Appelqvist, E-L., Reinhart, M., Fischer, R.,
Billheimer, J. and Dallner, G. (1990) Arch.
Biochem. Biophys., 282, 318–325.
84. Baudhuin, P. (1974) Meth. Enzymol., 31,
17–23.
85. Murata, Y., Sun-Wada, G-H., Yoshimizu,
T., Yamamoto, A., Wada, Y. and Futai, M
(2002) J. Biol. Chem., 277, 36296–36303.
86. Sharer, J. D., Shern, J. F., Van Valkenburgh, H., Wallace, D. C. and Kahn, R. A.
(2002) Mol. Biol. Cell, 13, 71–83.
87. Liu, J., Takano, T., Papillon, J., Khadir, A.
and Cybulsky, A. V. (2001) Biochem. J.,
353, 79–90.
88. Greeve, I., Hermans-Borgmeyer, I., Brellinger, C., Kasper, D., Gomez-Isla, T.,
Behl, C., Levkau, B. and Nitsch, R. M.
(2000) J. Neurosci., 20, 7345–7352.
89. Simonova, M., Wall, A., Weissleder, R. and
Bogdanov, A. (2000) Cancer Res., 60,
6656–6662.
90. Miyazaki, T., Neff, L., Tanaka, S., Horne,
W. C. and Baron, R. (2003) J. Cell Biol.,
160, 709–718.

151

91. Weissleder, R., Tung, C-H., Mahmood, U.
and Bogdanov, A. (1999) Nature Biotech.,
17, 375–378.
92. Solaas, K., Ulvestad, A., Soreide, O. and
Kase, B. F. (2000) J. Lipid Res., 41,
1154–1162.
93. Glunde, K., Guggino, S. E., Ichikawa, Y.
and Bhujwalla, Z. M. (2003) Mol. Imaging,
2, 24–36.
94. Sabo, S. L., Lanier, L. M., Ikin, A. F.,
Khorkova, O., Sahasrabudhe, S., Greengard, P. and Buxbaum, J. D. (1999) J. Biol.
Chem., 274, 7952–7957.
95. Majoul, I. V., Bastiaens, P. I. H. and Soling, H-D. (1996) J. Cell Biol., 133, 777–
789.
96. Cartwright, I. J., Higgins, J. A., Wilkinson, J., Bellavia, S., Kendrick, J. S. and
Graham, J. M. (1997) J. Lipid Res. 38, 531–
545.
97. Schneider, W. C. (1957) Meth. Enzymol., 3,
680–684.
98. Hartel-Schenk, S., Minnifield, N., Reuter,
W., Hanski, C., Bauer, C. and Morre, D. J.
(1991) Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1115, 108–
122.
99. Widnell, C. C. (1974) Meth. Enzymol., 32,
368–374.
100. Brightwell, R. and Tappel, A. L. (1968)
Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 124, 325–332.
101. Esmann, M. (1988) Meth. Enzymol., 156,
105–115.

5
Fractionation of Subcellular
Membranes in Studies on Membrane
Trafficking and Cell Signalling
John Graham

Protocol 5.1
Protocol 5.2
Protocol 5.3
Protocol 5.4
Protocol 5.5
Protocol 5.6
Protocol 5.7
Protocol 5.8
Protocol 5.9

Protocol 5.10
Protocol 5.11
Protocol 5.12
Protocol 5.13

Separation of basolateral and bile canalicular plasma
membrane domains from mammalian liver in sucrose
gradients
Isolation of rat liver sinusoidal domain using
antibody-bound beads
Fractionation of apical and basolateral domains from
Caco-2 cells in a sucrose gradient
Fractionation of apical and basolateral domains from
MDCK cells in an iodixanol gradient
Isolation of lipid rafts
Isolation of caveolae
Analysis of Golgi and ER subfractions from cultured
cells using discontinuous sucrose–D2 O density
gradients
Analysis of Golgi, ER, ERGIC and other membrane
compartments from cultured cells using continuous
iodixanol density gradients
Analysis of Golgi, ER, TGN and other membrane
compartments in sedimentation velocity iodixanol
density gradients (continuous or discontinuous)
SDS-PAGE of membrane proteins
Semi-dry blotting
Detection of blotted proteins by enhanced
chemiluminescence (ECL)
Separation of membranes and cytosolic fractions from
(a) mammalian cells and (b) bacteria

Cell Biology Protocols. Edited by J. Robin Harris, John Graham, David Rickwood
 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-84758-1

160
162
163
165
167
170
172
174
177
180
182
183
185

154

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

Protocol 5.14 Analysis of early and recycling endosomes in preformed
iodixanol gradients; endocytosis of transferrin in
transfected MDCK cells
Protocol 5.15 Analysis of clathrin-coated vesicle processing in
self-generated iodixanol gradients; endocytosis of
asialoglycoprotein by rat liver
Protocol 5.16 Polysucrose–Nycodenz gradients for the analysis of
dense endosome–lysosome events in mammalian liver

188
191
194

Introduction
In conjunction with confocal microscopy, density gradients are often used to analyse
processes that might be broadly defined as membrane trafficking and cell signalling.
They are relevant to a diverse range of cellular events such as secretion, biosynthesis,
endocytosis and virus processing. They involve the use of gradients to fractionate not
only the principal subcellular organelles such as smooth and rough endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the Golgi, but also subcompartments such as the trans-Golgi network
(TGN), the ER-Golgi Intermediate Compartment (ERGIC), early and late endosomes,
transport and secretory vesicles and plasma membrane domains such as caveolae and
lipid rafts. This rich area of cell biology research also involves studies into the transfer
of proteins from the cytosol to a membrane, which might occur for example during cell
differentiation.

Methods available
Frequently, a simple post-nuclear supernatant is used as a gradient input rather than
a partially purified fraction such as a light mitochondrial pellet or microsomes. Since
the gradient is often used not so much to purify one particular type of membrane (see
Chapter 4), but rather to analyse the translocation of proteins or other molecules from
compartment to compartment, it is often considered more important that none of the
potentially involved compartments gets lost in some pre-gradient treatment. Such a
simple treatment of the homogenate also reduces the experimentation time and number
of manipulations to a minimum.
For many years, sucrose gradients were the principal vehicle for analysing these
membrane compartments and a number of the most well-established protocols using
this solute are presented in this chapter. Increasingly, however, the use of iodinated
density gradient media, notably Nycodenz and iodixanol, are being used for this purpose and a number of examples of the use of these gradient solutes are given. They
have several advantages over sucrose; they are commercially available as dense solutions, making gradient solutions easy to prepare, and their lower osmolality compared
to sucrose solutions of similar density (particularly iodixanol solutions) often results in
a greater resolving power than that of sucrose.
The viscosity of Nycodenz and iodixanol solutions is also lower than that of sucrose
solutions of similar density and there are many examples that take advantage of the
consequent more rapid movement of membrane particles through the gradient. Gradients
of Nycodenz and iodixanol are frequently run for 2–4 h, rather than overnight, which

PLASMA MEMBRANE DOMAINS

155

is the norm for sucrose gradients. However, there is a school of thought that maintains
that to get true equilibrium density banding it is necessary to centrifuge for long periods
(> 12 h) at relatively low centrifugation speeds, irrespective of the gradient medium. A
number of iodixanol gradient methods support this contention (see Protocol 5.8). There
are also some examples of the use of very short centrifugation times, which tend to
separate particles principally on the basis of sedimentation velocity (see Protocol 5. 9).
One property of iodixanol that is not available for sucrose is its ability to form selfgenerated gradients, given a sufficiently high g-force and the right sort of rotor (vertical
or near-vertical) [1]. There are several advantages of using self-generated gradients over
the more standard preformed gradients: they are very easy to prepare (the sample is
simply adjusted to a certain iodixanol concentration); they are very reproducible and
very shallow gradients may be generated (under the appropriate centrifugation conditions) – such gradients are not easily preformed. Protocol 5.15 is an example of the use
a self-generated gradient.
Thus, the protocols in this chapter are generally not aimed at the isolation of an
individual membrane compartment; rather they describe the use of a variety of gradient
systems that might be used for analysing some aspect of membrane trafficking or cell
signalling. An exception is the group of protocols at the start of this chapter that describes
the isolation of various types of plasma membrane domain. Because plasma membrane
domains have a unique composition and function, they are of particular importance in
studies on the means by which the cell directs and controls the flow of molecules to and
from the surface.

Plasma membrane domains
Bile canalicular and basolateral domains of rat liver plasma membrane are prepared
from the plasma membrane sheets, isolated in Protocol 4.26, after vesiculation, which
is usually produced either by sonication [2, 3] or liquid shear [4–6]. The two domains
are then separated in a continuous or discontinuous sucrose gradient (Protocol 5.1).
Sometimes Nycodenz gradients are used to provide additional purification [7, 8]. The
sinusoidal domain is rather less easy to purify by density gradients and it is more usually obtained by density perturbation with protein A-sepharose beads (Protocol 5.2 ).
The beads are bound to an antibody to the polymeric IgA receptor, often called the
secretory component (SC), which is a specific marker for the sinusoidal plasma membrane domain [9]. Once bound to the beads, the sinusoidal membrane vesicles can be
harvested in a microcentrifuge. The methodology has been widely reviewed [10, 11].
Protocols 5.3 and 5.4 provide methods for the fractionation of apical and basolateral
domains from polarized cells such Caco-2 [12] and MDCK cells [13, 14] in sucrose and
iodixanol gradients respectively.
Lipid rafts, the specialized cholesterol-, sphingolipid- and caveolin-rich microdomains
at the surface of a variety of cell types, are involved in an important range of signaltransduction events, virus processing and lipid transport. They are routinely isolated as
detergent-resistant membranes (DRMs) by flotation through a discontinuous iodixanol
gradient (Protocol 5.5). The method was initially worked out for a line of mouse mammary epithelial cells [15] and for MDCK cells [16], but has since been extended to a
huge range of cell types and the details of the gradient centrifugation have been varied

156

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

considerably. In contrast, the flotation gradient for the purification of caveolae (Protocol 5.6), which has also been extended from human skin fibroblasts [17] to the use of
a vast range of tissue and cell types, has hardly been modified at all [18]. It relies on
the sonication of a purified plasma membrane preparation, followed by two iodixanol
flotation gradients: the first being a purification in a continuous gradient, the second
being a concentration in a discontinuous gradient [17, 18].

Analysis of membrane compartments in the endoplasmic
reticulum–Golgi–plasma membrane pathway
Sucrose–D2 O gradients

Before iodinated density gradient media became widely used for analysis of membrane
trafficking, one particular strategy to reduce the concentration of sucrose solutions necessary to band subcompartments of the ER and Golgi membrane systems was to dissolve
the sucrose in D2 O (Protocol 5.7). This allowed gradients of lower osmolality and viscosity to be used [19]. The method was used primarily to study the transfer of proteins
from the rough endoplasmic reticulum to the cis-Golgi. The gradient showed that this
intercompartmental transport involved a low-density vesicle quite distinct from its source
and destination membranes. Part of the resolution of such gradients is achieved by collection of the gradients in small fraction volumes (12 ml gradients in 32 fractions). The
gradients are also capable of a high degree of resolution of ER-Golgi-trans Golgi network (TGN) events [19, 20] and subfractionation of the Golgi membranes in the analysis
of N-linked oligosaccharide processing [21].
Buoyant density iodixanol gradients (preformed)

Continuous iodixanol gradients were first used by Yang et al. [22] and Zhang et al. [23]
to fractionate the ER and Golgi from COS-7 and CHO cells (Protocol 5.8 ). The density
of these membranes generally decreases in the order ER > Golgi > PM. Most centrifugations are carried out for approx. 3 h, but the separation of ER and Golgi is enhanced
by longer periods (16 h) and relatively low g-forces (<100 000g). This strategy has
permitted the clear resolution of ERGIC in the middle of the gradient between the Golgi
and the ER [24]. Long period centrifugations have also permitted the resolution of perinuclear ER from that ER more further from the nuclear region [25]. Most gradients are
in the region of 1–25% iodixanol, and depending on the cell type, other compartments
such as early and late endosomes and TGN may also be at least partially resolved (see
Table 5.2 in Protocol 5.8 for a summary of some of the variations).
Continuous linear gradients may be constructed by diffusion of the solute between
layers of the same volume, whose density increases regularly from one layer to the
other. Thus a 10–30% iodixanol gradient might be formed from equal volumes of 10,
20 and 30% iodixanol. Sometimes increased resolution may be obtained in convex or
concave gradients. Although there are devices to create such gradients [26] they are
not particularly common, nor are they easy to use; an alternative is to construct the
gradient from steps of increasing (or decreasing) volume and/or increasing (or decreasing) concentration interval. Table 5.3 in Protocol 5.8 describes some of the variants and
their use.

SEPARATION OF MEMBRANE VESICLES FROM CYTOSOLIC PROTEINS

157

Sedimentation velocity iodixanol gradients (preformed)

There are several examples of the use of preformed iodixanol gradients for the separation
of membrane compartments, principally on the basis of their sedimentation rate (Protocol 5.9). They have the advantage of the use of relatively low g-forces and also short
centrifugation times (never more than 90 min and sometimes as short as 25 min). Their
disadvantage is that small changes in gradient and centrifugation conditions, which are
unlikely to affect buoyant density separations, may have serious effects on their resolution. Nevertheless it seems that such separations are able to provide useful fractionations:
for example, of cis-medial Golgi, TGN, ER and early endosomes [27]. Two examples
are given, one using a continuous gradient, the other using a discontinuous gradient.
Analysis by SDS-PAGE and electroblotting (Western blotting)

Traditionally, subcellular membranes have been characterized by measuring marker
enzymes (usually spectrophotometrically), whose location has been established by histochemistry or by association with a structure identified unambiguously by electron
microscopy. Protocols of enzyme assays for all of the major subcellular organelles are
given in the relevant sections of Chapter 4. Modern analytical techniques rely more
on the antibody probing of Western blots from SDS-PAGE gels. This approach is frequently used to identify proteins in membrane compartments involved in trafficking and
cell signalling (see refs 28–30).
The standard Laemmli gel electrophoresis system is commonly used for fractionating membrane proteins. As long as the protein in the gradient fraction is sufficiently
concentrated for the detection system, then the non-ionic true solutes such as sucrose,
Nycodenz and iodixanol do not need to be removed before the sample is applied
to the gel. These solutes can thus replace the glycerol normally added to the sample
to render it dense enough to layer beneath the running buffer. Percoll however does
require removal as the silica particles interfere with the uniform movement of the protein
molecules into the gel.
The semi-dry Western blotting apparatus that uses small volumes of buffer and short
inter-electrode distances is the most widely used one. Nitrocellulose blotting membranes
are the most popular, but polypropylene or polyvinylidine difluoride are more robust and
have higher binding capacities. Visualization of the proteins on the blotting membrane
can be performed by general methods using Amido Black or the more sensitive silver
staining, but only probing the blot with antibodies to specific proteins will provide
the means of identifying the subcellular particle. The antibody itself may be tagged
with a suitable radiolabel for detection, but it is far more common (and safer) to use
a secondary reagent conjugated with an enzyme that is subsequently monitored by an
enhanced colorimetric or fluorometric assay. For more information see refs 29 and 30
and Protocols 5.10–5.12.

Separation of membrane vesicles from cytosolic proteins
In addition to the frequent requirement for establishing whether a protein has a cytosolic
or membrane location, the separation of these two compartments is also often necessary
following experiments with permeabilized mammalian cells and also those involving

158

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

vesicle budding. The strategy for separating membranes and cytosol, which involves
flotation of the membranes through an iodixanol barrier from a dense sample, has been
developed for both eukaryotes and bacteria (Protocol 5.13). This strategy allows maximum resolution of the two components, since the proteins, which are much denser than
the membranes, tend to sediment rather than float. It removes any ambiguity in the
results from top-loaded sucrose gradients, in which the membranes sediment and the
proteins move more slowly in the same direction due to sedimentation and diffusion.
The difference in density between the proteins and the membrane vesicles is also much
greater in iodixanol than in sucrose, primarily due to the much lower osmolality of
the iodixanol gradients. Similar methods are used for the separation of liposomes from
denser proteoliposomes.

Endocytosis
Ligand labelling

In most instances the endocytic process is followed experimentally by using a ligand
that can be identified by (i) a radiolabel, (ii) a covalently bound enzyme, subsequently
detected by provision of a substrate, or (iii) colloidal gold. Although such modifications
to the ligand may modulate its behaviour, unless the ligand itself can be easily identified,
they are difficult to avoid. The basic strategy is to present the labelled ligand to the
tissue or cells in short pulse, after which it is chased through the various intracellular
compartments.

Tissue systems

Establishment of a perfused rat liver the system requires an anaesthetized animal; it
must be performed by a trained and licensed person. After allowing the isolated perfused
liver to equilibrate with the perfusion medium, using a continuous recycling system, the
labelled ligand is presented in a single-pass perfusion for 1 min, followed by unlabelled
medium for varying times. The process is arrested by perfusion with ice-cold homogenization medium. The perfused liver provides a situation as close to that in vivo as
possible, but it is difficult to use with very short chase times or when studying large
numbers of variables.
Cell systems

A cell monolayer culture provides the most easily managed system for investigating incubation conditions and exposure to perturbants or use of more than one ligand; cultured
hepatocytes or MDCK cells are popular choices. The ligand is allowed to bind to the
cells at 0 ◦ C; the ligand-containing medium is then removed and the monolayer washed
with culture medium. Endocytosis is then allowed to proceed at 37 ◦ C (in the presence
or absence of perturbants) and then rapidly cooled to 0 ◦ C (with ice-cold homogenization medium) to arrest further ligand processing. Detailed information on strategies for
studying endocytosis has been published elsewhere [31].

ENDOCYTOSIS

159

Analysis

Sucrose gradients can be used to separate the endocytic compartments on the basis of
density [32] but unless the ligand is attached to a marker that can perturb the density
of the endosomes, the resolving power is not great. The two most commonly employed
methods use either colloidal gold [33] or horseradish peroxidase (HRP) [34]. In the
latter case the density perturbation is achieved prior to gradient by incubation of the
membrane fraction with H2 O2 and benzamidine, which is polymerized in the HRPcontaining vesicles. There are, however, several gradient techniques which do not require
these sometimes inconvenient perturbation techniques and they have been reviewed in
ref. 31. Three examples are provided: a preformed iodixanol gradient for analysing
early and recycling endosomes (Protocol 5.14), a self-generated iodixanol gradient for
analysing the processing of clathrin-coated vesicles (Protocol 5.15) and a polysucroseNycodenz gradient for analysis of late endosomes/lysosome events (Protocol 5.16).

PROTOCOL 5.1
Separation of basolateral and bile canalicular
plasma membrane domains from mammalian
liver in sucrose gradients [5]

Reagents
Suspension buffer (SB): 0.25 M sucrose,
10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4
Gradient solutions: 35, 39 and 44% (w/v)
sucrose in SB
Rat liver plasma membrane sheets (see
Protocol 4.26)
Include protease inhibitors in these solutions as required

3. Monitor the procedure using a phase
contrast microscope (25× objective);
the large sheets of membrane should be
3
converted principally to vesicles. 
4. In tubes for the swinging-bucket rotor,
use the syringe and metal cannula to
prepare discontinuous gradients from
3–5 ml each of the gradient solutions
and layer 1–2 ml of the suspension on
4
top. 
5. Centrifuge at 196 000g for 3 h.

Equipment
Dounce homogenizer (5–10 ml tight-fitting,
Wheaton type A)
Phase contrast microscope
Syringe (10 ml) with metal filling can1
nula 
Ultracentrifuge with 14–17 ml swingingbucket rotor and 13 ml fixed-angle rotor
(with open-topped tubes)

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.

6. The canalicular membrane vesicles
band at the sample/gradient interface;
the basolateral (contiguous) domain at
the 39/44% sucrose interface.
7. Collect each band with the syringe and
cannula; dilute each with two volumes
of SB and pellet at 200 000g for 30 min
in the fixed-angle rotor.
8. Resuspend the pellet in SB for analysis.

Notes
This procedure will take approx. 4 h.

1. Suspend the plasma membrane sheets in
2–5 ml of SB.


1 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be obtained
from any surgical equipment supplies
company.

2. Disrupt the membranes using at least
30 vigorous strokes of the pestle of the
2
Dounce homogenizer. 


2 A bath sonicator (80 W output) or a
Polytron homogenizer (setting 8) is
an alternative device for disrupting

PROTOCOL 5.1

the membrane sheets [2, 3]. Whatever
method is used, the disruption must be
regularly monitored. Start monitoring
the preparation, for example, after
15 strokes of the pestle (Dounce
homogenizer) or after five bursts of
sonication.


3 The sheets of membrane, which are
observed as characteristic dark Yshaped structures (15–20 µm), should

161

be replaced by mass of black dots
when disruption is complete.


4 The precise volumes will depend on
the size of the centrifuge tube. For
more information about the preparation of gradients see ref. 26.

PROTOCOL 5.2
Isolation of rat liver sinusoidal domain using
antibody-bound beads [9]

Reagents
Anti-SC serum (or other primary antibody)
Medium A: 0.25 M sucrose, 50 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.4
Medium B: 2% (w/v) Triton X-100,
150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 30 mM
Tris-HCl, pH, 7.4
Medium C: 1% (w/v) Triton X-100,
0.2% (w/v) SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM
EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0
Medium D: as medium C minus the
detergents
Non-immune serum
Protein–sepharose beads
Light mitochondrial supernatant: Protocol
4.8 as far as step 8 (use medium A for
1
the homogenization medium) 
Include protease inhibitors in solutions as
required

Equipment
Dounce homogenizer (10 ml loose-fitting,
Wheaton type B)
Shaking water bath at 24 ◦ C
Microcentrifuge and microcentrifuge tubes
Ultracentrifuge with fixed-angle rotor for
approx 13 ml tubes
Vortex mixer

Procedure
Carry out the isolation of the microsome
fraction at 0–4 ◦ C.

1. Centrifuge the supernatant (Protocol
4.8, Step 8) at 120 000g for 90 min to
pellet the microsomes.
2. Resuspend the microsomes (using the
Dounce homogenizer) in medium A (at
2 mg microsomal protein/ml).
3. Incubate 200 µl of a 60% (v/v) suspension of protein A–sepharose beads in
medium B at 24 ◦ C with 50 µl of antiSC serum (or non-immune serum) for
60 min.
4. Pellet the beads in a microcentrifuge
and wash them four times in medium C,
and a further two times in the medium
D (use the vortex mixer to resuspend
the beads in the media).
5. Incubate the beads in 500 µl of the
microsome fraction for 2 h at room
temperature.
6. Sediment the beads in a microcentrifuge
and wash four times in medium A and
then finally resuspend in this medium
for further analysis.

Note
This procedure will take approx. 6 h
(including preparation of the light mitochondrial supernatant).


1 In Protocol 4.8 do not omit the first
centrifugation step at 800g. Failure
to include this step will cause a
significant loss of microsomal material
due to entrapment by large, rapidly
sedimenting particles and debris.

PROTOCOL 5.3
Fractionation of apical and basolateral
domains from Caco-2 cells in a sucrose
gradient [12]

Reagents
Homogenization buffer (HM): 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4
Suspension buffer B (SB): as HM plus
5 mM EDTA
Hepes-buffered saline (HBS)
1 mM MgCl2
Gradient solutions: 34, 40, 54% (w/v)
sucrose in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4
Include protease inhibitors in solutions as
required

Equipment
Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge with
swinging-bucket rotor (10–15 ml tubes)
Nitrogen pressure vessel (Artisan Industries, Waltham, Mass, USA or Baskerville, Manchester, UK)
1
Syringe and metal filling cannula 
Ultracentrifuge with (a) fixed-angle rotor
for 13.5 ml open-topped tubes and
(b) swinging-bucket rotor for approx.
5 ml tubes

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.
1. Rinse the cell monolayers once in
HBS and once in HM.

2. Scrape the cells off the substratum
with a rubber policeman into 5 ml
of HM.
3. Homogenize the cells by nitrogen cavitation using nitrogen at 3795 kPa
(550 psi) for 10 min and collect the
homogenate in a beaker (50 ml) covered with Parafilm, through which
2 
3
the delivery tube is sealed. 
4. Allow the foam to subside by gentle stirring and then centrifuge the
homogenate at 270g for 10 min.
5. Recentrifuge the supernatant at 920g
for 10 min and carefully decant the
supernatant.
6. Add 1 M MgCl2 to the supernatant to
a final concentration of 10 mM.
7. Stir for 15 min before centrifuging at
2300g for 15 min.
8. Carefully decant the supernatant and
centrifuge it at 170 000g for 45 min.
9. Resuspend the pellet in 0.5 ml of SB.
10. Using the syringe and cannula prepare a discontinuous gradient from 34,
40 and 54% (w/v) sucrose, 10 mM
Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 (1.4, 1.7 and 1.4 ml
respectively) in tubes for the swinging4
bucket rotor. 
11. Layer the suspension over the gradient
and centrifuge at 68 000g for 4.5 h.

164

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

12. Remove the material at the interfaces
with the syringe. The top band is
enriched in Golgi membranes, the
middle, in basolateral membranes and
the bottom, in apical membranes.

Note that when the homogenate is
collected, the valve on the delivery
tube should be released only very
slowly. For more information on the
homogenization procedure see ref. 35.

13. Dilute the fractions with at least
two volumes of HM and harvest the
membranes by centrifugation at about
40 000g for 1 h.


3 It may be permissible to use other cell
homogenization media, for example,
the ball-bearing homogenizer or if
neither of these machines is available,
several passages through a gauge 23
or 25 syringe needle may suffice. The
gradient fractionation is not known to
be homogenization method sensitive.
See ref. 35 for more information on
the homogenization of cultured cells.

Notes
This procedure will take approx. 9–10 h.


1 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be obtained
from any surgical equipment supplies
company.

2 Assemble and operate the nitrogen
cavitation vessel in accordance with
the manufacturer’s recommendations.


4 For more information on the preparation of gradients see ref. 26.

PROTOCOL 5.4
Fractionation of apical and basolateral
domains from MDCK cells in an iodixanol
gradient [13, 14]

Reagents
OptiPrep
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 90 mM KOAc, 2 mM Mg(OAc)2 ,
1
20 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 8.0 
Diluent: 540 mM KOAc, 12 mM Mg(OAc)2 ,
120 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 8.0
Working solution (50% iodixanol): mix 5
vol. of OptiPrep and 1 vol. of diluent
Include protease inhibitors in HM and the
diluent as required

Equipment
Ball-bearing homogenizer 
2
Gradient collector 
3
Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge with
swinging-bucket rotor (10–15 ml tubes)
Phase contrast microscope
Refractometer (Abbé)
4
Syringe and metal filling cannula 
Ultracentrifuge with vertical rotor or near5
vertical for 11–13 ml tubes 

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.
1. Homogenize the cells in HM in the
ball-bearing homogenizer using four to

six passages. Monitor the efficacy of
the homogenization by phase contrast
microscopy.
2. Centrifuge the homogenate at 1000g
for 5 min to pellet the nuclei. Decant
and retain the post-nuclear supernatant
(PNS).
3. Mix the working solution with the PNS
to produce a final iodixanol concentration of 30% (format A) or 35% (for6
mat B). 
4. Dilute the working solution with HM
to produce solutions of 10 and 20%
iodixanol (Format A) or 10, 15, 20, 25
6
and 30 (Format B). 
5. Layer equal volumes of the dense PNS
and the chosen iodixanol solutions in
tubes for the vertical or near-vertical
7 
8
rotor. 
6. Centrifuge at 353 000gav for 3 h using
a slow acceleration program.
7. Allow the centrifuge to decelerate to
rest from 2000 rpm without the brake
or use a slow deceleration program.
8. Unload the gradient by tube puncture, upward displacement or aspiration from the meniscus in 0.5 ml fractions and assay for membrane markers [13, 14]. Measure the density profile
of a blank gradient using a refractome9 
10
ter. 

166

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

Notes

1 Homogenization media often have to
be tailored to a particular cell type;
some alternatives are given in ref. 35.

2 Other homogenization methods may be
permissible, such as Dounce homogenization or repeated passage through a
gauge 23 or 25 syringe needle; for more
information see ref. 35.

3 The type of unloading system that
is permissible will depend on the
tube type. Heat-sealed or crimp-sealed
tubes must be unloaded by tube
puncture, or possibly aspiration from
the bottom of the gradient. Beckman
Optiseal tubes, which are sealed
with a central plastic plug, may also
be unloaded by upward displacement
with Maxidens or by aspiration from
the meniscus using the Labconco Auto
Densi-flow machine. See ref. 26 for
more information.

4 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas can be obtained
from any surgical equipment supplies
company.

5 The most convenient sealed tubes are
the Optiseal for Beckman rotors.
Some small volume fixed-angle rotors
with a sedimentation path length

<25 mm may be suitable for making
self-generated gradients.


6 Choose whichever format is most suitable; format A was used by Amieva
et al. [14]; format B was used by Yeaman [13]. Both will lead to the formation of a gradient that is more
or less linear after the centrifugation
period.

7 A small volume of HM may be added
to fill the tube to the required level.

8 Use the syringe and metal cannula to
introduce the layers into the tube; see
ref. 26 for more information.

9 Measurement of the density is not
an absolute requirement but it makes
comparison of banding patterns of
basolateral and apical domain markers
with published data easier. It also
confirms the density profile, which
should be linear over most of the
gradient, becoming more steep in the
densest region.

10 The peak density of the basolateral
domain is approx 1.17 g/ml (about
two-thirds of the way down the gradient), while that of the apical domain
is approx. 1.08 g/ml (about a third of
the way down the gradient).

PROTOCOL 5.5
Isolation of lipid rafts [15, 16]

Reagents
Homogenization medium (HM): 150 mM
NaCl, 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 5 mM
1
EDTA, 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 
Lysis medium (LM): HM + 1% Triton
2
X100 
OptiPrep
Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
Triton X-100
Add protease inhibitors to HM as required

Equipment
Dounce homogenizer (tight-fitting, Wheaton type A) or syringe with 23 or 25
3
gauge needle 
Gradient collector (optional) 
4
Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge with
swinging-bucket rotor (approx. 15 ml
tubes)
Phase contrast microscope (for isolation
from a post-nuclear supernatant only)
5
Syringe (5 ml) with metal cannula 
Ultracentrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
6
(5 or 13 ml tubes) 

dish. Scale up all volumes proportionally
for larger amounts of cells.
1. Wash the cell monolayer twice with
PBS and scrape into this medium using
a rubber policeman.
2. Pellet the cells and resuspend in 0.2 ml
of LM; then leave on ice for 30 min.
Isolation from a post-nuclear supernatant

The procedure is more convenient with
larger numbers of cells (from one or two
9 cm dishes) because of the difficulty in
homogenizing very small volumes.
1. Homogenize the cells in HM (up to
2 ml) using up to 20 strokes of the
pestle of the Dounce homogenizer or up
to the same number of passes through
7
the syringe needle. 
2. Centrifuge the homogenate at 1000g for
10 min.
3. Decant the supernatant and adjust it to
1% Triton X-100 and leave on ice for
30 min.
Gradient separation

Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.

1. Add 2 vol. of OptiPrep to 1 vol.
of either the homogenate or 1000g
supernatant.

Isolation from a total cell lysate

2. Dilute OptiPrep with LM to give 35,
8
30, 25 and 20% (w/v) iodixanol. 

The procedure can be applied to any
confluent cells from a single 3 cm culture

3. In tubes for the swinging-bucket rotor
layer 0.6 ml each of the sample, the four

Procedure

168

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

Table 5.1

Some methodological variations for the isolation of lipid rafts

Source material

EDTA; DTT; TX1001

MDCK TGN
vesicles
MDCK cells

5 mM; 5 mM; 0.1%

30%, 20%, 10%, 5%

2 mM; 2 mM; 2.0%
1 mM; none; 2.0%
5 mM3 ; 5 mM; 1.0%
5 mM3 ; 1 mM; 1.0%
none; 1 mM; 1.0%
0.2 mM3 ; none; 2.0%
5 mM; none; 0.2%

43%,
40%,
40%,
40%,
40%,
24%,
35%,

Drosophila
Human breast
carcinoma
HEK293

5 mM; none; 0.1%
5 mM; 1 mM; 2.0%5
Yeast
5 mM; none; 1.0%
5 mM; none; 1.0%
Jurkat
5 mM; none; 1.0%
Oligodendrocytes 5 mM; none; 1.0%6
Neurons
2 mM; 5 mM; 1%
Neuroblastoma
5 mM, none, 0.1%
cells
Ciliary ganglion7 none; 1 mM; 0.1%
COS-1
5 mM; none; 0.5%
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Iodixanol gradient2

35%,
30%,
25%,
30%,
35%,
21%,
30%,

35%; 30%
45%, 35%,
40%, 30%,
35%, 30%,
40%, 35%,
40%, 30%,
40%, 30%,
35%, 30%,

30%,
5%
0%
25%,
30%,
15%,
0%

RCF (time)
160 000g (4 h)

25%, 20%, 0% 250 000g (2.5 h)
78 000g (4 h)
160 000g (4 h)
5%4
100 000g (4 h)
25%, 20%, 0% 120 000g (12 h)
6%
130 000g (5 h)
170 000g (4 h)

30%, 20%, 0%
0% (0.1% TX100)
0%
30%, 25%, 0%
0%
5%
0%

35%, 30%, 0%
50%, 40%, 30%, 20%, 10%

160 000g
180 000g
200 000g
147 000g
150 000g
200 000g
150 000g
200 000g

(4 h)
(4 h)
(2 h)
(16 h)
(7 h)
(2 h)
(5 h)
(4 h)

285 000g (4 h)
170 000g (4 h)

Ref.
16
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52

Most cell lysis media also contained NaCl and a Tris buffer, DTT = dithiothreitol, TX100 = Triton X100.
The first figure in each series gives the % iodixanol in the sample.
EGTA was used in place of EDTA.
All solutions contained 10% sucrose, the density layers did not contain DTT.
Density solutions contained Ca2+ and no DTT.
20 mM CHAPS was also used in place of triton X-100.
Membrane fraction first obtained in preliminary OptiPrep gradient.

gradient solutions and LM to fill the
tube. Modify or scale up the gradient
8
for larger sample volumes 
4. Centrifuge at 160 000gav for 4 h. 
9
5. Collect the lipid rafts from the top
interface or harvest the gradient in a
number of equal volume fractions and
10
analyse as required. 

Notes
The procedure will take approx. 5.5 h,
using a 4 h centrifugation.


1 The isolation media used by both
Oliferenko et al. [15] and Lafont
et al. [16] were similar, although the
level of DTT used by Oliferenko

et al. [15] was 1 mM rather than
5 mM and EDTA was omitted. Some
proteins, which associate with lipid
rafts, exhibit a Ca2+ -dependence, so
inclusion of a chelating agent may
be detrimental to the study. DTT
is often now omitted and sometimes
the level of Triton X-100 in the
discontinuous gradient is lower than in
the sample layer. Protease inhibitors
such as PMSF, leupeptin, antipain,
aprotinin, etc. should be included in all
of the media. Some of the variations in
isolation media are given in Table 5.1
(column 2)


2 The level of Triton X100 is sometimes increased to 2% or reduced as

PROTOCOL 5.5

low as 0.1% (see Table 5.1). Occasionally Triton X-100 is substituted by
CHAPS [48, 53]; sometimes the detergent is in the sample but omitted from
the density gradient solutions.


3 Use whatever device is known to
be suitable for the cell type; a ballbearing homogenizer might be a useful alternative. For more information
on the homogenization of cultured
cells see ref. 35.

4 For gradient collection low-density
end first use either the tube puncture device of the Beckman Fraction
Recovery System to deliver a dense
liquid such as Fluorinert (Sigma
Aldrich) or Flutec-Blue (F2 chemicals Ltd, Preston UK) to the bottom
of the tube or the Labconco Auto
Densi-flow device to aspirate from the
meniscus. For collection dense-end
first use tube-puncture. More information about gradient collection can be
found in ref. 26.

5 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas (i.d. 0.8–
1.0 mm) can be obtained from any
surgical equipment supplies company.

6 The smaller volume tubes are generally sufficient if a total cell lysate is
to be used for the gradient input, but a
larger volume tube may be easier for
scale-ups or if a post-nuclear supernatant is to be prepared.

7 The details of the homogenization
will have to be worked out for the
specific cell type used. Use phase

169

contrast microscopy to monitor the
homogenization.


8 Some of the variations in gradient
format are given in Table 5.1 (column 3). Some workers have reduced
the total number of layers to three
(see Table 5.1); in this format the 5 ml
tubes are capable of accommodating
larger sample volumes. Lipid raft subdomains are best analysed using a different gradient format (see ref. 52 and
Table 5.1). It may even be better to
use a continuous gradient rather than
a discontinuous one.

9 Oliferenko et al. [15] used a longer
centrifugation time of 12 h at a
slightly lower RCF (120 000gav ).
Because of the relatively short sediment path length of the rotor, 4 h at
the higher RCF is probably satisfactory, but the centrifugation conditions
may vary with the mode of preparation
(see Table 5.1).

10 Depending on the resolution that is
required it may be sufficient to use
an automatic pipette to collect the
gradient in four or five broad zones.
Alternatively for higher resolution the
gradient should be unloaded either
by tube puncture, upward displacement or automatic aspiration from the
meniscus (see note 4 and ref. 26).
Always check on the distribution of
raft and non-raft markers in the gradient to check that the centrifugation
has achieved a satisfactory resolution
and recovery of rafts.

PROTOCOL 5.6
Isolation of caveolae [17, 18]

Reagents
OptiPrep
Diluent: 0.25 M sucrose, 6 mM EDTA,
120 mM Tricine-NaOH, pH 7.8
Working solution (50% iodixanol, ρ =
1.282 g/ml): mix 5 vol. of OptiPrep
with 1 vol. of diluent
Suspension medium (SM): 0.25 M sucrose,
1 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tricine-NaOH,
pH 7.6
Add protease inhibitors to diluent and SM
as required

Equipment
Gradient maker (two-chamber) or Gradient
Master
Gradient collector (optional)
Sonicator
Syringe and metal cannula (i.d. 0.8–
1
1.0 mm) 
Ultracentrifuge with swinging bucket (14–
17 ml tube size)

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.
1. Prepare a plasma membrane fraction
2
by a suitable technique. 
2. Suspend the plasma membrane in 2 ml
of SM in a suitable tube (approx.
1.5 cm diameter).
3. Place the tube in ice and introduce
the tip of a sonicator probe (approx.

diameter 3 mm) to a point equidistant
from the top and bottom of the suspension.
4. Sonicate twice for 6 s at a total power
of 50 J/W per second, then allow to
rest for 2 min before repeating the
sonication procedure twice more, i.e.
3
a total of six sonication bursts. 
5. Add 1.84 ml of 50% iodixanol working solution and 0.16 ml of SM.
The final iodixanol concentration is
23% (w/v).
6. Produce two gradient solutions of 10%
(w/v) iodixanol (ρ = 1.076 g/ml) and
20% (w/v) iodixanol (ρ = 1.125 g/ml)
by diluting the working solution with
SM (1 + 4 and 2 + 3 v/v respec4
tively). 
7. Using a standard two-chamber gradient former or a Gradient Master produce a 9 ml linear 10–20% iodixanol
gradient in an approx. 13 ml tube for
4 
5
the swinging-bucket rotor. 
8. Using the syringe and metal cannula, underlayer the gradient with
4 ml of the sample and centrifuge at
53 000gmax for 90 min.
9. Collect the top 5 ml of the gradient; transfer to a new centrifuge tube
and mix with 4 ml of working solu6 
7
tion. 
10. Produce two new gradient solutions of
5 and 15% (w/v iodixanol by diluting
working solution with SM (1 + 9 and
3 + 7 v/v respectively)

PROTOCOL 5.6

11. Layer 1.0 ml of 15% and 0.5 ml of
5% iodixanol over the sample and
8
centrifuge at 52 000g for 90 min. 
12. Collect the caveolae-rich opaque layer
that forms above the 15% iodixanol
layer.

Notes
The procedure, excluding the preparation of the plasma membrane, will take
approx. 4.5 h.


1 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas (i.d. 0.8–
1.0 mm) can be obtained from any
surgical equipment supplies company.

2 The method used to prepare the
plasma membrane will vary with the
type of tissue or cell. As the source
material may be a ‘routine’ cultured
cell line such as human fibroblasts
[54, 55], COS 7 [56, 57] or NIH 3T3
[18], a genetically modified line such
as CHO-ldlA-7 [58, 59] or tissuederived cells such as lung microvascular endothelial cells [60, 61] or brain
astrocytes [62], the operator should
refer to the appropriate literature for
a plasma membrane isolation technique. However, one of the methods
described in Protocols 5.8 and 5.9
may be relevant.

3 If the sonicator does not conform to
these parameters, it may be necessary
to modulate the conditions in order to
achieve the necessary fragmentation
of the membrane. This can only be
monitored by determining the caveolin
and protein distribution in the first
gradient (step 9).

4 The volume of the gradient needs to
be calculated to fill the tube when

171

the 4 ml sample is underlayered. An
approximately 9 ml gradient was used
by Smart et al. [17]. The method can
be scaled up or down as required,
adjusting the volumes of sample and
gradient proportionately.


5 If a gradient-forming device is not
available, then prepare a discontinuous gradient from equal volumes of
10, 15 and 20% iodixanol and allow
them to diffuse overnight at 4 ◦ C. See
ref. 26 for more information about
making gradients.

6 If the volume of the gradient is
increased, the volume occupied by
the caveolae-containing fractions may
also increase. As an approximation,
the top third-to-half of the gradient
should be removed. If the relative volumes of gradient and sample are significantly different it may be advisable
to check the distribution of the caveolae by assaying fractions for caveolin by electroblotting (see Protocols
5.10–5.12 ).

7 Until the banding of the caveolin-rich,
protein-poor material in the gradient
is well established, it might be pertinent to collect the gradient by upward
displacement with a dense medium;
for more information on unloading
gradients see ref. 26. Once the banding position of the caveolae has been
established, the relevant part of the
gradient can be removed using a
syringe and cannula.

8 The volumes used in the second
gradient may also have to be modified
for larger volume tubes; it is probably
good practice to increase the volumes
of the sample and the two iodixanol
layers, proportionally.

PROTOCOL 5.7
Analysis of Golgi and ER subfractions from
cultured cells using discontinuous
sucrose–D2 O density gradients [19]

Reagents
Homogenization buffer (HB): 0.25 M
sucrose, 10 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.4
Gradient solutions: 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, 20,
22.5, 25, 27.5, 30 and 50% (w/v) sucrose
in 10 mM Hepes-NaOH, pD 7.4 in D2 O
Add protease inhibitors to all solutions as
required

Equipment
Dounce homogenizer (10 ml tight-fitting,
Wheaton type A) or ball-bearing homogenizer or syringe fitted with 25 gauge
needle
Gradient collector (upward displacement
1
or collection from the meniscus) 
Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge with
swinging-bucket rotor for 10 ml plastic
tubes
Phase contrast microscope
Syringe (5 ml) and metal filling can2
nula 
Ultracentrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
(approx. 13 ml tubes)

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.
1. Suspend the cells in HB (no more
than 5 ml) and homogenize using up

to 20 strokes of the pestle of the
Dounce homogenizer, or up to 10
passes through the ball-bearing homog3
enizer or syringe. 
2. Pellet the nuclei by centrifugation at
1000g for 10 min.
3. Using the syringe and cannula, prepare
a discontinuous gradient from 1 ml of
each of the gradient solutions in tubes
4
for the ultracentrifuge rotor. 
4. Layer 2 ml of the post-nuclear supernatant over the gradient and centrifuge
at 160 000g for 3 h.
5. Unload the gradient by upward displacement (or aspiration from the
meniscus) into approx 0.3 ml frac5
tions. 

Notes

1 For gradient collection low-density
end first use either the tube puncture device of the Beckman Fraction
Recovery System to deliver a dense
liquid such as Fluorinert (Sigma
Aldrich) or Flutec-Blue (F2 chemicals Ltd, Preston UK) to the bottom
of the tube or the Labconco Auto
Densi-flow device to aspirate from the
meniscus. For collection dense-end
first use tube puncture. More information about gradient collection can be
found in ref. 26.

PROTOCOL 5.7


2 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas (i.d. 0.8–
1.0 mm) can be obtained from any
surgical equipment supplies company.

3 Monitor the progress of the homogenization by phase contrast microscopy;
ideally no less than 90% cell lysis
should be obtained, while the nuclei
remain intact. More information about
cell homogenization can be found in
ref. 35.

173


4 Ref. 26 provides more information
about the preparation of gradients.

5 Low density ER-Golgi intermediates
band in the region 12.5–17.5% sucrose,
while the ER itself bands around 22%
sucrose.

PROTOCOL 5.8
Analysis of Golgi, ER, ERGIC and other
membrane compartments from cultured cells
using continuous iodixanol density gradients
[22, 23]

Reagents

Procedure

OptiPrep
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 1 mM EDTA 10 mM Hepes1
NaOH, pH 7.4 
Diluent: 0.25 M sucrose, 6 mM EDTA,
60 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.4
50% (w/v) Iodixanol working solution (ρ =
1.272 g/ml): 5 vol. of OptiPrep + 1 vol.
of diluent
Phosphate-buffered saline
Add protease inhibitors to HM and diluent
as required

Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.

Equipment
Ball-bearing homogenizer, Dounce homogenizer (5 ml tight-fitting, Wheaton type
2
A) or syringe with 25-gauge needle 
Gradient maker (two-chamber or Gradient
Master)
Gradient collector 
3
Low-speed refrigerated and/or high-speed
centrifuge with swinging bucket rotor
for 15 ml tubes
Phase contrast microscope
Ultracentrifuge with swinging bucket rotor
for approx. 13 ml tubes and fixed-angle
rotor for 4–10 ml open-topped tubes
4
(optional, see step 5 below) 

1. Wash the cells twice in phosphatebuffered saline to remove the culture
medium, and then once in the homogenization medium before resuspending
5
in this medium. 
2. Suspend the cells in a small volume of HM (0.5–5.0 ml) and disrupt
them in a ball-bearing homogenizer,
Dounce homogenizer or repeated pas6
sages through a fine syringe needle. 
3. Centrifuge the homogenate at 1000–
3000g for 10 min; decant and retain the
supernatant.
4. Resuspend the pellet in 0.5–2.0 ml of
HM; repeat step 3 and combine the two
7
supernatants. 
5. Optional step: Centrifuge the supernatant(s) at 100 000g for 40 min and
then resuspend the pellet in 1–2 ml of
8
HM. 
6. Prepare a 25% (w/v) iodixanol solution
by mixing equal volumes of HM and
the 50% iodixanol working solution.
7. Prepare 12 ml gradients in tubes for
the swinging-bucket rotor from equal
volumes of HM and the 25% iodixanol

PROTOCOL 5.8

175

Table 5.2 Preformed continuous iodixanol gradients (2–3 h) for buoyant density separation of ER,
Golgi, PM and other membrane compartments: variations in gradient and centrifugation conditions

Cell type

Input1

Grad2

g

Time (h)

Membrane compartments3

BHK
CV1

pns
pns
pns
pns
pns
pns
pns
ppns
lmp
ppns

2.5–25
8–22
2.5–25
0–26
10–24
2.5–25
2.5–25
0–15
0–26
1–20

130 000
95 000
100 000
288 000
170 000
100 000
100 000
200 000
160 000
200 000

3.0
2.0
3.0
2.0
1.5
3.0
3.0
2.0
2.0
3.0

ER; G; PM; early endosomes
ER sub; cis-G
ER sub; G; PM
ER; G; PM
ER; cis-medial G
ER; G; PM
ER sub; G; PM
ER; G; PM
ER; light vesicles
ER; G; PM; granules

HEK293
LLC-PK1
3T3
M7 transgenic
Neuroblastoma
RBL-2H34

Ref.
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72

1
pns = post-nuclear supernatant, ppns = 80–100 000g pellet from a pns, lmp = light mitochondrial pellet from
pns.
2
Gradient density range in % iodixanol.
3
Membrane compartments analysed: ER = endoplasmic reticulum, G = Golgi, PM = plasma membrane,
ERGIC = ER Golgi intermediate compartment, sub = subfraction.
4
RBL = rat basophilic leukaemia cells.

Table 5.3 Preformed continuous iodixanol gradients (16–18 h) for buoyant density separation of ER,
Golgi, PM and other membrane compartments: variations in gradient conditions

Cell type

Input1

CHO
H4
LLC-PK1
PC12
3T3

pns
pns
lms
pns

Grad2
8–34
10–28
8–34
5–25
10–40

g

Time (h)

Membrane compartments3

100 000
100 000
100 000
88 000
48 000

18
18
18
16
18

ER; G; early endosomes
ER; G; ERGIC
ER; G; PM
PM, early endosomes
ER sub; end; coated vesicles

Ref.
73
24
74
75
25

pns = post-nuclear supernatant, lms = light mitochondrial supernatant.
Gradient density range in % iodixanol.
3
Membrane compartments analysed: ER = endoplasmic reticulum, G = Golgi, PM = plasma membrane,
ERGIC = ER Golgi intermediate compartment, sub = subfraction.
1
2

solution using a two-chamber gradient
9 
10
maker or a Gradient Master. 
8. Layer the vesicle suspension on top of
the gradient and centrifuge at 200 000g
10
for 2–3 h. 
9. Collect the gradient in 0.5 ml fractions by tube puncture or upward displacement and analyse by SDS-PAGE
and electroblotting, probing with the
appropriate antibodies to proteins in
the membranes of interest (see Protocols 5.10–5.12 ). Prior to analysis, it
may be necessary to concentrate the
fraction either by precipitation with

trichloroacetic acid or by diluting it
with 2 vol. of HM and pelleting by
centrifugation at 100 000–150 000g for
40 min before resuspending in a small
volume of HM. See the references
in Tables 5.2 and 5.3 for details of
the banding of the membrane compartments from a variety of cell types.

Notes
This procedure will take approx. 2 h.


1 With cultured cells the homogenization
medium often has to be tailored to

176

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

the cell type. Sometimes an alternative
buffer such as 10 mM triethanolamineacetic acid or the HM used in Protocol
5.4 achieves a better cell disruption.
For more information see ref. 35.


2 The device of choice is the ballbearing homogenizer. Sometimes a
syringe needle with a lower gauge
number (wider orifice) will work satisfactorily. As with the homogenization
medium, the homogenization protocol
will need to be tailored to the cell type.
See ref. 35 for more information.

3 For gradient collection low-density
end first use either the tube puncture device of the Beckman Fraction
Recovery System to deliver a dense
liquid such as Fluorinert (Sigma
Aldrich) or Flutec-Blue (F2 Chemicals Ltd, Preston UK) to the bottom
of the tube or the Labconco Auto
Densi-flow device to aspirate from the
meniscus. For collection dense-end
first use tube puncture. More information about gradient collection can be
found in ref. 26.

4 Other swinging-bucket rotors or even
vertical rotors may be used. Larger
volume swinging-bucket rotors may
require longer centrifugation times but
vertical rotors will need shorter times.
Most of the gradients have been run
in 13 ml tubes but the gradients and
sample volume can be scaled down as
required.

5 Washing the cells with saline may be
carried out at room temperature rather
than at 4 ◦ C if preferred.

6 Up to 10 cycles with the ball-bearing
homogenizer, up to 15 strokes of

the pestle of a Dounce homogenization or up to 20 passages through
a syringe needle should be sufficient. Always monitor the progress
of homogenization by phase contrast
microscopy.


7 Washing the low-speed pellet will
release some trapped vesicles and
improve yields.

8 The advantage of using a low-speed
supernatant for the gradient input
is that the procedure is quick and
that vesicles in the supernatant are
not further exposed to the shearing
forces that are required to resuspend
a 100 000g pellet. On the other hand,
if it is important to remove any soluble
cytosolic proteins then preparing a
100 000g pellet may be a useful step.

9 If neither of these devices is available
then a continuous gradient can be prepared by diffusion of a discontinuous
gradient [26].

10 The actual density range of the gradient may require modulation to suit the
operator’s requirements. If the main
interest, for example, is the Golgi
and lower density fractions then a
0–20% or 0–15% iodixanol gradient
may be more useful. Table 5.2 summarizes some of the variations for the
2–3 h centrifugations. Table 5.3 summarizes some of the 16–18 h centrifugation separations. A commonly
used non-linear gradient is generated
from layering the following iodixanol
solutions: 1 ml of 2.5%, 2 ml each
of 5, 7.5 and 10%, 0.5 ml of 12.5%,
2 ml of 15%, and 0.5 ml each of
17.5, 20 and 30%. These gradients
appear particularly good for resolving
the TGN [76–80].

PROTOCOL 5.9
Analysis of Golgi, ER, TGN and other
membrane compartments in sedimentation
velocity iodixanol density gradients
(continuous or discontinuous)

Reagents
OptiPrep
Homogenization medium I (HMI): 0.25 M
sucrose, 1 mM EDTA 10 mM Hepes1
NaOH, pH 7.4 
Diluent I: 0.25 M sucrose, 6 mM EDTA,
1
60 mM Hepes-NaOH, pH 7.4 
Homogenization medium II (HMII): 130
mM KCl, 25 mM NaCl, 1 mM EGTA,
2
25 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.4 
Diluent II: 130 mM KCl, 25 mM NaCl,
6 mM EGTA, 150 mM Tris-Cl, pH
2
7.4 
Working solution of 50% (w/v) iodixanol:
5 vol. of HM +1 vol. of diluent I or
3
II 

Equipment
Ball-bearing homogenizer, Dounce homogenizer (5 ml tight-fitting, Wheaton type
4
A) or syringe with 25-gauge needle 
Gradient collector 
5
Gradient maker (two-chamber or Gradient Master), for continuous gradient
6
only 
Low-speed refrigerated and/or high-speed
centrifuge with swinging bucket rotor
for 15 ml tubes

Syringe (5 ml) and metal cannula, for
7
discontinuous gradient only 
Ultracentrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
8
for approx. 13 ml tubes 

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.
1. Produce a cell homogenate from the
chosen tissue or cells using HM (I or
II) using steps 1–2 of Protocol 5.8 .
2. Centrifuge the homogenate at 1000g for
10 min.
3. Centrifuge the supernatant from step 2
at 3000g for 10 min; decant and retain
the supernatant.
4. For a discontinuous gradient: Prepare
10 ml each of 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10, 12.5,
15, 17.5, 20 and 30% (w/v) iodixanol
solution by mixing HM with the 50%
iodixanol working solution containing
the appropriate diluent (I or II).
5. For a continuous gradient: Prepare
20 ml of 10 and 30% iodixanol solutions as in step 4.
6. In 13 ml tubes for the swinging-bucket
rotor (discontinuous gradient): layer
1.2 ml each of the nine gradient solutions using the syringe and metal

178

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

Table 5.4 Preformed iodixanol gradients for sedimentation velocity separation of ER, Golgi and other
membrane compartments

Cell/tissue

Input1

CHO

pns

HEK93

pns

MDCK
Mouse brain

lms
hms

Mouse brain
and
fibroblasts
Neuroblastoma

hms

hms

Vero

hms

Xenopus

hms

Gradient
10–30% (or 25%)
continuous
2.5–30%
discontinuous
0–40% continuous
2.5–30%
discontinuous
2.5–30%
discontinuous
2.5–30%
discontinuous
2.5–30%
discontinuous
10–30% (or 25%)
continuous

g

Min

Membrane
compartments2

54 000

90

ER; G; PM

126 000

30

ER sub, G sub

85 000
120 000

45
32

ER, G, end, TGN
ER sub, G sub

86
87

126 000

30

ER sub; G sub

81

126 000

30

27

126 000

25

ER; cis- med-G,
TGN, EE
ER, G, mit

26 000

90

ER, G, ERGIC,
post-TGN

Ref.
82
83, 84, 85

88, 89
90

pns = post-nuclear supernatant; lms = light mitochondrial supernatant; hms = heavy mitochondrial supernatant.
Membrane compartments analysed: ER = endoplasmic reticulum, G = Golgi, sub = subfractions, EE = early
endosome, TGN = trans-Golgi network, ERGIC = ER Golgi intermediate compartment.
1
2

cannula; (continuous gradient): use a
two-chamber gradient maker or Gradient Master to make an approx. 12 ml
gradient from equal volumes of the 10
9
and 30% iodixanol solutions. 
7. Layer the supernatant from step 3 on
top of the gradient.
8. Centrifuge at 126 000gav for 30 min,
85 000g for 45 min or 26000g for
10
90 min. 
9. Collect the gradient in 0.5 ml fractions by tube puncture or upward displacement and analyse by SDS-PAGE
and electroblotting, probing with the
appropriate antibodies to proteins in
the membranes of interest (see Protocols 5.10–5.12 ). Prior to analysis, it
may be necessary to concentrate the
fraction either by precipitation with
trichloroacetic acid or by diluting it
with 2 vol. of HM and pelleting by
centrifugation at 100 000–150 000g for

40 min before resuspending in a small
volume of HM. See the references in
Table 5.4 for details of the banding of
the membrane compartments from a
variety of cell types.

Notes
This procedure will take approx. 4 h.


1 This is general purpose HM and diluent and has been used for many types
of cultured cells and tissues.

2 This salt-containing HM and diluent
was used for neuroblastoma cells [27]
and brain tissue [81] but may be particularly applicable to any cells and
tissues that release proteins that may
cause agglutination of membranes.
See ref. 35 for other homogenization
media.

3 Use the appropriate diluent for the
chosen HM.

PROTOCOL 5.9


4 The device of choice is the ballbearing homogenizer. Sometimes a
syringe needle with a lower gauge
number (wider orifice) will work satisfactorily. As with the homogenization
medium, the homogenization protocol
will need to be tailored to the cell type.
See ref. 35 for more information.

5 For gradient collection low-density
end first use either the tube puncture device of the Beckman Fraction
Recovery System to deliver a dense
liquid such as Fluorinert (Sigma
Aldrich) or Flutec-Blue (F2 Chemicals Ltd, Preston UK) to the bottom of
the tube or the Labconco Auto Densiflow device to aspirate from the meniscus. For collection dense-end first use
tube puncture. More information about
gradient collection can be found in
ref. 26.

6 If neither of these devices is available then a continuous gradient can be
prepared by diffusion of a discontinuous gradient [26].

179


7 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas (i.d. 0.8–
1.0 mm) can be obtained from any surgical equipment supplies company.

8 Other swinging-bucket rotors or even
vertical rotors may be used. Larger
volume swinging-bucket rotors may
require longer centrifugation times but
vertical rotors will need shorter times.
Most of the gradients have been run
in 13 ml tubes but the gradients and
sample volume can be scaled down as
required.

9 See ref. 26 for information on making discontinuous gradients. Continuous gradients can be prepared by
allowing a discontinuous gradient of
equal volumes of 10, 20 and 30%
iodixanol to diffuse overnight.

10 These are the most widely reported
centrifugation conditions; see Table
5.4 for examples of separations using
the various conditions described in this
protocol.

PROTOCOL 5.10
SDS-PAGE of membrane proteins

Reagents
Ammonium persulfate (10% w/v, freshly
made up)
Reservoir buffer: 0.192 M glycine, 25 mM
Tris, 0.1% (w/v) SDS
10% (w/v) SDS
Sample buffer (SB): 4% SDS, 0.002%
bromophenol blue, 20% glycerol, 10%
2-mercaptoethanol, 125 mM Tris-HCl,
1
pH 6.5 
Separating gel buffer: 1.5 M Tris-HCl,
pH 8.8
Stacking gel buffer: 1.0 M Tris-HCl, pH
8.8
Stock acrylamide (30% T, 2.7% C):
20.2 g acrylamide, 0.8 g bisacrylamide
in 100 ml distilled water Deionize with
1 g Amberlite MB-1 monobed resin per
100 ml for 2 h. Store in an amber bottle
at 4 ◦ C after filtering
N ,N ,N  ,N  -tetramethylenediamine
(TEMED)
20% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA)
Water-saturated isobutanol

Equipment
Commercial gel cassette system, power
pack, etc.
Narrow-ended tips for automatic pipette
Vacuum pump and side-arm flask

Procedure [28, 30]
This procedure will take approx. 21–36 h.

1. Assemble the gel mould cassette according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
2. Make a 10% T separating gel by
mixing: 33.3 ml of acrylamide stock,
25 ml of 1.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.8,
40.5 ml of distilled water and 150 µl
2
of ammonium persulfate. 
3. Degas the solution using the vacuum
pump.
4. Carefully add 1.0 ml of SDS and
50 µl of TEMED; mix by gentle
swirling.
5. Pour the gel solution carefully into
the cassette to about 1 cm below the
position of the comb.
6. Overlayer the gel with a small volume
of the water saturated isobutanol.
7. Allow the gel to polymerize for
3
2–16 h at room temperature. 
8. Prepare the stacking gel solution from:
3 ml of acrylamide stock, 3.75 ml of
1.5 M Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 22.8 ml of
distilled water and 135 µl of ammonium persulfate.
9. After degassing, carefully add 375 µl
of SDS and 30 µl of TEMED; mix by
gentle swirling.
10. Fill the cassette with the stacking gel
solution and carefully insert the comb.
11. Polymerize for 2 h at room temperature.

PROTOCOL 5.10

181

12. Remover the comb and set up the 
2 This 10% T gel is a useful general
cassette in the electrophoresis appapurpose gel for resolving most proteins
ratus according to the manufacturer’s
in the Mr range 20 000–150 000; for
resolution of higher Mr proteins use a
instructions.
5% T gel, for lower Mr values use a 15
13. Add 1 vol. of sample buffer to 1 vol.
or 20% T gel.
of membrane suspension and heat at

3 Polymerization overnight is often con100 ◦ C for 3 min.
venient.
14. Apply the samples into the wells of
the stacking gel with the micropipette; 
4 The amount of sample loaded on to
20–100 µl of the sample is commonly
each track of a standard SDS-PAGE
used, depending on the well size and
gel will vary with the sample and will
4
the protein concentration. 
depend on the staining technique used.
With Coomassie blue staining the load
15. Run the gels at constant current.
should be 50–100 µg of protein; with
Standard 1.5 mm thick gels can be run
silver staining, 10–50 µg of protein is
at 15 mA per gel overnight.
normally sufficient.
16. Remove the gels from the cassette,

5 Coomassie blue stock: 0.125 g Coomasfix in TCA if necessary and stain as
sie brilliant blue in methanol-water
required, unless the gels are going
(405 : 520 v/v); add 7 ml of glacial
to be electroblotted (see Protocol
acetic acid in 100 ml before use.
5 
6 
7
5.11 ). 
Destain in the same solvent mixture.

Notes


6 Staining is enhanced if the gels are first
rinsed with water to remove some of the
SDS.


1 The glycerol may be omitted if dense

7 For glycoproteins use periodic acidgradient fractions containing sucrose,
Schiff or Alcian blue [28, 30].
Nycodenz or iodixanol are to be used
directly. For membrane fractions in
0.25 M sucrose include the glycerol.

PROTOCOL 5.11
Semi-dry blotting

Reagents

4. Place the cathode in position.

Transfer buffer: 20 mM Tris, 150 mM
1
glycine, pH 8.3. 

5. Transfer the proteins at ∼0.8 mA/cm2
for 40 min.

Equipment
Filter paper (Whatman 3 mM) cut to size
of gel
Rocker
Semi-dry apparatus with high current capability power supply (e.g. Bio-Rad PowerPac HC)
Transfer membrane (nitrocellulose) cut to
size of gel

6. Blotted proteins are normally detected
by antibody binding using a primary
antibody to a membrane protein, peroxidase-conjugated rabbit IgG as secondary antibody followed by enhanced
chemiluminescence using one of a variety of commercially available kits. See
Protocol 5.12 and refs 29 and 30 for
more information.

Notes
The procedure will take approx. 2 h.

Procedure [29, 30] 
2


1 An alternative is to use an anode buffer
of 60 mM Tris-HCl, pH 9.6, 40 mM
CAPS, 15% methanol and a cathode
buffer of 60 mM Tris-HCl, pH 9.6,
2. Soak 12 sheets of filter paper and
40 mM CAPS, 0.1% SDS.
the nitrocellulose membrane in transfer

2 Carry out all reactions at room tem3
buffer. 
perature and handle all materials with
3. After allowing excess buffer to drain
gloved hands.
off each paper and gel, place six sheets
3 If the two-buffer system is used, soak
of the filter paper, the membrane, the 
the gel and six sheets of filter paper in
gel and six more sheets of filter paper
the anode buffer and the other six sheets
on the anode plate of the semi-dry
in the cathode buffer.
apparatus.
1. Place gel from cassette (see Protocol
3
5.10 ) in transfer buffer for 30 min. 

PROTOCOL 5.12
Detection of blotted proteins by enhanced
chemiluminescence (ECL)

Reagents
Diaminobenzidine (DAB): 0.05% (w/v)
DAB, 0.01% (v/v) H2 O2 in PBS
ECL electroblotting detection reagents; a
variety of kits are commercially available and very convenient to use
Phosphate buffered saline (PBS): 8 g NaCl,
0.2 g KCl, 1.15 g Na2 HPO4 , 0.2 g KH2
PO4 in 1 litre of water
PBS-T: 0.05% Tween 20 in PBS
PBS-TM: 3% (w/v) non-fat dried milk in
PBS-T
Primary (monoclonal) antibody for detecting membrane antigens
Secondary antibody reagent: e.g. peroxidase-conjugated rabbit IgG; dilute this
1 : 1000 in PBS-TM

Equipment
Cling-film
Detection film (blue-light sensitive) and
1 
2
suitable photoradiography cassette 
Glass plate
Plastic bags 
3
Rocker

Procedure [29, 30]
Carry out all operations at room temperature and use gloved hands.

1. Remover the membrane carefully from
the semi-dry blotter and incubate in a
plastic bag with PBS-TM for 1 h to
block non-specific binding sites on the
membrane.
2. Transfer the membrane to a suitable
dilution (e.g. 1 : 1000–1:10 000) of the
monoclonal antibody and incubate for
4
1 h. 
3. Wash the membrane three times in
PBS-T.
4. Incubate for 1 h with the peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibody.
5. Wash the membrane three times in
PBS-T.
6. Mix the ECL reagents as recommended by the manufacturer and incubate with the membrane (0.125 ml/cm2
membrane) for 1 min.
7. Drain excess solution from the membrane; place on a glass plate (protein
side uppermost) and cover with cling5
film to prevent drying out. 
8. Expose the membrane to the film in
6
the dark. 
9. Develop the film as recommended by
the manufacturer.
10. To visualize the proteins after completion of the ECL exposure, wash the
membrane twice for 15 min in PBS-T
and stain with the DAB solution for
10 min.

184

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

Notes

1 Consult local manufacturer’s instructions and ref. 30 for details.

2 Rather than use the traditional film
method, the blot can also be detected
via a gel documentation system such
as a Bio-Rad ChemiDoc XRS or a
VersaDoc imager. The convenience
of this method and the production
of a digital image make this an
increasingly popular choice.


3 Compared to plastic boxes, small volume plastic bags make more economical use of often expensive or sparingly
available antibodies.

4 Use the minimum volumes permitted
by the bag.

5 Avoid all air bubbles and creasing of
the membrane.

6 Times between 15 s and 60 min are
common. Check the manufacturer’s
instructions.

PROTOCOL 5.13
Separation of membranes and cytosolic
fractions from (a) mammalian cells and (b)
bacteria

(a) Mammalian cells [91, 92]
Reagents

OptiPrep
OptiPrep diluent (OD): 140 mM KCl,
60 mM Hepes-KOH, pH 7.2 containing
either 15 mM Mg(OAc)2 or 12 mM
1 
2
EGTA and 6 mM DTT 
Working solution (WS) of 50% iodixanol:
mix 5 vol. of OptiPrep with 1 vol. of
OD
WS diluent: 140 mM KCl, 10 mM HepesKOH, pH 7.2 containing either 2.5 mM
Mg(OAc)2 or 2 mM EGTA and 1 mM
1 
2
DTT 
Include protease inhibitors in solutions as
required

Equipment
Gradient collector (optional)
Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge or microcentrifuge (in cold room)
Ultracentrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
for approx 5 ml tubes

Procedure
Carry out all operations at 0–4 ◦ C.
1. Remove cells from the vesicle-containing suspension either in a microcentrifuge or by centrifugation at 1000g for
3
5 min in a low-speed centrifuge. 

2. Aspirate the supernatant and adjust it
to 30% (w/v) iodixanol by thorough
4
mixing with WS. 
3. Prepare solutions containing 25 and 5%
(w/v) iodixanol by diluting WS with
5
WS diluent. 
4. In tubes for the swinging-bucket rotor
layer 2 ml each of the crude vesicle
fraction in 30% iodixanol and the
6
25% iodixanol. 
5. Fill the tube by overlayering with 5%
7
iodixanol. 
6. Centrifuge at approx. 250 000g for 3 h;
collect the vesicles which band at the
top interface and the bottom layer containing cytosolic proteins. Alternatively
the gradient may be collected in a num8
ber of equal volume fractions. 

(b) Bacteria [93] 
9
Reagents

OptiPrep
OptiPrep diluent (OD): 3.0 M KOAc,
30 mM Mg(OAc)2, , 300 mM Hepes10
KOH, pH 7.6 
Working solution (WS) of 50% iodixanol:
mix 5 vol. of OptiPrep with 1 vol. of
OD
Suspension buffer (SB): 0.5 M KOAc,
5 mM Mg(OAc)2, , 50 mM Hepes-KOH,
pH 7.6

186

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

WS diluent: 0.125 M sucrose in SB 
10
Include protease inhibitors in solutions as
required
Equipment

Ultracentrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
for approx. 5 ml tubes
Procedure

1. Suspend the crude vesicle preparation
in SB.
2. Adjust the suspension to 44% iodixanol
by addition of WS.
3. Transfer to tubes for the chosen swinging-bucket rotor.
4. Dilute WS with WS diluent to give a
30% iodixanol solution.
5. Overlayer the sample with approx. 5
vol. of 30% iodixanol. 
6
6. Fill the tubes by overlayering with SB
and centrifuge at approx 170 000g for
7
3 h. 
7. Either collect the gradient in three or
four fractions or harvest the vesicle
band at the top interface and the soluble
protein fraction (original sample zone at
8
the bottom of the tube). 

Notes

1 The preparation of a 50% iodixanol
working solution using OptiPrep
and OD maintains the concentration of
buffer and Mg(OAc)2 (or EGTA and
DTT) constant through the gradient
when WS is diluted with WS diluent. The buffer and additives may be
changed to suit the operator’s requirements; as long as their concentration
in the gradient is no more than approx.
20 mM, they can be present in the
OD at 6× the required concentration.

The KCl concentration in the OD is
not similarly raised; if it were, gradient solutions would be highly hyperosmotic and affect the density of the
vesicles.


2 The MgOAc was used by Love
et al. [92] in the separation of vesicles
and cytosol from permeabilized cells
and the DTT/EGTA used by Scheiffele et al. [91] in the separation of
budded vesicles and cytosol.

3 If the requirement is to separate the
cytosol and total microsomes from a
homogenate it is probably advisable to
centrifuge the homogenate at 15 000g
for 15 min to remove all of the larger
organelles (nuclei, mitochondria, lysosomes, peroxisomes) before adjusting
the density of the supernatant.

4 Rather than adjusting the crude vesicle
fraction to 30% iodixanol by the
addition of a 50% iodixanol WS, Love
et al. [92] first pelleted the vesicles
and then suspended them directly in
30% iodixanol. Either strategy should
be effective.

5 Most published protocols use very
similar discontinuous gradient strategies; it is worth noting, however, that
Joglekar et al.[94] used a continuous
5–25% iodixanol gradient to separate
COP-coated vesicles (budded from the
ER/Golgi) from the cytosol also by
flotation.

6 The procedure can be scaled down or
up as required to suit the sample volume; change the volume of the solution above the sample proportionally;
the small volume of low-density solution on top need not be increased.

7 As with all flotation methods a small
volume of buffer or 5–10% iodixanol
is always layered on top of the lowdensity barrier to prevent banding of
the vesicles at an air/liquid interface.

PROTOCOL 5.13


8 See ref. 26 for more information on
gradient fractionation. Small volume
gradients may be divided into three
of four zones simply by very careful
aspiration using an automatic pipette.

9 The same flotation strategy has been
applied to lysed yeast spheroplasts;
the lysate is adjusted to 37% (w/v)
iodixanol; layered beneath 30, 25, 19
and 0% iodixanol; and centrifuged at
75 000gav for 4 h to separate cytosolic
and vacuolar fractions [95].

187


10 The preparation of a 50% iodixanol
working solution (WS) using OptiPrep and OD, maintains the concentration of buffer KOAc and Mg(OAc)2
constant through the gradient when
WS is diluted with WS diluent. The
buffer and additives may be changed
to suit the operator’s requirements;
they can be present in OD at 6× the
required concentration as long as their
final concentration in the gradient does
not significantly alter its osmolality.

PROTOCOL 5.14
Analysis of early and recycling endosomes in
preformed iodixanol gradients; endocytosis of
transferrin in transfected MDCK cells [96]

Reagents

Procedure

OptiPrep
Optiprep diluent (OD): 235 mM KCl,
12 mM MgCl2 , 25 mM CaCl2 , 30 mM
EGTA, 150 mM Hepes-NaOH pH 7.0
40% Iodixanol working solution (WS): 2
vol. of OptiPrep + 1 vol. of OD
WS diluent: 78 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2 ,
8.4 mM CaCl2 , 10 mM EGTA, 50 mM
Hepes-NaOH pH 7.0
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 78 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2 ,
8.4 mM CaCl2 , 10 mM EGTA, 50 mM
1
Hepes-NaOH pH 7.0 
Protease inhibitors should be added to the
HM and WS diluent as required

Following any experimental procedures to
allow binding, uptake and processing of a
ligand or other functional manipulations,
all operations must be carried out at 4 ◦ C.

Equipment
Ball-bearing homogenizer, syringe with
25-gauge needle or tight-fitting Dounce
homogenizer (Wheaton type A) or other
2
suitable device 
Gradient collector 
3
Gradient maker (two-chamber) or Gradient
Master
Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge with
swinging-bucket rotor for 15 ml tubes
Phase contrast microscope
Ultracentrifuge with swinging-bucket rotor
for 13–17 ml tubes

1. Remove any unbound ligand or other
components from the cell surface by
washing the cell monolayer twice in any
solution compatible with the study and
4
then scrape the cells in 1 ml of HM. 
2. Homogenize the cells using a ballbearing homogenizer (cell cracker);
four passes of the cell suspension
should be sufficient. Check for adequate homogenization by phase contrast microscopy. If such a device is
not available then use several passages
through a fine gauge syringe needle or
5
a Dounce homogenizer. 
3. Centrifuge the homogenate in a swinging-bucket rotor at 1000g for 5 min to
pellet the nuclei and any cell debris.
The pellet may be washed with HM
if necessary and the two supernatants
combined.
4. Prepare the low- and high-density gradient solutions of 5 and 20% (w/v) iodixanol by diluting WS with the WS diluent.
5. In tubes for the swinging-bucket rotor
prepare 11–14 ml 5–20% iodixanol gradients using either a two-chamber gradi6
ent maker or a Gradient Master. 

PROTOCOL 5.14

6. Layer the 1000g supernatant(s) on
top of the gradient and centrifuge at
7 
8
90 000gav for 18–20 h. 

the cell type. See ref. 35 for more
information.


3 Either the Beckman Fraction Recovery or the Labconco Auto Densi-flow
is suitable. For more information see
ref. 26.

7. Collect the gradient in approx. 0.25 ml
fractions either by upward displacement
with a dense liquid or by tube puncture
or by aspiration from the meniscus.
The delivery of the gradient into a
multi-well plate via a Gilson Fraction
Collector is a very convenient mode for
9 
10
analysis. 


4 Surface-bound transferrin, for example,
is removed by washing the cells twice
in 280 mM sucrose, 25 mM citric acid,
24.5 mM sodium citrate, pH 4.6 [96].

5 Up to 10 cycles with the ball-bearing
homogenizer may be needed (depending on cell type and/or HM composition), up to 15 strokes of the pestle
of a Dounce homogenization or up to
20 passages through a syringe needle should be sufficient. Always monitor the progress of homogenization by
phase contrast microscopy.

8. If it is necessary to remove the
iodixanol, fractions can be pelleted at
200 000g for 20 min after dilution with
3 vol. of HM.

Notes

1 Other homogenization media may be
permissible and may need modulating
if other cell types are used; see ref. 35
for more details.


6 Alternatively allow a discontinuous
gradient of equal volumes of 5, 10,
15 and 20% iodixanol to diffuse
overnight. See ref. 26 for information
on making continuous gradients.


2 The device of choice is the ballbearing homogenizer. Sometimes a
syringe needle with a lower gauge
number (wider orifice) will work
satisfactorily. As with the homogenization medium, the homogenization
protocol will need to be tailored to
Table 5.5

Cell/tissue

189


7 Satisfactory separation of endosomal
compartments from other cells or
tissues may require modulation of
either the density gradient or the

Preformed iodixanol gradients for analysis of endocytosis

Input1

Grad2

CHO
(25RA)
HeLa

pns

5–20

pns

5–20

MDCK

pns
pns

5–20
5–20

NRK

pns

12.5–30d

Renal BB4

mic

15–25

g

hours

Fractionation3

90 000 20.0 EE,
PM
125 000 20.0 EE,
lys
90 000 18.0 EE,
90 000 18.0 EE,
lys
113 000 1.5 EE
100 000

LE, TGN,
RE, PM,
RE, PM
RE, PM,

Analysis
LDL-derived cholesterol
trafficking
Degradation of EGF
receptor
Rab11 endocytic targeting
Transferrin endocytosis

Caveolin recruitment to
early endosomes
3.0 CP, endosomes Myosin localization

Ref.
97
98
99
96
100
101

pns = post-nuclear supernatant; mic = microsomal fraction.
Gradient density range in % iodixanol; d = discontinuous.
3
EE = early endosomes; LE = late endosomes, RE = recycling endosomes, TGN = trans Golgi network, PM =
plasma membrane; CP = coated pit; lys = lysosomes.
4
BB = brush border.
1
2

190

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

centrifugation conditions. This can
only be determined by trial and error.


8 Use of other centrifugation conditions
(shorter times at higher RCFs for
example) should be checked against
the recommended parameters for their
efficacy.

9 For gradient collection low-density
end first, use either the tube puncture device of the Beckman Fraction Recovery System to deliver a
dense liquid such as Maxidens to the

bottom of the tube or the Labconco
Auto Densi-flow device to aspirate
from the meniscus. For collection
dense-end first, use tube puncture.
More information about gradient collection can be found in ref. 26.


10 In this gradient the density of plasma
membrane, lysosomes, recycling endosomes and early endosomes increases
in that order[96]. Some other published
papers that have reported the use of similar gradients are given in Table 5.5.

PROTOCOL 5.15
Analysis of clathrin-coated vesicle processing
in self-generated iodixanol gradients;
endocytosis of asialoglycoprotein by rat liver
[102, 103]

Reagents
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl,
1
pH 7.4 
OptiPrep
OptiPrep diluent (OD): 0.25 M sucrose,
6 mM EDTA, 60 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4
Working solution (WS) of 50% iodixanol:
5 vol. of OptiPrep + 1 vol. of OD.
Add protease inhibitors to HM and OD as
required

Equipment
Gradient collector 
2
High-speed centrifuge with swingingbucket for 40–50 ml tubes
3
Syringe (2 ml) with metal cannula 
Ultracentrifuge with a vertical or near vertical rotor capable of approx. 350 000g
(e.g. Beckman VTi65.1 or NVT65) with
4
11.2 ml Optiseal tubes 

Procedure 
5
Carry out ligand binding, uptake and
processing, as required. Subsequently all
operations must be carried out at 4 ◦ C.

1. Homogenize the liver in HM (approx.
4 ml per g of tissue) as described in
steps 4–6 of Protocol 4.6.
2. Centrifuge the homogenate in a swinging-bucket rotor at 3000gav for 10 min.
The pellet may be washed with HM
if necessary and the two supernatants
6
combined. 
3. Make a 20% iodixanol solution (ρ =
1.127 g/ml) by diluting WS with HM.
4. Dilute the 3000g supernatant with WS
3 : 1 (v/v), so the final iodixanol concentration is 12.5% (w/v).
5. Transfer approx. 9 ml of the suspension
to the Optiseal tube for the vertical or
near-vertical rotor.
6. Underlay with 1.5 ml 20% iodixanol
7
and overlay with HM to fill the tube. 
7. Centrifuge at approx. 350 000gav for
1.5 h (slow acceleration to 800 rpm).
Use slow deceleration (or no brake)
8
from 800 rpm. 
8. Collect the gradient, low-density end
first, by upward displacement or aspiration from the meniscus or dense end
first by tube puncture, in approx. 0.5 ml
9
fractions and analyse as required. 
9. If it is necessary to remove cytosolic
proteins from the fractions and/or to

192

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

concentrate them, dilute with an equal
volume of buffer and sediment the
membranes at approx. 350 000g for
10
15 min. 

Notes
This procedure will take approx. 3–4 h
(excluding the operations prior to homogenization).


1 The inclusion of EDTA in this buffer
removes ligand bound to the plasma
membrane so that only intracellular
compartments are labelled.

2 Either the Beckman Fraction Recovery
System or the Labconco Auto Densiflow is suitable. For more information
see ref. 26.

3 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas (i.d. 0.8–1.0
mm) can be obtained from any surgical
equipment supplies company.

4 The sedimentation path length of the
tube should be <24 mm. The protocol provides centrifugation times and
g-forces for 11 ml Optiseal tubes
for the Beckman VTi65.1; they may
need to be optimized to produce
the required iodixanol density gradient in other rotors. Smaller volume rotors can be used with little
or no modification to the protocol,
but larger volumes may require significantly longer centrifugation times.
For more information on the formation
of self-generated gradients see ref. 26.
Although tubes other than Optiseal
tubes may be used, the latter are the
easiest of any sealed tube type for gradient unloading.

5 Although this fractionation protocol
was used to study the endocytosis of
neogalactosylalbumin by the perfused
rat liver, it may also be used to analyse

the internalization of other ligands by,
for example, isolated hepatocytes.


6 Although washing of the pellet will
maximize the recovery of endosomes,
it may make the volume of the
post-heavy mitochondrial supernatant
inconveniently large.

7 If a near-vertical rotor is used, the 20%
iodixanol cushion may be omitted, it is
present in tubes for vertical rotors to
prevent any dense particle reaching the
wall of the centrifuge tube; likewise
the overlay may also be omitted in
near-vertical rotors.

8 Slow acceleration is not needed if the
dense cushion and overlay are omitted
with near-vertical rotors.

9 For gradient collection low-density
end first, use either the tube puncture device of the Beckman Fraction
Recovery System to deliver a dense
liquid such as Fluorinert (Sigma
Aldrich) or Flutec-Blue (F2 chemicals Ltd, Preston UK) to the bottom
of the tube or the Labconco Auto
Densi-flow device to aspirate from
the meniscus. For collection denseend first, use tube puncture. More
information about gradient collection
can be found in ref. 26. Under the
recommended conditions, the gradient
contains a central shallow region to
separate light and dense endosomes.
Lysosomes band in the sharp gradient formed at the bottom of the tube,
while mitochondria and peroxisomes
band below the lysosomes. For a more
linear gradient use longer centrifugation times. To subfractionate the early
clathrin-coated vesicles and the plasma
membrane, which tend to have a high
density, the starting concentration of
iodixanol should be increased to 15
or 17.5%. To analyse more effectively

PROTOCOL 5.15

the low-density endosomes, the starting concentration of iodixanol might
be reduced to 10%.


10 By removing cytosolic proteins after
fractionation, endosomes need not be
pelleted and resuspended prior to separation. Small volume open-topped
thick-walled tubes for a micro-ultra

193

centrifuge are a convenient way of
recovering sedimented membrane fractions. Do not use more than 15 min
at 350 000g or 1–1.5 h at 100 000g,
otherwise sedimentation of the iodixanol molecules themselves may interfere with pellet formation.

PROTOCOL 5.16
Polysucrose–Nycodenz gradients for the
analysis of dense endosome–lysosome events
in mammalian liver [104–108]

Reagents

Procedure 
6

Nycoprep Universal
Homogenization medium (HM): 0.25 M
sucrose, 1 mM MgCl2 , 10 mM TESNaOH, pH 7.4
Nycoprep Universal diluent (NUD): 6
mM EDTA, 60 mM TES-NaOH, pH 7.4
Gradient diluent (GD): 0.25 M sucrose,
1 mM EDTA, 10 mM TES-NaOH, pH 7.4
Nycodenz working solution (50%, w/v):
mix 5 vol. of Nycoprep Universal with
1 vol. of NUD
45% (w/v) Nycodenz: mix 4.5 vol. of
Nycodenz working solution with 0.5
vol. of 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM TESNaOH, pH 7.4 (use NUD diluted with
5 vol. of water)
20% (w/v) Nycodenz: mix 2 vol. of 45%
Nycodenz with 2.5 vol. of GD
20% (w/v) polysucrose in GD 
1 
2

Carry out ligand binding, uptake and
processing, as required. Carry out all
operations at 0–4 ◦ C.

Equipment
Gradient collector 
3
High-speed or refrigerated low-speed
centrifuge with swinging bucket for
40–50 ml tubes
4
Syringe (2 ml) with metal cannula 
Ultracentrifuge and vertical rotor with a
tube volume of approx. 36 ml (e.g.
5
Beckman VTi50 rotor) 

1. Perfuse with the liver with HM until the
lobes are well blanched. 
7
2. Homogenize the liver in HM (approx.
4 ml per g of tissue) as described in
steps 3 and 4 of Protocol 4.7.
3. Centrifuge the homogenate at 2000g for
10 min to sediment cell debris, nuclei
and most of the heavy mitochondria.
4. Transfer 12.5 ml of the 20% polysucrose to 36 ml Optiseal tubes for the
VTi50 rotor, then using a syringe and
metal cannula underlayer with 12.5 ml
of 20% Nycodenz and 4 ml of 45%
8 
9
Nycodenz solution. 
5. Layer the 2000g supernatant on top,
to fill the tube, as specified by the
manufacturer.
6. Centrifuge at 200 000g for 1 h, using
a slow acceleration and deceleration
programs up to and below 2000 rpm
(alternatively turn off the brake below
2000 rpm).
7. Harvest the gradient in a series of
equal volume fractions prior to analysis. Lysosomes band at the 45/20%

PROTOCOL 5.16

Nycodenz interface, very dense endosomes at the 20% polysucrose/20%
Nycodenz; all other endosomes band
at the sample/20% polysucrose inter10
face. 

Notes

1 Polysucrose is available commercially
under this name (Axis-Shield and
its distributors) or under the trade
name Ficoll (Amersham Pharmacia
Biotech and its distributors). When
making up solutions of these high
molecular weight sucrose polymers,
it is better to add small aliquots
(2–3 ml) of the solvent to the
weighed-out powder, using a glass rod
to mix well after each addition.

2 Ellis et al. [104] made up a more
concentrated Ficoll solution in water
(1 ml per g) before dialysing it for
2 h against a large volume of water
and adjusting it to the appropriate concentration in 0.25 M sucrose, 1 mM
EDTA, 10 mM TES-NaOH, pH 7.4. It
is probably easier to make up a 25%
(w/v) polysucrose in 0.25 M sucrose,
1 mM EDTA, 10 mM TES-NaOH, pH
7.4 and to dialyse it against the same
medium, before checking and adjusting the volume to make it 20% with
respect to polysucrose.

3 Either the Beckman Fraction Recovery System or the Labconco Auto
Densi-flow is suitable. For more information see ref. 26.

4 Metal ‘filling’ cannulas (i.d. 0.8–1.0
mm) can be obtained from any surgical equipment supplies company.

5 If a vertical rotor is unavailable, either
a fixed-angle or a swinging-bucket
rotor may be used, but the longer
sedimentation path length of these

195

rotors will require longer centrifugation times.


6 This methodology applies to rat liver
and although in principle it may be
applied to other tissues and cultured
cells, in view of the functional uniqueness of liver, it is likely that some
optimization of the gradient and centrifugation conditions may be necessary.

7 See ref. 104 for more information
about liver perfusion.

8 A simplified method for separating
lysosomes and endosomes in which
the 20% polysucrose layer was omitted has also been used.

9 More detailed analysis of the light
and dense endosomes may be carried
out on continuous 1–22% polysucrose
gradients (with a 45% Nycodenz
cushion) using approx. the same gradient volume, rotor and centrifugation conditions. The material containing lysosomes and dense endosomes
at the cushion interface may be reanalysed in 0–35% or 0–45% Nycodenz
gradients; see refs 104–108 for
more details. Analysis of in vitro
systems to study the transfer of
molecules between endosomes and
lysosomes has also been carried out in
0–35% Nycodenz gradients using a
swinging-bucket rotor with a tube volume of approx. 14 ml, again at approx
200 000g for 1 h [109–111].

10 For gradient collection low-density
end first, use either the tube puncture device of the Beckman Fraction
Recovery System to deliver a dense
liquid such as Fluorinert (Sigma
Aldrich) or Flutec-Blue (F2 chemicals Ltd, Preston UK) to the bottom
of the tube or the Labconco Auto
Densi-flow device to aspirate from

196

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

the meniscus. For collection denseend first, use tube puncture. More
information about gradient collection
can be found in ref. 26.

References
1. Graham, J., Ford, T. and Rickwood, D.
(1994) Anal. Biochem., 220, 367–373.
2. Hubbard, A. L., Wall, D. A. and Ma, A.
(1983) J. Cell Biol., 96, 217–229.
3. Scott, L., Schell, M. J. and Hubbard, A. L.
(1993) In: Methods in Molecular Biology,
Vol. 19 (J. M. Graham and J. A. Higgins,
eds), pp. 59–69. Humana Press, Totowa,
NJ, USA.
4. Wisher, M. H. and Evans, W. H. (1975)
Biochem J., 146, 375–388.
5. Meier, P. J., Sztul, E. S., Reuben, A. and
Boyer, J. L. (1984) J. Cell Biol., 98,
991–1000.
6. Graham, J. M. and Northfield, T. C. (1987)
Biochem. J., 242, 825–834.
7. Ali, N., Aligue, R. and Evans, W. H. (1990)
Biochem. J., 271, 185–192.
8. Ekblad, L. and Jergil, B. (2001) Biochim.
Biophys. Acta, 1531, 209–221.
9. Sztul, E. S., Howell, K. E. and Palade,
G. E. (1985) J. Cell Biol., 100, 1255–
1261.
10. Howell, K. E., Gruenberg, J., Ito, K. and
Palade, G. E. (1988) In: Cell-free Analysis
of Membrane Traffic (D. J. Morré, K. E.
Howell, G. M. C. Cook and W. H.Evans,
eds), pp. 77–90. Alan R Liss Inc., New
York.
11. Luzio, J. P., Mullock, B. M., Branch, W. J.
and Richardson, P. J. (1988) in Cell-free
Analysis of Membrane Traffic (D. J. Morré,
K. E.Howell, G. M. C. Cook and W. H.
Evans, eds), pp. 91–100. Alan R Liss Inc.,
New York.
12. Ellis, J. A., Jackman, M. R. and Luzio, J. P.
(1992) Biochem. J., 283, 553–560.
13. Yeaman, C. (2003) Methods, 30, 198–206.
14. Amieva, M. R., Vogelman, R., Covacci,
A., Tompkins, L. S., Nelson, W. J. and
Falkow, S. (2003) Science, 300, 1430–
1434.
15. Oliferenko, S., Paiha, K., Harder, T., Gerke,
V., Schwarzler, C., Schwarz, H., Beug, H.,
Gunthert, U. and Huber, L. A. (1999) J.
Cell Biol. 146, 843–854.

16. Lafont, F., Verkade, P., Galli, T., Wimmer,
C., Louvard, D. and Simons, K. (1999)
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., USA, 96, 3734–3738.
17. Smart E. J., Ying, Y-S., Mineo, C. and
Anderson, R. G. W. (1995) Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci., USA, 92, 10104–10108.
18. Uittenbogaard, A., Ying, Y. and Smart, E. J.
(1998) J. Biol. Chem., 273, 6525–6532.
19. Lodish, H. F., Kong, N., Hirani, S. and Rasmussen, J. (1987) J. Biol. Chem., 104,
221–230.
20. Miller, S. G., Carnell, L. and Moore, H. H.
(1992) J. Cell Biol., 118, 267–283.
21. Moore, S. E. and Spiro, R. G. (1992) J.
Biol. Chem., 267, 8443–8451.
22. Yang, M., Ellenberg, J., Bonifacino, J. S.
and Weissman, A. M. (1997) J. Biol. Chem.,
272, 1970–1975.
23. Zhang, J., Kang, D. E., Xia, W., Okochi,
M., Mori, H., Selkoe, D. J. and Koo, E. H.
(1998) J. Biol. Chem., 273, 12436–12442.
24. Tekirian, T. L., Merriam, D. E., Marshansky, V., Miller, J., Crowley, A. C., Chan,
H., Ausiello, D., Brown, D., Buxbaum,J. D.,
Xia, W. and Wasco, W. (2001) Mol. Brain.
Res., 96, 14–20.
25. Woods, A. J., Roberts, M. S., Choudhary,
J., Barry, S. T., Mazaki, Y., Sabe, H., Morley, S. J., Critchley, D. R. and Norman,J. C.
(2002) J. Biol. Chem., 277, 6428–6437.
26. Graham, J. M. (2001) In: Biological Centrifugation, pp. 61–84. Taylor and Francis
Books Ltd, Oxford, UK.
27. Petanceska, S. S., Seeger, M., Checler, F.
and Gandy, S. (2000) J. Neurochem., 74,
1878–1884.
28. Dunn, M. J. and Bradd, S. J. (1993) In:
Methods in Molecular Biology, Vol. 19
(J. M. Graham and J. A. Higgins, eds),
pp. 203–210. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.
29. Bradd, S. J. and Dunn, M. J. (1993) In:
Methods in Molecular Biology, Vol. 19
(J. M. Graham and J. A. Higgins, eds),
pp. 211–218. Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.
30. Dunn, M. J. (1993) Gel Electrophoresis:
Proteins. Taylor and Francis Books Ltd,
Oxford, UK.
31. Gjoen, T., Berg, T. O. and Berg T. (1997)
In: Subcellular Fractionation – a Practical
Approach (J. M. Graham and D. Rickwood,
eds), pp. 169–203. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.

PROTOCOL 5.16

32. Courtoy, P. J. (1993) In: Endocytic Compartments: Identification and Characterization (J. J. M. Bergeron and J. R. Harris,
eds), pp. 29–68. Plenum Press, New York.
33. Gupta, D. and Tartakoff, A. M. (1989)
Meth. Cell Biol., 31, 247–272.
34. Courtoy, P. J., Quintart, J. and Baudhuin, P.
(1984) J. Cell Biol., 98, 870–876.
35. Graham J. M. (1997) In: Subcellular Fractionation – a Practical Approach (J. M. Graham and D. Rickwood, eds), pp. 1–29.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
36. Lafont, F., Lecat, S., Verkade, P. and
Simons, K. (1998) J. Cell Biol., 142,
1413–1427.
37. Benting, J. H., Rietveld, A. G. and Simons,
K. (1999) J. Cell Biol., 146, 313–320.
38. Plant, P. J., Lafont, F., Lecat, S., Verkade,
P., Simons, K. and Rotin, D. (2000) J. Cell
Biol., 149, 1473–1483.
39. Lecat, S., Verkade, P., Thiele, C., Fiedler,
K., Simons, K. and Lafont, F. (2000) J. Cell
Sci., 113, 2607–2618.
40. Hanwell, D., Ishikawa, T., Saleki, R. and
Rotin, D. (2002) J. Biol. Chem., 277, 9772–
9779.
41. Rietveld, A., Neutz, S., Simons, K. and
Eaton, S. (1999) J. Biol. Chem., 274,
12049–12054.
42. Manes, S., Mira, E., Gomez-Mouton, C.,
Lacalle, R. A., Keller, P., Labrador, J. P.
and Martinez-A, C. (1999) EMBO J., 18,
6211–6220.
43. Bruckner, K., Labrador, J. P., Scheiffele, P.,
Herb, A., Seeburg, P. H. and Klein, R.
(1999) Neuron, 22, 511–524.
44. Gimpl, G. and Fahrenholz, F. (2000) Eur. J.
Biochem., 267, 2483–2497.
45. Bagnat, M., Keranen, S., Shevchenko, A.,
Shevchenko, A. and Simons, K. (2000)
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 97, 3254–3259.
46. Lee, M. C. S., Hamamoto, S. and Schekman, R. (2002) J. Biol. Chem., 277, 22395–
22401.
47. Harder, T. and Kuhn, M. (2000) J. Cell
Biol., 151, 199–207.
48. Simons, M., Kramer, E-M., Thiele, C., Stoffel, W. and Trotter, J. (2000) J. Cell Biol.,
151, 143–153.
49. Ledesma, M. D., Da Silva, J. S., Crassaerts, K., Delacourte, A., De Stropper, B.
and Dotti, C. G. (2000) EMBO Rep., 1,
530–535.

197

50. Tansey, M. G., Baloh, R. H., Milbrandt, J.
and Johnson, E. M. (2000) Neuron, 25,
611–623.
51. Bruses, J. L., Chauvet, N. and Rutishauser,
U. (2001) J. Neurosci., 21, 504–512.
52. Lindwasser, O. W. and Resh, M. D. (2001)
J. Virol.,75, 7913–7924.
53. Ehehalt, R., Keller, P., Haass, C., Thiele, C.
and Simons, K. (2003) J. Cell Biol., 160,
113–123.
54. Liu, P., Ying, Y., Ko, Y. G. and Anderson, R. G. W. (1996) J. Biol. Chem., 271,
10299–10303.
55. Liu, P., Ying, Y-S. and Anderson, R. G. W.
(1997) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., USA, 94,
13666–13670.
56. Ikezu, T., Trapp, B. D., Song, K. S., Schegel, A., Lisanti, M. P. and Okamato, T.
(1998) J. Biol. Chem., 273, 10485–10495.
57. Brouillett, E., Trembleau, A., Galanaud, D.,
Volovitch, M., Bouillot, C., Valenza, C.,
Prochiantz, A. and Allinquant, B. (1999) J.
Neurosci., 19, 1717–1727.
58. Graf, G. G., Connell, P. M., van der Westhuyzen, D. R. and Smart, E. J. (1999) J.
Biol. Chem., 274, 12043–12048.
59. Uittenbogaard,A., Everson, W. V., Matveev,
S. V. and Smart, E. J. (2002) J. Biol.
Chem., 277, 4925–4931.
60. Blair, A., Shaul, P. W., Yuhanna, I. S., Conrad, P. A. and Smart, E. J. (1999) J. Biol.
Chem., 274, 32512–32519.
61. Czarny, M., Liu, J., Oh, P. and Schnitzer, J.
E. (2003) J. Biol. Chem., 278, 4424–4430.
62. Cameron, P. L., Ruffin, J. W., Bollag, R.,
Rasmussen, H. and Cameron, R. S. (1997)
J. Neurosci., 17, 9520–9535.
63. Frank, S., Upender, S., Hansen, S. H. and
Casanova, J. E. (1998) J. Biol. Chem., 273,
23–27.
64. Pedrazzini, E., Villa, A., Longhi, R., Bulbarelli, A. and Borgese, N. (2000) J. Cell
Biol., 148, 899–913.
65. Roy, M-O., Leventis, R. and Silvius, J. R.
(2000) Biochemistry, 39, 8298–8307.
66. Cai, Y., Maeda, Y., Cedzich, A., Torres,
V. E., Wu, G., Hayashi, T., Mochizuki, T.,
Park, J. H., Witzgall, R. and Somlo, S.
(1999) J. Biol. Chem., 274, 28557–28565.
67. Drummer, H. E., Maerz, A., Poumbourios,
P. (2003) FEBS Lett., 546, 3385–3390.

198

FRACTIONATION OF SUBCELLULAR MEMBRANES

68. Choukroun, G. J., Marshansky, V., Gustafson, C. E., McKee, M., Hajjar,R. J., Rosenzweig, A., Brown, D. and Bonventre, J. V.
(2000) J. Clin. Invest., 106, 983–993.
69. Van’t Hoff, W. and Resh, M. D. (1997) J.
Cell Biol., 136, 1023–1035.
70. Newby, L. J., Streets, A. J., Zhao, Y., Harris, P. C., Ward, C. J. and Ong, A. C. M.
(2002) J. Biol. Chem., 277, 20763–20773.
71. Kim,S-H., Lah, J. J., Thinakaran, G., Levey,
A. and Sisodia, S. S. (2000) Neurobiol.
Disease, 7, 99–117.
72. Chahdi, A., Choi, W. S., Kim, Y. M. and
Beaven, M. A. (2003) J. Biol. Chem., 278,
12039–12045.
73. Puglielli, L., Konopka, G., Pack-Chung, E.,
MacKenzie Ingano, L. A., Berezovska, O.,
Hyman,B. T., Chang,T. Y., Tanzi, R. E. and
Kovacs, D. M. (2001) Nature Cell Biol., 3,
905–912.
74. Koulen, P., Cal, Y., Geng, L., Maeda, Y.,
Nishimura, S., Witzgall, R., Ehrlich, B. E.
and Somlo, S. (2002) Nature Cell Biol., 4,
191–197.
75. Wu, C., Lai, C-F. and Mobley,W. C. (2001)
J. Neurosci., 21, 5406–5416.
76. Xia, W., Zhang, J., Ostrazewski,B. L., Kimberly, W. T.,
Seubert, P.,
Koo, E. H.,
Shen, J. and Selkoe, D. J. (1998) Biochemistry, 37, 16465–16471.
77. Campbell, W. A., Reed,M. L. O., Strahle,J.,
Wolfe, M. S. and Xia, W. (2003) J. Neurochem., 85, 1563–1574.
78. Kimberly, W. T., LaVoie, M. J., Ostrazewski, B. L., Ye, W., Wolfe, M. S. and
Selkoe,D. J. (2002) J. Biol. Chem., 277,
35113–35117.
79. Iwata, H., Tomita, T., Maruyama, K. and
Iwatsubo, T. (2001) J. Biol. Chem., 276,
21678–21685.
80. Tomita, T., Wayabiki, T., Takikawa, R.,
Morohashi, Y., Takasugi, N., Kopan, R., De
Stropper, B. and Iwatsubo, T. (2001) J.
Biol. Chem., 276, 33273–33281.
81. Chen,F., Yang,D-S., Petanceska,S., Yang,A.,
Tandon, A., Yu, G., Rozmahel, R., Ghiso,J.,
Nishimura, M., Zhang, D. M., Kawarai, T.,
Levesque, G.,
Mills, J.,
Levesque, L.,
Song, Y-Q., Rogaeva, E., Westaway, D.,
Mount, H., Gandy, S., St. George-Hyslop,P.
and Fraser, P. E. (2000) J. Biol. Chem., 275,
36794–36802.
82. Schroder, M., Schafer, R. and Friedl, P.
(2002) Biotech. Bioeng., 78, 131–140.

83. Yu,G., Chen,F., Nishimura,M., Steiner,H.,
Tandon,A.,
Kawarai,T.,
Arawaka,S.,
Supala,A., Song, Y-Q., Rogaeva, E., Holmes, E., Zhang, D. M., Milman, P., Fraser,
P. E., Haass, C. and St George-Hyslop, P.
(2000) J. Biol. Chem., 275, 27348–27353.
84. Yang, D-S., Tandon, A., Chen, F., Yu,G.,
Yu,H., Arawaki,S., Hasegawa,H.,Duthie,M.,
Schmidt, S. D., Ramabhadran,T. V., Nixon,
R. A.,
Mathews, P. M.,
Gandy, S. E.,
Mount, H. T. J., St George-Hyslop, P. and
Fraser, P. E. (2002) J. Biol. Chem., 277,
28135–28142.
85. Gu, Y-J., Chen, F., Sanjo, N., Kawarai, T.,
Hasegawa, H., Duthie,M., Li,W., Ruan, X.,
Luthra, A., Mount, H. T. J., Tandon, A.,
Fraser, P. E. and St George Hyslop, P.
(2003) J. Biol. Chem., 278, 7374–7380.
86. Sabo, S. L., Lanier, L. M., Ikin, A. F.,
Khorkova, O., Sahasrabudhe, S., Greengard,P. and Buxbaum, J. D. (1999) J. Biol.
Chem., 274, 7952–7957.
87. Chen, F., Tandon, A., Sanjo, N., Gu, Y-J.,
Hasegawa, H., Arawaka, S., Lee, F. J. S.,
Ruan, X., Mastrangelo, P., Erdebil, S.,
Wang, L., Westaway, D., Mount, H. T. J.,
Yankner, B., Fraser, P. E. and St George
Hyslop, P. (2003) J. Biol. Chem., 278,
19974–19979.
88. Majoul,I.V., Bastiaens,P. I.H. and Soling,HD. (1996) J. Cell Biol., 133, 777–789.
89. Majoul, I., Ferrari, D. and Soling, H-D.
(1997) FEBS Lett., 401, 104–108.
90. Kuiper, R. P., Bouw, G., Janssen, K. P. C.,
Rotter, J., van Herp, F. and Martens, G. J.
M. (2001) Biochem. J., 360, 421–429.
91. Scheiffele, P., Verkade, P., Fra, A. M.,
Virta, H., Simons, K. and Ikonen, E. (1998)
J. Cell. Biol., 140, 795–806.
92. Love, H. D., Lin, C-C., Short, C. S. and
Ostermann, J. (1998) J. Cell Biol., 140,
541–551.
93. De Leeuw, E., Poland, D., Mol, O., Sinning, I.,
ten
Hagen-Jongman, C. M.,
Oudega, B. and Luirink, J. (1997) FEBS
Lett., 416, 225–229.
94. Joglekar, A. P., Xu, D., Rigotti, D. J., Fairman, R. and Hay, J. C. (2003) J. Biol.
Chem., 278, 14121–14133.
95. Satyanarayana, C.,
Schroder-Kohne, S.,
Craig, E. A., Schu, P. V. and Horst, M.
(2000) FEBS Lett., 470, 232–238.
96. Sheff, D. R., Daro,E. A., Hull,M. and Mellman, I. (1999) J. Cell Biol., 145, 123–139.

PROTOCOL 5.16

97. Sugii, S., Reid, P. C., Ohgami, N., Du, H.
and Chang, T-Y. (2003) J. Biol. Chem., 278,
27180–27189.
98. Chin, L-S., Raynor, M. C., Wei, X., Chen,
H-Q. and Li, L. (2001) J. Biol. Chem., 276,
7069–7078.
99. Meyers, J. M. and Prekeris, R. (2002) J.
Biol. Chem., 277, 49003–49010.
100. Pol, A., Lu, A., Pons, M., Peiro, S. and
Enrich, C. (2000) J. Biol. Chem., 275,
30566–30572.
101. Biemesderfer, D., Mentone, S. A., Mooseker, M. and Hasson, T. (2002) Am. J. Physiol., Ren. Physiol., 282, F785–F794.
102. Billington, D., Maltby, P. J., Jackson, A. P.
and Graham, J. M. (1998) Anal. Biochem.,
258, 251–258.
103. Molinari, M.,
Galli, C.,
Norais, N.,
Telford, J. L., Rappuoli, R., Luzio, J. P. and
Montecucco, C. (1997) J. Biol. Chem., 272,
25339–25344.
104. Ellis, J. A., Jackman, M. R., Perez, J. H.,
Mullock, B. M. and Luzio, J. P. (1992) In:
Protein Targeting: a Practical Approach
(A. I. Magee, and T. Wileman, eds),

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.
110.

111.

199

pp. 25–57. IRL Press at Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK.
Mullock, B. M., Perez, J. H., Kuwana, T.,
Gray, S. R. and Luzio, J. P. (1994) J. Cell
Biol., 126, 1173–1182.
Mullock, B. M., Bright, N. A., Fearon, C.
W., Gray, S. R. and Luzio, J. P. (1998) J.
Cell. Biol., 140, 591–601.
Mullock, B. M., Smith, C. W., Ihrke, G.,
Bright, N. A., Lindsay,M., Parkinson,E. J.,
Brooks, D. A. Parton, R. G., James, D. E.,
Luzio, J. P. and Piper, R. C. (2000) Mol.
Biol. Cell, 11, 3137–3153.
Pryor, P. R., Mullock, B. M., Bright, N. A.,
Gray, SD. R. and Luzio, J. P. (2000) J. Cell
Biol., 149, 1053–1062.
Authier, F. and Chauvet, G. (1999) FEBS
Lett., 461, 25–31.
Authier, F., Danielsen, G. M., Kouach, M.,
Briand, G. and Chauvet, G. (2001) Endocrinology, 142, 276–289.
Desbuquois, B., Chauvet, G., Kouach, M.
and Authier, F. (2003) Endocrinology, 144,
5308–5321.

6
In Vitro Techniques
Edited by J. Robin Harris

Nuclear components
Protocol 6.1
Protocol 6.2
Protocol 6.3
Protocol 6.4
Protocol 6.5
Protocol 6.6
Protocol 6.7
Protocol 6.8
Protocol 6.9
Protocol 6.10
Protocol 6.11

Nucleosome assembly coupled to DNA repair synthesis
using a human cell free system
Single labelling of nascent DNA with halogenated
thymidine analogues
Double labelling of DNA with different halogenated
thymidine analogues
Simultaneous immunostaining of proteins and
halogen-dU-substituted DNA
Uncovering the nuclear matrix in cultured cells
Nuclear matrix–lamin interactions: in vitro blot overlay
assay
Nuclear matrix–lamin interactions: in vitro nuclear
reassembly assay
Preparation of Xenopus laevis egg extracts and
immunodepletion
Nuclear assembly in vitro and immunofluorescence
Nucleocytoplasmic transport measurements using
isolated Xenopus oocyte nuclei
Transport measurements in microarrays of nuclear
envelope patches by optical single transporter recording

204
210
214
217
220
228
230
234
237
240
244

Cells and membrane systems
Protocol 6.12
Protocol 6.13
Protocol 6.14
Protocol 6.15

Cell permeabilization with Streptolysin O
Nanocapsules: a new vehicle for intracellular delivery of
drugs
A rapid screen for determination of the protective role
of antioxidant proteins in yeast
In vitro assessment of neuronal apoptosis

Cell Biology Protocols. Edited by J. Robin Harris, John Graham, David Rickwood
 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-84758-1

248
250
255
259

202

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Protocol 6.16 The mitochondrial permeability transition: PT and
m loss determined in cells or isolated mitochondria
with confocal laser imaging
Protocol 6.17 The mitochondrial permeability transition: measuring
PT and m loss in isolated mitochondria with Rh123
in a fluorometer
Protocol 6.18 The mitochondrial permeability transition: measuring
PT and m loss in cells and isolated mitochondria on
the FACS
Protocol 6.19 Measuring cytochrome c release in isolated
mitochondria by Western blot analysis
Protocol 6.20 Protein import into isolated mitochondria
Protocol 6.21 Formation of ternary SNARE complexes in vitro
Protocol 6.22 In vitro reconstitution of liver
endoplasmic reticulum
Protocol 6.23 Asymmetric incorporation of glycolipids into
membranes and detection of lipid flip-flop movement
Protocol 6.24 Purification of clathrin-coated vesicles from rat brains
Protocol 6.25 Reconstitution of endocytic intermediates on a lipid
monolayer
Protocol 6.26 Golgi membrane tubule formation
Protocol 6.27 Tight junction assembly
Protocol 6.28 Reconstitution of the major light-harvesting chlorophyll
a/b complex into liposomes
Protocol 6.29 Reconstitution of photosystem 2 into liposomes
Protocol 6.30 Golgi–vimentin interaction in vitro and in vivo

265
268
270
271
272
274
277
280
286
288
293
296
300
305
307

Cytoskeletal and fibrillar systems
Protocol 6.31 Microtubule peroxisome interaction
Protocol 6.32 Detection of cytomatrix proteins by immunogold
embedment-free electron microscopy
Protocol 6.33 Tubulin assembly induced by taxol and other
microtubule assembly promoters
Protocol 6.34 Vimentin production, purification, assembly and study
by EPR
Protocol 6.35 Neurofilament assembly
Protocol 6.36 α-Synuclein fibril formation induced by tubulin
Protocol 6.37 Amyloid-β fibril formation in vitro
Protocol 6.38 Soluble Aβ1 – 42 peptide induces tau
hyperphosphorylation in vitro
Protocol 6.39 Anti-sense peptides
Protocol 6.40 Interactions between amyloid-ß and enzymes
Protocol 6.41 Amyloid-ß phosphorylation
Protocol 6.42 Smitin–myosin II coassembly arrays in vitro
Protocol 6.43 Assembly/disassembly of myosin filaments in the
presence of EF-hand calcium-binding protein S100A4
in vitro
Protocol 6.44 Collagen fibril assembly in vitro

313
317
326
331
337
342
345
348
353
359
364
369
372
375

INTRODUCTION

203

Introduction
Modern cell biology is increasing moving onwards from the intact cell or component
isolated directly from the cell, to a consideration of the experimental manipulation and
reassembly of such components.
This chapter dealing with in vitro techniques in cell biology includes a range of recent
methods that loosely fall within the sphere of experimental reconstitution/assembly procedures. The topics included integrate well with those within the other sections of the
book and often rely upon both EM and advanced light microscopical techniques for
assessment of what is achieved or produced experimentally.
Several assays for nuclear components, cellular and membrane systems are presented,
together with the assembly of cytoskeletal proteins. In addition, protocols relating to
in vitro collagen fibrillogenesis, amyloid-β fibrillogenesis, amyloid-β-enzyme interaction
and amyloid-β phosphorylation are also included.
Because of the diversity of this material, most protocols (or a small group of protocols)
includes a brief introduction, its own list of references and sometimes examples of typical
data. It is hoped that these protocols will enable the book to indicate a way ahead for
cell biology, as an addition to the well-used classical procedures dealing with cells and
subcellular components presented in the other chapters of the book.

PROTOCOL 6.1
Nucleosome assembly coupled to DNA repair
synthesis using a human cell free system
Geneviève Almouzni and Doris Kirschner
Introduction
The assembly of nucleosomes onto DNA,
in two steps, involves the loading of a
H3–H4 histone tetramer followed by the
subsequent addition of two H2A–H2B
histone dimers. In vivo, histone deposition is promoted by histone chaperones,
among which the evolutionary conserved
three-subunit complex called the chromatin
assembly factor 1 (CAF-1) is the only one
that links nucleosome formation to DNA
synthesis.
Here we describe an assay to monitor nucleosome assembly coupled to DNA
repair in a human cell free system. The
nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway
used in this assay repairs most of the UVphotoproducts (mainly cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers and 6–4 photoproducts) can
be reproduced in vitro [4, 6].
A cell free extract (cytosolic extract)
derived from Hela cells is thus used for its
ability to support NER reactions on a damaged DNA template. This extract, however,
cannot ensure the assembly into chromatin
of the repaired DNA molecules. It can
be complemented using either a nuclear
extract as a crude source of assembly factors or using purified recombinant assembly factors such as CAF-1 [1, 3].

Reagents
Agarose (Ultra Pure, Sigma)

Ammonium acetate (5 M)
100 mM ATP (Pharmacia) stored at −80 ◦ C
(each aliquot is used only once)
Bacculovirus produced recombinant CAF1 4 ng/µl [5]
Creatine phosphokinase (Boehringer) 2.5
1
mg/ml in H2 O 
Cytosolic extracts derived from HeLa
2 
3
cells [2] 
Ethidium bromide, 10 mg/ml (GIBCO
BRL)
Glycogen, 20 mg/ml (Roche), store at
−20 ◦ C
Loading buffer 5×: 0.42% bromophenol
blue, 50% glycerol
Nuclear extracts from HeLa (4C Biotech/
Belgium or [2])
αP32 dCTP, 3000 Ci/mmol (ICN)
Phenol : chloroform : isoamyl
alcohol
(25 : 24 : 1) (GIBCO BRL)
Proteinase K, 20 mg/ml (Roche), aliquots
stored at −20 ◦ C
5× Reaction buffer: 25 mM MgCl2 , 200
mM Hepes-KOH (pH 7.8), 2.5 mM
dithiothreitol (DTT; Sigma), 200 mM
1
phosphocreatine (di-Tris salt, Sigma) 
RNase A (Roche) 10 mg/ml in 0.01 M
sodium acetate (pH 5.2), heat for 15 min
at 100 ◦ C and adjust the pH with 1 vol
of Tris-HCL (pH 7.4), aliquots stored at
−20 ◦ C

PROTOCOL 6.1

Stop-mix: 30 mM EDTA, 0.7% SDS
TAE 50×: 242 g Tris base, 57.1 ml glacial
acetic acid, 37.2 g Na2 EDTA, (pH 8.0),
adjust to a final volume of 1 l with
deionized water (or 50× TAE from Bio
Media)
TE: 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 1 mM
EDTA (pH 8.0)
UV treated Bluescript plasmid (pBS) DNA
4 [1]
(50 ng/µl) 

Equipment
Eppendorf thermomixer 5436
Eppendorf tubes (1.5 ml, siliconized) (precooled on ice)
Gelbox (35 × 20 cm, Biorad)
Germicidal lamp with a 254 nm peak
(Philips)
Microfuge (e.g. Eppendorf centrifuge
5451)
3 MM Paper (Whatman)
Phosphoimager (Storm 860–Molecular
Dynamics), and Image Quant 5.2 software (or films and standard film developer)
Power supply (Pharmacia Biotech, EPS
3500)
UV transilluminator (BIORAD Gel Doc
2000) equipped with a camera
Vacuum gel dryer (slab gel Dryer, SGD
2000, SAVANT)
Waterbath (e.g. polystat, Bioblock Scientific)

Procedure
A standard reaction contains 150 ng of
4 200–400 µg of cytosoplasmid DNA, 
lic extract, 5 mM MgCl2 , 40 mM HepesKOH (pH 7.8), 0.5 mM DTT, 40 mM
phosphocreatine, 4 mM ATP, 2.5 µg creatine phosphokinase and 5 µCi α32 P dCTP
in 25 µl.

205

1. First, to prepare the DNA-mix, in a
precooled Eppendorf tube, assemble
on ice the following reagents (prepare
a proportionally larger mix for more
1
than one reaction). 
DNA-mix (amounts for one reaction):
3 µl DNA (50 ng/µl), 5 µl 5× reaction buffer, 1 µl ATP, 1 µl creatine
3
kinase, 2.5 µl dilution buffer 
2. For each reaction, distribute 1 µl of
HeLa nuclear extract to precooled
Eppendorf tubes on ice (or a protein
complex to test for nucleosome assembly or buffer controls). In an assay
designed for an antibody inhibition
strategy, you can add the antibodies
or the appropriate control serum at this
5
step. 
3. Add 10 µl of the cytosolic extract (as
source of histones and repair factors)
to each tube except to the DNA
only control in which buffer is added
instead. To preserve optimal activity of
cytosolic extracts, defrost the extract
just prior to use, work quickly and
2
discard any remaining material. 
4. Add α32 P dCTP to the prepared DNAmix (0.5 µl for 150 ng DNA), homogenize gently by pipetting up and down.
5. Start the reaction by adding 13 µl
of DNA-mix containing the labelled
precursor to each reaction tube, and
immediately transfer to a preheated
water bath, or to a thermo-mixer at
37 ◦ C for a 3 h incubation, see note
6 and ref. 1.
6. Stop the reaction with 50 µl of stopmix and 25 µl of H2 O.
7. Add 5 µl of RNase A (at 2 mg/ml)
and incubate 30 min at 37 ◦ C.
8. Add 2 µl of proteinase K (at 20 mg/ml)
7
and incubate 30 min at 37 ◦ C. 
9. Add 110 µl of phenol : chloroform :
isoamyl alcohol (25 : 24 : 1) and vortex

206

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

each tube at least 10 s. Centrifuge
10 min at 14 000g in the Eppendorf
centrifuge at room temperature and
recover 90 µl of the aqueous phase in
a fresh Eppendorf tube; do not take
any of the interphase.
10. Precipitate the DNA by adding of
90 µl ammonium acetate (5 M), 1 µl
of glycogen (20 mg/ml) and 300 µl (2
vol) of ice-cold ethanol, leave 30 min
at −20 ◦ C.
11. Centrifuge 30–45 min at 14 000g at
4 ◦ C, recover the DNA pellet, wash
with 500 µl of cold 70% ethanol, centrifuge for 5–10 min at 14 000 g at
4 ◦ C. Remove the supernatant carefully and air-dry the pellet.
12. Dissolve the pellet in 8 µl of TE buffer
and add 2 µl of 5× loading dye.
13. Prepare a 1% agarose gel in 1× TAE
without ethidium bromide (EtBr). 
8

9
14. Load the samples and migrate at 1.5 V/
cm for 20 h at 4 ◦ C overnight, for opti7
mal resolution of the topoisomers. 
15. Soak the gel in EtBr staining solution
(1µg/ml), rinse for 30 min in water
at room temperature, and place the
gel on a UV transilluminator system
equipped with a camera to visualize
the migration pattern of the total DNA
and make your image acquisition.
16. Transfer the gel onto a 3 MM Whatman paper of equal size, cover with
saran wrap and dry for 2 h at 80 ◦ C in
a vacuum gel dryer. Expose the covered and dried gel to a Phosphoimager
screen to visualize the labelled DNA
(repaired), if not available use an Xray film. Quantification of the topoisomer distribution is carried out on both
the labelled DNA (repaired) and the
total DNA by densitometric scanning
10
of the images. 

Notes

1 Thawing and freezing of the 5×
reaction buffer alter the concentration
of DTT, phosphocreatine and dNTPs.
The buffer is prepared in advance,
aliquoted and stored at −80 ◦ C, use
only once.

2 Cytosolic and nuclear extracts are prepared from unsynchronized adherent
HeLa cells, under cooling conditions
(4 ◦ C), for a detailed protocol see [2].
The protein concentration is determined by Bradford assay and usually
ranges between 10 and 20 mg/ml [2].
Small aliquots of 50–100 µl frozen in
liquid nitrogen are stored at −80 ◦ C to
avoid waste.

3 The cytosolic extract used in this
assay, which contains only trace
amounts of p60 and p150, needs to be
complemented with the nuclear extract
or bacculovirus recombinant CAF-1 to
ensure an efficient chromatin assembly coupled to DNA repair synthesis [1]. For each extract, optimal conditions for both chromatin assembly
and DNA repair synthesis have to
be adjusted (protein/DNA ratio and
ionic conditions). For example, the
composition of the dilution buffer for
commercial (4C) HeLa nuclear extract
is: 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.8), 100 mM
KCl, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.2 mM PMSF,
0.5 mM DTT and 20% glycerol. This
has to be taken into account.

4 Plasmid DNA is treated with germicidal UV light (Philips) with 254 nm
peak and a dose of 500 J/m2 . The general estimation of DNA damage produced by 100 J/m2 is roughly 1 pyrimidine dimer photoproduct per 1000 bp
(the ratio is about 0.75 cyclobutane
pyrimidine and 0.25 of 6-4 photo
product) [1, 5].

PROTOCOL 6.1
−
−
−
−
−

NE
CAF-1
PI
anti-p60
anti-p150

+
−
−
−
−

−
+
−
−
−

+
−
+
−
−

+
−
−
+
−

207

+
−
−
−
+

−Ir/II

Topoisomer
distribution of
labelled
DNA
−I

−Ir/II
Topoisomer
distribution of
total
DNA

−I
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Figure 6.1 Chromatin assembly coupled to nucleotide excision repair synthesis mediated by CAF-1.
UV-damaged DNA substrate was incubated in cytosolic extract (CE) competent for NER and complemented with nuclear extracts (NE) or recombinant CAF-1 to ensure the nucleosome assembly reaction.
Lane 1 shows a DNA-only control (supercoiled DNA molecules) and lane 2 the DNA after incubation
with cytosolic extract, which promotes the relaxation of the DNA and NER, which is visualized by the
incorporation of radiolabelled nucleotides. Subsequent supercoiling of the repaired DNA is dependent
upon addition of CAF-1, either as nuclear extract (lane 3) or as recombinant complex (lane 4). In this
assay the CAF-1 dependent nucleosome formation was largely impaired by the addition of 1 µl of
polyclonal antibodies directed respectively against the p60 subunit (lane 6) or the p150 subunit (lane
7) of CAF-1 and compared with a pre-immune (PI) serum (lane 5). Total DNA is visualized after
ethidium bromide staining (lower panel) and radiolabel incorporation due to repair synthesis (labelled
DNA) is visualized on a phosphoimager screen of the dried gel (upper panel). Relaxed/nicked circular
DNA (Ir/II) and supercoiled DNA (I) are indicated


5 When antibodies are used as in Figure
6.1, the quantity added has to be
adjusted for each serum or clone.

6 Nucleotide excision repair as followed
by the DNA synthesis and chromatin

assembly reactions is usually completed after 3 h. Although specific
UV-dependent nucleotide incorporation can be detected already after
15 min, the chromatin assembly reaction is a slower process [1].

208

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES


7 To monitor chromatin assembly, the
supercoiling assay makes use of the
topological properties of closed circular molecules. In the extracts, which
contain topoisomerase activity, the
deposition of nucleosomes induces
topological stress that is relieved
progressively. Therefore, after deproteinization, accumulation of topoisomers with an increasing number of
negative supercoils can be used as
an indication of the effectiveness of
the assembly reaction. The repaired
molecules (labelled DNA) are compared to the bulk DNA (total DNA)
to evaluate a differential effect.

8 The concentration of the agarose gel
is adjusted according to the size of the
plasmid used. As a guideline, use 1%
agarose gels for plasmids of 3–4 kb
and 0.8% gels for plasmids of 6–7 kb
in size.

9 It is crucial to run the supercoiling gel
in the absence of EtBr. This intercalating agent would interfere with the
analysis of the topological state of the
molecules.

10 The radiolabelled DNA corresponds
to incorporation of nucleotides during repair synthesis (one of the steps
in NER) and can be analysed quantitatively and qualitatively using the
Image Quant 5.2 software. Adapt the
exposure time depending on the repair
efficiency of the extract used. A higher
proportion of supercoiled molecules in
the radiolabelled DNA as compared to
total DNA is indicative of a preferential assembly of repaired molecules,

reflecting a link between repair synthesis and nucleosome assembly.

References
1. Gaillard, P. H., Roche, D. M. and Almouzni,
G. A. (1999) Meth. Mol. Biol., 119, 231–243.
2. Martini, E., Roche, D. M., Marheineke, K.,
Verreault, A., and Almouzni, G. A. (1998)
Recruitment of phosphorylated chromatin assembly factor 1 to chromatin after UV irradiation of human cells. J. Cell Biol., 143,
563–575.
3. Mello, J. A., Sillje, H. H., Roche, D. M.,
Kirschner, D. B., Nigg, E. A. and Almouzni,
G. A. (2002) Human Asf1 and CAF-1 interact and synergize in a repair-coupled nucleosome assembly pathway. EMBO Rep. 3(4),
329–334.
4. Moggs, J. G. and Almouzni, G. A. (1999) Assays for chromatin remodeling during DNA
repair. Meth. Enzymol., 304, 333–351.
5. Verreault, A., Kaufman, P. D., Kobayashi, R.
and Stillman, B. (1996) Nucleosome assembly
by a complex of CAF-1 and acetylated histones
H3/H4. Cell, 87, 95–104.
6. Wood, R. D., Biggerstaff, M. and Shivji,
M. K. K. (1995) Detection and measurement
of nucleotide excision repair synthesis by
mammalian cell extracts in vitro. Methods: A
Companion to Methods Enzymol., 7, 163–175.

Acknowledgements
We thank Alain Verreault for the generous
gift of CAF-1, Jill Mello for advice and
Catherine Green for reading and critical
comments. D.B.K. was supported by the
EEC-RTN (to G.A.), the team of G.A. is
supported by the Ligue Contre le Cancer,
Euratom, EU-RTN and LCR of CEA.

PROTOCOLS 6.2–6.4
Immunocytochemical studies of DNA
replication in mammalian nuclei
Daniela Dimitrova
Introduction
Indirect immunofluorescent staining of
newly synthesized DNA and/or proteins of
the replication machinery has emerged as
a powerful technique for identification of
proliferating cells [1] and for cancer diag-

nosis or prognosis [2, 3], as well as for
studies of cell cycle kinetics [1, 4], intra-Sphase checkpoint control [5], organization
of nuclear DNA replication sites [6, 7],
establishment and execution of the temporal program for chromosomal DNA replication during the S-phase [8].

PROTOCOL 6.2
Single labelling of nascent DNA with
halogenated thymidine analogues

Reagents
Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS): 8 g NaCl,
0.2 g KCl, 1.44 g Na2 HPO4 and 0.24 g
KH2 PO4 per litre at pH 7.2
PBS-T: PBS containing 0.5% (v/v) Tween
20 (Sigma)
Halogenated nucleosides: stock solutions
of 10 mg/ml of 5-bromo-2 -deoxyuridine (BrdU, Sigma), 5-chloro-2 -deoxyuridine (CldU, Sigma), or 5-iodo-2 deoxyuridine (IdU, Sigma) are prepared
in cell culture medium (without serum)
at pH 7.2. Store frozen at −20 ◦ C in
small aliquots
Antibodies: (A) Mouse anti-BrdU (No.
347580; Becton Dickinson) is used for
detection of BrdU, CldU and IdU [1].
(B) Rat anti-BrdU (MAS250b; HarlanSera lab) is used for detection of BrdU
and CldU [1]. (C) Secondary antibodies:
FITC-conjugated donkey anti-rat IgG
(No. 712-095-153; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) or FITC-conjugated
donkey anti-mouse IgG (No. 715-095151; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) are used to detect the rat or mouse
anti-BrdU antibodies, respectively
Blocking buffer: to suppress non-specific
binding of antibodies to coverslips or
to cellular material, antibody dilutions
are made in PBS containing 2% bovine
serum albumin and either 10% normal
donkey serum, or 10% fetal bovine

serum. Supplement with NaN3 at 1 mM
final concentration and store at 4 ◦ C
DNA staining dye: a stock solution of
1 mg/ml of 4 ,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Sigma) is prepared in
ddH2 O and stored frozen in small
aliquots at −20 ◦ C. A working solution
of 10 µg/ml can be kept at 4 ◦ C

Materials and equipment
Sterile glass coverslips
Cell culture dishes and medium
A pair of fine sharp forceps
Dark humid incubation chamber
Plain glass slides (3 × 1 )
Mounting medium for fluorescent microscopy, e.g. Vectashield (Vector Laboratories)
Epifluorescent microscope

Procedure
1. Grow cells directly on glass cover1 submerged in medium inside
slips 
2
Multi-well
cell culture dishes. 
dishes can be used if cell cultures need
to be grown in separate chambers.
Alternatively, several coverslips can
be placed within a single dish. Make
sure that the coverslips do not overlap.
2. Add the nucleotide precursor of choice
(i.e. BrdU, CldU or IdU) to the culture
medium to a final concentration of

PROTOCOL 6.2

10 µM. Mix gently by swirling the
dish, taking care not to disturb the
coverslips, and quickly return the dish
to the cell culture incubator.
3. Incubate at 37 ◦ C for several minutes to allow incorporation of the
thymidine analogue into nascent DNA
3
within the S-phase cells. 
4. Aspirate the medium and wash the
cells with ice-cold PBS to stop the
labelling and to remove traces of
medium and unincorporated nucleosides.
5. Fix the cells with cold 70% ethanol for
4
at least 30 min at 4 ◦ C. 
6. It is convenient to perform the subsequent immunostaining steps by transferring the desired number of coverslips into multi-well dishes. In this
way many coverslips can be processed
in batches, while ensuring easy and
precise tracking of the individual cov5
erslips. 
7. Remove the ethanol and rinse the cells
once with PBS.
8. Incubate the cells in 1.5 N HCl for
30 min at room temperature. 
6
9. Remove the HCl and rinse several
times with ample volumes of PBS.
Make sure that the pH is neutral at the
end of the washing.
10. Wash once with PBS-T. 
7
11. Remove the coverslips from the wells
of the dish and blot the excess liquid
by placing them on a piece of soft
tissue (e.g. Kleenex or similar). Do not
handle more than five to six coverslips
at a time to avoid drying of the cells.
12. Invert each coverslip (cell side
8 over a drop of anti-BrdU
down) 
antibody diluted in blocking solution.
Drops of 3–4 µl, or 7–8 µl, work

211

well with 12 mm, or 18 mm coverslips, respectively. Dilutions (usually
in the range of 1 : 20–1 : 500) must be
optimized empirically for each antibody. The drops can be placed on
any type of clean hydrophobic surface, e.g. a piece of Parafilm. In cases
when numerous coverslips must be
processed simultaneously, it is best to
invert the coverslips onto microscope
glass slides, which can then be stacked
into tight-closing slide storage boxes.
13. Incubate for 1 h at room tempera9 in a humid chamber to preture 
vent the cells from drying. A humid
chamber can be improvised by placing a layer of wet filter paper inside a
covered plastic dish or along the inner
side of the cover of a microscope slide
storage box.
14. Lift the coverslips carefully (avoid
dragging along the surface, which can
cause cell damage and/or loss) and
return to the washing dish. Wash twice
with PBS-T.
15. Remove the coverslips from the wells
as described in steps 11–12 and
place over drops with an appropriate fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibody diluted in blocking
solution (1 : 100–1 : 1000).
16. Incubate for 1 h at room temperature
10
in a dark humid chamber. 
17. Return the coverslips to the washing
dish. Wash twice with PBS-T.
18. Counterstain the nuclei by incubating
in 0.2 µg/ml solution of DAPI in
PBS for 10 min at room temperature.
Alternatively, this step can be skipped
and DAPI can be diluted directly in
the mounting medium.
19. Mount the coverslips (cell side down)
over drops of Vectashield placed on
clean microscope slides and observe

212

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

using an epifluorescent microscope.
Do not allow the coverslips to dry out.
If long-term preservation is desired,
blot excess mounting medium and
seal the coverslips with colourless nail
polish. Store inside microscope slide
11
boxes at 4 ◦ C or at −20 ◦ C. 

Notes
This procedure will take approximately
5 h.


1 Use clean forceps when handling coverslips and always open the box with
coverslips under a laminar hood to
avoid contaminations. If these conditions are observed, additional sterilization of the coverslips is not usually
required. However, if contamination
occurs, the coverslips can be sterilized
by immersing in ethanol and flaming.

2 For best results, seed the cells ∼24 h
before labelling to allow sufficient
time for attachment and good spreading of the cells. Seed the cells
sparsely, so that the culture is ∼30–
50% confluent at the time of labelling.
This ensures optimal cell growth conditions and also helps to reduce nonspecific background fluorescence.

3 The duration of the pulse would
depend on the purpose of the experiment. Limit pulses to 2–5 min when
labelling of short nascent DNA chains
close to the replication forks is desired.
Longer pulses (10–30 min), resulting
in brighter staining, can be administered when the length of the labelled
DNA segment is of no importance
(e.g. for scoring the percentage of Sphase cells in the cell population).

4 Fixed cells can be stored indefinitely
under these conditions, provided that
care is taken not to allow the ethanol

to evaporate (e.g. seal the dishes with
Parafilm). After this step, it is critical
not to allow the cells to dry out,
since this will result in destruction of
cell/nuclear morphology.


5 The fragile coverslips must be handled
carefully during transfers to avoid
breaking. Use fine sharp-point forceps
to lift the coverslips from inside the
wells of the dish. Keeping the wells
full facilitates the process, since the
liquid momentarily supports the lifted
coverslip in an upright position.

6 This step is critical for successful
immunostaining. The brief HCl treatment causes mild depurination of
DNA, thus exposing the BrdU bases
buried inside the double helix for
binding by the anti-BrdU antibodies.
If staining is weak or absent, troubleshoot by increasing the HCl concentration (e.g. incubate in 3 N HCl
for 15 min at room temperature).

7 Typically, each washing step is performed for 5–10 min at room temperature. After incubations with fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies, the
washing steps must be performed in
the dark (e.g. cover the dishes with
aluminum foil).

8 Since the small fragile coverslips are
hard to mark, special attention must
be paid to track the side on which the
cells are attached and not to flip the
coverslips.

9 The incubation times are flexible. To
accelerate the procedure, incubations
can be carried out for 30 min. at 37 ◦ C.
Alternatively, longer incubations (e.g.
several hours, overnight, or up to few
days) can be performed at 4 ◦ C.

10 If a cell culture dish is used as a humid
chamber, place a piece of aluminum
foil over it to prevent exposure to

PROTOCOL 6.2

light. Alternatively, place the dish
inside a dark cabinet or drawer.


11 Two types of control experiments
must be performed to eliminate the
possibility of non-specific immunostaining:
(A) Perform the procedure with cells
that have not been labelled with a
halogenated thymidine analogue,
i.e. skip steps 1–3. No immunofluorescent signal should be visible and all cells must appear
unlabelled in the FITC (green)
channel. The DAPI-stained nuclei
can be observed and/or counted in
the UV (blue) channel.
(B) Perform the procedure with cells
that have been labelled with
a halogenated thymidine analogue, but omit the primary antiBrdU antibody, i.e. skip steps
12–14. No immunofluorescent
signal should be visible and
all cells must appear unlabelled
in the FITC (green) channel.
The DAPI-stained nuclei can be
observed and/or counted in the
UV (blue) channel.
If non-specific fluorescent background is
present:
(i) increase the number and/or duration
of the washing steps;
(ii) decrease the concentration of the
primary or secondary antibodies;
(iii) test different batches of antibodies.

Safety precautions
Some chemicals used in the procedure
are hazardous (e.g. HCl, Tween 20,

213

concentrated BrdU, IdU or CldU) and
contact with skin must be avoided. Wear
gloves when performing the procedure.

References
1. Aten, J. A., Bakker, P. J. M., Stap, J.,
Boschman, G. A. and Veenhof, C. H. N. (1992)
DNA double labelling with IdUrd and CldUrd
for spatial and temporal analysis of cell
proliferation and DNA replication. Histochem.
J., 24, 251–259.
2. Freeman, A., Morris, L. S., Mills, A. D., Stoeber, K., Laskey, R. A., Williams, G. H. and
Coleman, N. (1999) Minichromosome maintenance proteins as biological markers of dysplasia and malignancy. Clin. Cancer Res., 5,
2121–2132.
3. Hunt, D. P., Freeman, A., Morris, L. S., Burnet, N. G., Bird, K., Davies, T. W., Laskey,
R. A. and Coleman, N. (2002) Early recurrence of benign meningioma correlates with
expression of mini-chromosome maintenance2 protein. Br. J. Neurosurg., 16, 10–15.
4. Shibui, S., Hoshino, T., Vanderlaan, M. and
Gray, J. W. (1989) Double labeling with iodoand bromodeoxyuridine for cell kinetics studies. J. Histochem. Cytochem., 37, 1007–1011.
5. Dimitrova, D. S. and Gilbert, D. M. (2000)
Temporally coordinated assembly and
disassembly of replication factories in the
absence of DNA synthesis. Nat. Cell Biol., 2,
686–694.
6. Dimitrova, D. S. and Berezney, R. (2002) The
spatio-temporal organization of DNA replication sites is identical in primary, immortalized
and transformed mammalian cells. J. Cell Sci.,
115, 4037–4051.
7. Manders, E. M., Stap, J., Strackee, J., van Driel, R. and Aten, J. A. (1996) Dynamic behavior of DNA replication domains. Exp. Cell
Res., 226, 328–335.
8. Dimitrova, D. S. and Gilbert, D. M. (1999)
The spatial position and replication timing of
chromosomal domains are both established in
early G1 phase. Mol. Cell, 4, 983–993.

PROTOCOL 6.3
Double labelling of DNA with different
halogenated thymidine analogues

Reagents, materials and equipment
Most reagents and equipment are the same
as in Protocol 6.2.
Antibodies: in addition to the antibodies listed in Protocol 6.2, Texas Redconjugated donkey anti-rat IgG (No.
712-075-153; Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories) or Texas Redconjugated donkey anti-mouse IgG (No.
715-075-151; Jackson ImmunoResearch
Laboratories) are used to detect the rat
or mouse anti-BrdU antibodies, respectively
High-salt washing buffer (TNT): 50 mM
Tris-HCl, 0.5 M NaCl and 0.5% (v/v)
Tween 20, pH 8

Procedure
1. Grow cells on coverslips as described
in step 1 of Protocol 6.2.
2. Add IdU to the culture medium to
a final concentration of 10 µM. Mix
gently by swirling the dish and quickly
return the dish to the cell culture
incubator.
3. Incubate at 37 ◦ C for the desired
time to allow IdU incorporation into
nascent DNA within the S-phase
1
cells. 
4. Aspirate the medium and rinse the
cells two to three times with ample
volumes of warm (37 ◦ C) PBS or

medium to remove all traces of exoge2
nous IdU. 
5. Fill the dish with warm free medium
and return to the cell culture incubator
1
for the desired period of time. 
6. Administer a second pulse-label by
3 to the medium to a
adding CldU 
final concentration of 10–100
4 Mix gently by swirling the
µM. 
dish and quickly return the dish to the
cell culture incubator.
7. Incubate at 37 ◦ C for the desired
time to allow CldU incorporation into
1
nascent DNA. 
8. Aspirate the medium and wash the
cells with ice-cold PBS to stop the
labelling and to remove traces of
medium and unincorporated CldU.
9. Fix the cells with cold 70% ethanol
and depurinate DNA following steps
5–11 of Protocol 6.2. The subsequent immunostaining procedure for
double-labelled DNA generally follows the protocol developed by Aten
et al. [1].
10. Incubate the cells for 1 h at room
5 with the rat antitemperature 
BrdU antibody diluted in blocking
6
solution. 
11. Wash twice with PBS-T. 
7
12. Incubate the cells for 1 h at room
temperature with the FITC-conjugated

PROTOCOL 6.3

donkey anti-rat IgG diluted in blocking solution.
13. Wash twice with PBS-T.
14. Incubate the cells for 1 h at room
temperature with the mouse anti-BrdU
8 diluted in blocking soluantibody 
tion.
15. Wash twice with TNT.
16. Wash once with PBS-T.
17. Incubate the cells for 1 h at room
temperature with the Texas Red9 donkey anti-mouse IgG
conjugated 
diluted in blocking solution.
18. Wash twice with PBS-T.
19. Counterstain the nuclei with DAPI and
mount the coverslips as described in
steps 18–19 of Protocol 6.2. Observe
10
using an epifluorescent microscope. 

Notes
Depending on the length of the chase
period, this procedure may take from
several hours to several days.


1 The duration of the pulse and chase
periods is determined by the purpose
of the experiment. When cultured
during long chase periods (e.g. several
days), the cells must be passaged to
ensure proper cell density and optimal
growth conditions. In this case, the
cells are initially grown directly in
tissue culture dishes during the first
label and most of the chase period, and
are subsequently seeded on coverslips,
preferably ∼24 h before the second
label.

2 When followed by long chase periods (>2 h), 200 µM thymidine can
be added to the PBS during the first
washing step to promote the immediate cease of IdU incorporation. However, use of concentrated thymidine is

215

not recommended when short chase
periods (≤1 h) separate the two labels,
because it prevents the efficient incorporation of CldU during the second
pulse-label.


3 The order of addition of IdU and
CldU is of no importance and can be
reversed.

4 Following short chase periods (<1 h),
it is recommended to use higher
concentrations of CldU (e.g. 100 µM)
during the second label to ensure
the preferential incorporation of CldU
over any residual IdU persisting inside
the cells.

5 All incubations must be performed
in a dark humid chamber to prevent
the cells from drying and the fluorochromes from bleaching. See also
note 9 in Protocol 6.2.

6 The final concentrations must be optimized for each batch of antibodies.
Start by testing primary antibody dilutions in the range of 1 : 20–1 : 500,
and secondary antibody dilutions in
the range of 1 : 100–1 : 1000.

7 Typically, each washing step is performed for 5–10 min at room temperature. After incubations with fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies, the
washing steps must be performed in
the dark (e.g. cover the dishes with
aluminum foil).

8 The order of incubation with the
primary rat and mouse anti-BrdU
antibodies is important [1] and the
sequence described in the procedure
must be followed strictly.

9 The exact combination of fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibodies
used to detect the rat and mouse antiBrdU antibodies is of no importance
and fluorochromes can be selected
at freedom with consideration for

216

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

the specific needs of each individual
experiment (e.g. Texas Red-conjugated donkey anti-rat IgG in combination
with FITC-conjugated donkey antimouse IgG can be used with equal
success). When choosing secondary
antibodies, however, it is essential
to select the highly cross-adsorbed
forms to avoid non-specific crossspecies reactivity.


10 Three types of control experiments
must be performed to eliminate the
possibility of non-specific immunostaining:
(A) Perform the complete procedure
with cells that have not been
labelled, i.e. skip steps 1–8. No
immunofluorescent signal should
be visible and all cells must
appear unlabelled in the FITC
(green) and Texas Red (red) channels. The DAPI-stained nuclei
can be observed and/or counted
in the UV (blue) channel. This
experiment will control for nonspecific reactivity by all antibodies.
(B) Perform the procedure with cells
that have been labelled with
a single halogenated thymidine
analogue (e.g. either IdU or
CldU). Incubate the cells with
the primary anti-BrdU antibody,
which recognizes the respective
halogenated nucleoside (e.g. the
mouse anti-BrdU antibody in the
case of IdU labelling, or the rat
anti-BrdU antibody in the case
of CldU labelling). Then use
‘the wrong secondary antibody’,
i.e. the FITC-conjugated donkey
anti-rat IgG to detect the mouse
anti-BrdU antibody within IdUlabelled cells, or the Texas Redconjugated donkey anti-mouse
IgG to detect the rat anti-BrdU

antibody within CldU-labelled
cells. No immunofluorescent signal should be visible and all
cells must appear unlabelled in
the FITC (green) and Texas Red
(red) channels. This experiment
will provide control for the specificity of the secondary antibodies.
(C) Perform the complete procedure
with cells that have been labelled
with a single halogenated thymidine analogue (e.g. either IdU
or CldU). The positive (S-phase)
nuclei must be stained in one
colour only, i.e. nuclei must be
stained only in red within IdUlabelled cells, or only in green
within CldU-labelled cells. This
experiment will provide control
for the specificity of the primary
antibodies.
If non-specific fluorescent background is
present:
(i) increase the number and/or duration
of the washing steps;
(ii) decrease the concentration of the
primary or secondary antibodies;
(iii) test different batches of antibodies.

Safety precautions
Some chemicals used in the procedure are
hazardous (e.g. HCl, Tween 20, concentrated BrdU, IdU or CldU) and contact with
skin must be avoided. Wear gloves when
performing the procedure.

Reference
1. Aten, J. A., Bakker, P. J. M., Stap, J.,
Boschman, G. A. and Veenhof, C. H. N. (1992)
DNA double labelling with IdUrd and CldUrd
for spatial and temporal analysis of cell
proliferation and DNA replication. Histochem.
J., 24, 251–259.

PROTOCOL 6.4
Simultaneous immunostaining of proteins
and halogen-dU-substituted DNA

Reagents, materials and equipment
Most reagents and equipment are the same
as in Protocols 6.2 and 6.3.
1. Antibodies: in addition to the antibodies listed in Protocols 6.2 and 6.3,
primary antibodies recognizing specific cellular proteins must be available. Appropriate highly cross-adsorbed
fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibodies must also be obtained to detect
the respective primary antibodies.
2. Fixative: use fresh formaldehyde solution prepared by depolymerization of
paraformaldehyde (Sigma). Formaldehyde is toxic and the fixative must be
prepared in a chemical fume hood. To
prepare 100 ml 4% formaldehyde in
PBS, dissolve 4 g paraformaldehyde in
∼40 ml ddH2 O by heating to 60–65 ◦ C
and vigorous mixing. Add 10 N NaOH
drop by drop until the white powder
is completely dissolved (around neutral
pH). Remove from the heat and add
50 ml of 2× concentrated PBS. Adjust
the pH to 7.2, then bring to 100 ml
by adding ddH2 O. The fixative can be
stored at 4 ◦ C for 1–2 weeks.
3. Permeabilizing solution: 0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100 (Sigma) in PBS.

Procedure
1. Grow cells on coverslips as described
in step 1 of Protocol 6.2.

2. Depending on the purpose of the
experiment, single- or double-label the
cells with CldU and/or IdU following
the procedures described in Protocols
6.2 and 6.3.
3. Aspirate the cell culture medium and
wash the cells with ice-cold PBS.
4. Remove the PBS and add appropriate
1 Three frequently used
fixative. 
fixatives are described below, but
other reagents or combinations of
fixatives can be tested.
Incubate the cells in:
(A) 4% formaldehyde in PBS for
2 or
10 min, 
(B) cold methanol for 30 min. at
−20 ◦ C, or
(C) cold ethanol : acetic acid (19 : 1)
for 30 min at −20 ◦ C.
5. Remove the fixative and wash several
times with ample volumes of PBS.
6. Incubate the cells for 10 min at room
temperature with permeabilizing solu3 to ensure access of the antition 
4
bodies to their targets. 
7. Remove the permeabilizing solution
and wash several times with ample
volumes of PBS.
8. Incubate the cells for 1 h at room tem5 with a primary antibody
perature 
6 ) that
(diluted in blocking solution 
recognizes the protein of interest.
7
9. Wash twice with PBS-T. 

218

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

10. Incubate the cells for 1 h at room
temperature with appropriate fluorochrome-conjugated secondary antibody to detect the protein target-bound
primary antibody.
11. Wash twice with PBS-T.
12. Fix the cells again with 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 10 min. 
8
13. Remove the fixative and wash several
times with ample volumes of PBS.
14. Incubate the cells in 3 N HCl for
15 min at room temperature to depurinate DNA.
15. Remove the HCl and rinse several
times with ample volumes of PBS.
Make sure that the pH is neutral at the
end of the washing.
16. Wash once with PBS-T.
17. Depending on the type of DNA
labelling, follow steps 11–17 of Protocol 6.2, or steps 10–18 of Protocol
6.3 to immunostain the halogen-dUsubstituted DNA.
18. Counterstain the nuclei with DAPI and
mount the coverslips as described in
steps 18–19 of Protocol 6.2. Observe
using an epifluorescent microscope. 
9

Notes
Depending on the length of the pulse/chase
period(s), this procedure may take from
several hours to several days.


1 Since the immunostaining of halogendU-substituted DNA is not dependent
on the fixation method, the choice of
fixative is dictated by the properties
and sensitivity of the protein target.
Try several different fixation procedures when testing new primary antibodies.


2 The type, concentration and temperature of fixative and the length of treatment need to be determined empirically for each protein.

3 Treatment with acetone for 1–2 min
can be used as an alternative to TritonPBS.

4 Since methanol and ethanol both fix
and simultaneously permeabilize the
cells, additional permeabilization is
usually not required.

5 All incubations must be performed
in a dark humid chamber to prevent
the cells from drying and the fluorochromes from bleaching. See also
note 9 in Protocol 6.2.

6 The final concentrations must be optimized for each antibody. Start by
testing primary antibody dilutions in
the range of 1 : 10–1 : 500, and secondary antibody dilutions in the range
of 1 : 100–1 : 1000.

7 Typically, each washing step is performed for 5–10 min at room temperature. After incubations with fluorochrome-conjugated antibodies, the
washing steps must be performed in
the dark (e.g. cover the dishes with
aluminum foil).

8 During this step, the antibodies used
to detect proteins are covalently fixed
in their positions. It is essential to perform the immunostaining in this order,
since the subsequent depurination of
DNA with HCl can be destructive for
many cellular components and, if performed first, can cause the loss or
redistribution of protein antigen epitopes [1, 2].

9 Control experiments similar to those
described in note 11 of Protocol 6.2
and note 10 of Protocol 6.3 must be
performed to test the specificity of all
antibodies.

PROTOCOL 6.4

219

Safety precautions

References

Some chemicals used in the procedure are
hazardous (e.g. HCl, Tween 20, concentrated BrdU, IdU or CldU) and contact with
skin must be avoided. Wear gloves when
performing the procedure. Formaldehyde
solutions must be prepared and handled in
a chemical fume hood.

1. Dimitrova, D. S. and Berezney, R. (2002) The
spatio-temporal organization of DNA replication sites is identical in primary, immortalized
and transformed mammalian cells. J. Cell Sci.,
115, 4037–4051.
2. Humbert, C. and Usson, Y. (1992) Eukaryotic
DNA replication is a topographically ordered
process. Cytometry, 13, 603–614.

PROTOCOL 6.5
Uncovering the nuclear matrix in cultured cells
Jeffrey A. Nickerson, Jean Underwood and Stefan Wagner
Introduction
Nucleic acid metabolism is temporally
and architecturally organized in the cell
nucleus on two nucleic acid containing structures: the DNA containing chromatin and an RNA containing fibrogranular ribonucleoprotein (RNP) network [1].
This RNP network seen in unextracted
nuclei by selective staining for RNA is the
nuclear matrix (reviewed in ref. 2). Electron microscopy shows that the RNP network consists of interconnected structures
including the splicing factor-rich interchromatin granule clusters and the perichromatin fibrils which are enriched in new
transcripts [1, 3].
The spatial distribution of nuclear domains where transcription, RNA splicing,
DNA replication and other nuclear functions occur, remains unchanged after the
removal of chromatin, suggesting that
the nuclear matrix and not chromatin is
the fundamental structure organizing the
nucleus (reviewed by Nickerson [2]). Over
the years numerous protocols have been
developed to separate the nuclear matrix
from chromatin, based on the first procedure of Berezney and Coffey [4]. A
conservative nuclear matrix preparation
should preserve the ultrastructure of the
RNP network. In this protocol, we present
two methods for uncovering the nuclear
matrix in cultured cells. The first uncovers a structure with excellent preservation of RNP network ultrastructure [5].

This is achieved by cross-linking proteins
before the removal of chromatin. The
second method, performed without crosslinking, is less conservative and removes
more proteins but reveals that the nuclear
matrix is constructed on an underlying network of branched 10 nm filaments [6] (see
Figure 6.2).

Reagents
Electron microscopy grade formaldehyde
(16% w/v solution stored under inert
gas) Ted Pella (cat. no. 18505)
RNase-free DNase I, e.g. Roche (cat. no.
776 785)
Serine protease inhibitor, 4-(2-aminoethyl)
benzenesulfonyl fluoride (AEBSF),
Roche under the trade name Pefabloc
SC, or from Sigma-Aldrich (cat. no.
76307)
Triton X-100, protein grade, as a 10%
solution from Roche
Other extraction chemicals (Roche)
Vanadyl riboside complex (VRC), SigmaAldrich Co. (cat. no. 94740) or New
England Biolabs (cat. no. S1402S)

Solutions
Cytoskeletal buffer: (10 mM PIPES, pH
6.8, 300 mM sucrose, 100 mM NaCl, 3 mM
MgCl2 and 1 mM EGTA)

To make 1 l of the stock solution use
3.024 g of PIPES, 102.69 g of sucrose,

PROTOCOL 6.5

221

(a)

(b)

Figure 6.2 The ultrastructure of the cross-link stabilized nuclear matrix. The nuclear matrix of a CaSki
cell was prepared by the cross-link stabilized nuclear matrix preparation procedure and visualized by
resinless section electron microscopy. (a) The nuclear matrix consisted of two parts, the nuclear lamina
(L) and a network of intricately structured fibres connected to the lamina and well distributed through
the nuclear volume. The matrices of nucleoli (Nu) remained and were connected to the fibres of the
internal nuclear matrix. Three remnant nucleoli may be seen in this section. Few intermediate filaments
were connected to the outside of the lamina. (b) Seen at higher magnification the highly structured
fibres of the internal nuclear matrix seemed to be built on an underlying structure of 10 nm filaments
which are occasionally branched. These were seen most clearly when, for short stretches, they were
free of covering material (arrowheads). The classical nuclear matrix procedure, when used with the
2 M NaCl step, uncovers this network of core filaments. The bar shown in panel (a) represents 1 µM
and in panel (b) it is 100 nm. This figure is reproduced with permission from ref. 6

5.844 g of NaCl, 0.6099 g of MgCl2 ·
6H2 O and 0.3804 g of EGTA. Titrate to
pH 6.8 with 1 M NaOH. Freeze in aliquots
at −20 ◦ C.
Before use VRC is added to a final
concentration of 2 mM from the 100×
stock solution, and AEBSF is added to
a final concentration of 1 mM from the
100× stock solution. Additionally, for

some experiments Triton X-100 is added
to a final concentration of 0.5% from the
20× stock solution.
Extraction buffer: (10 mM PIPES, pH 6.8,
250 mM ammonium sulfate, 300 mM
sucrose, 3 mM MgCl2 , 1 mM EGTA)

To make 1 l of this stock solution use
3.024 g of PIPES, 102.69 g of sucrose,

222

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

33.035 g of ammonium sulfate, 0.6099 g
of MgCl2 ·6H2 O, and 0.3804 g of EGTA.
Titrate to pH 6.8 with 1 M NaOH. Freeze
in aliquots at −20 ◦ C.
Prior to use, Triton X-100 is added to a
final concentration of 0.5% from the 20×
stock solution, VRC is added to a final
concentration of 2 mM from the 100×
stock solution, and AEBSF is added to
a final concentration of 1 mM from the
100× stock solution.

Digestion buffer: (10 mM PIPES, pH 6.8,
300 mM sucrose, 50 mM NaCl, 3 mM
MgCl2 , 1 mM EGTA)

To make 1 l of this stock solution use
3.024 g of PIPES, 102.69 g of sucrose,
2.922 g of NaCl, 0.6099 g of MgCl2 ·
6H2 O and 0.3804 g of EGTA. Titrate to
pH 6.8 with 1 M NaOH. Freeze in aliquots
at −20 ◦ C.
Before use, Triton X-100 is added to a
final concentration of 0.5% from the 20×
stock solution, VRC is added to a final
concentration of 2 mM from the 100×
stock solution, and AEBSF is added to
a final concentration of 1 mM from the
100× stock solution.

2M NaCl buffer: (10 mM PIPES, pH 6.8,
300 mM sucrose, 2 M NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2 ,
1 mM EGTA)

To make 1 l of this stock solution use
3.024 g of PIPES, 102.69 g of sucrose,
116.88 g of NaCl, 0.6099 g of MgCl2 ·
6H2 O and 0.3804 g of EGTA. Titrate to
pH 6.8 with 1 M NaOH. Freeze in aliquots
at −20 ◦ C.
Before using, VRC is added to a final
concentration of 2 mM from the 100×
stock solution and AEBSF is added to
a final concentration of 1 mM from the
100× stock solution.

Triton stock: (10% (w/v) Triton X-100)

This is a 20× stock solution frozen in
aliquots at −20 ◦ C.
VRC stock: (200 mM Vanadyl riboside
complex)

This is a 100× stock solution frozen in
aliquots at −20 ◦ C.
AEBSF Stock: (100 mM
4-(2-Aminoethyl)-benzenesulfonyl
fluoride, hydrochloride)

This is a 100× stock solution frozen in
aliquots at −20 ◦ C.
To prepare the 100× stock solution, dissolve 100 mg in 4 ml water. Other protease inhibitors can be added if proteolysis is suspected. Do not use EDTA since
divalent ions are necessary for structural
integrity.
Phosphate buffered saline: (10 mM
Na2 HPO4 , 1 mM KH2 PO4 , 137 mM NaCl
and 2.7 mM KCl)

To make 1 l use 1.420 g of Na2 HPO4 ,
0.136 g of KH2 PO4 , 8.006 g of NaCl and
0.2013 g of KCl. Autoclave and store in
aliquots at room temperature.
Formaldehyde fixative: (4% solution)

The 4% formaldehyde fixative is prepared
fresh, just before use in cytoskeletal buffer
from a stock solution of 16% formaldehyde
(EM-grade) stored under an inert gas.
Alternatively, fresh formaldehyde can be
prepared from paraformaldehyde powder.

Equipment
Tissue culture incubator
Low-speed centrifuge (for suspension cells)

PROTOCOL 6.5

Procedure
Cells grown in monolayers, either on coverslips or in dishes, can be extracted by
exchanging solutions. Suspension cells or
cells removed from a growth surface can
be sequentially processed by centrifugation, removal of the supernatant and resus1 These propension in the next solution. 
cedures, as presented, uncover the nuclear
matrix in whole cells without prior nuclear
isolation. This allows the best preservation
of ultrastructure and reveals the nuclear
matrix–intermediate filament scaffold [7].
This consists of an internal nuclear matrix
and the intermediate filaments of the
cytoskeleton integrated into a single cellwide structure by their attachments to the
nuclear lamina. The same procedures can,
however, be used to extract isolated nuclei
in suspension and this is sometimes preferable for biochemical fractionation. One
compatible method for nuclear isolation is
that of Penman [8, 9].
A. Cross-link stabilized nuclear matrix

This method affords the best conservation of the nuclear matrix, as judged
by the ultrastructural preservation of the
nuclear RNP network [6]. This preparation
is excellent for microscopy, but the crosslinking can make biochemical analysis difficult.
1. Wash cells in phosphate buffered saline
1
at 4 ◦ C. 
2. Permeabilize cells in cytoskeletal buffer
with 0.5% Triton X-100 at 4 ◦ C for
2–5 min. This step will remove soluble
proteins, both cytoplasmic and nucleoplasmic, and prevent their cross-linking.

223

5. Wash in cytoskeletal buffer at 4 ◦ C
three times for 2 min each to remove
formaldehyde.
6. Cross-linked chromatin is removed by
digestion with 400 units of RNase-free
DNase I in digestion buffer at 32 ◦ C for
50 min. Most DNA is removed from the
structure at this step. Residual DNA can
be removed by washing:
7. Wash 1: Wash cells with extraction
buffer (which contains 0.25 M ammonium sulfate) at room temperature for
5 min.
8. Wash 2: Wash cells with 2 M NaCl
buffer at room temperature for 5 min.
9. The structure can be processed for
microscopy after a wash with cytoskeletal buffer.
B. Classical nuclear matrix

This method is more suitable for molecular
analysis. The spatial distribution of nuclear
components, for example those involved
in transcription, RNA splicing and DNA
replication, is well preserved as compared
to the unextracted nucleus. The procedure
can be stopped after the DNase I digestion
and 0.25 M ammonium sulfate extraction,
but further extraction in 2 M NaCl removes
some proteins of the RNP fibres, uncovering a core structure of branched 10 nm
filaments, the core filaments of the nuclear
matrix [5].
1. Wash cells with phosphate buffered
1
saline at 4 ◦ C. 

3. Wash briefly in cytoskeletal buffer at
4 ◦ C.

2. Permeabilize cells in cytoskeletal buffer
with Triton X-100 at 4 ◦ C for 2–5 min.
This will remove soluble proteins, both
cytoplasmic and nucleoplasmic.

4. Cross-link structures using 4% formaldehyde in cytoskeletal buffer at 4 ◦ C for
40 min.

3. Digest chromatin with 400 units of
RNase-free DNase I in digestion buffer
for 30–50 min at 32 ◦ C. This step

224

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

will remove DNA and the nucleosomal
histones. The nuclear structure at this
2 
3
point is the nuclear matrix. 
4. Extract cells with extraction buffer at
4 ◦ C for 3–5 min. This will remove histone H1 and will strip the cytoskeleton
except for the intermediate filaments
which remain tightly anchored to the
2
outside of the nuclear lamina. 
5. Optional: Extract the structure in 2 M
NaCl buffer at 4 ◦ C for 3–5 min. Better
preservation is obtained by increasing
the NaCl concentration slowly–or in
steps. This step strips some proteins
from the nuclear matrix uncovering
a highly branched network of 10 nm
filaments that form the core structure of
4
the nuclear matrix. 
6. For microscopy, fix immediately after
fractionation. Incubate the nuclei in 4%
formaldehyde in cytoskeletal buffer at
4 ◦ C for 30–50 min.

Notes

1 Cells in suspension are most conveniently processed for biochemical
experiments following trypsinization
or scraping. For suspended cells, we
use about 1 ml for each 107 cells until
the digestion step and then halve the
volume. Suspension processing can be
done by centrifuging at 1000 × g for
3 min at 4 ◦ C and sequentially resuspending cell pellets in the next wash or
extraction solution between steps. The
supernatant fractions can be saved for
biochemical analysis. The extracted
cell structure at each step is in the pellet.

2 Steps 3 and 4 may be reversed,
with equivalent results as judged
by electron microscopy. The protein

composition of the resulting nuclear
matrix is also the same. An easy alternative is to perform the DNase I digestion first and then add ammonium sulfate slowly from a 1 M stock solution
to a final concentration of 0.25 M.


3 DNA release can be evaluated microscopically by staining with a fluorescent DNA-binding dye such as 4 -6diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; 1–
10 ug/ml in phosphate buffered saline
for 5 min), or by pulse-labelling cells
in 3 H-thymidine before fractionation
and then measuring radioactivity.

4 Nuclear matrix proteins that are not
part of this core filament network
should be in the supernatant fraction.

References
1. Monneron, A. and Bernhard, W. (1969) Fine
structural organization of the interphase nucleus in some mammalian cells. J. Ultrastruct.
Res., 27, 266–288.
2. Nickerson, J. (2001) Experimental observations of a nuclear matrix. J. Cell Sci., 114,
463–474.
3. Nash, R. E., Puvion, E. and Bernhard, W.
(1975) Perichromatin fibrils as components of
rapidly labeled extranucleolar RNA. J. Ultrastruct. Res., 53, 395–405.
4. Berezney, R. and Coffey, D. S. (1974) Identification of a nuclear protein matrix. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun., 60, 1410–1417.
5. Nickerson, J. A., Krockmalnic, G., Wan, K.
M. and Penman, S. (1997) The nuclear matrix
revealed by eluting chromatin from a crosslinked nucleus, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 94,
4446–4450.
6. He, D. C., Nickerson, J. A. and Penman, S.
(1990) Core filaments of the nuclear matrix.
J. Cell. Biol., 110, 569–580.
7. Fey, E. G., Wan, K. M. and Penman, S. (1984)
Epithelial cytoskeletal framework and nuclear
matrix–intermediate filament scaffold: threedimensional organization and protein composition. J. Cell Biol., 98, 1973–1984.

PROTOCOL 6.5

8. Penman, S. (1966) RNA metabolism in the
HeLa cell nucleus. J. Mol. Biol., 17,
117–130.
9. Capco, D. G., Krockmalnic, G. and Penman, S. (1984) A new method of preparing

225

embedment-free sections for transmission electron microscopy: applications to the cytoskeletal framework and other three-dimensional networks. J. Cell Biol., 98, 1878–1885.

PROTOCOLS 6.6–6.7
Nuclear matrix–lamin interactions
Barbara Korbei and Roland Foisner
Background
The nuclear envelope of the eukaryotic
cell nucleus is composed of the outer
and inner nuclear membranes, nuclear pore
complexes, and a protein filament meshwork underlying the inner nuclear membrane, termed the nuclear lamina (see
Figure 6.3). The lamina contains nucleusspecific (type V) intermediate filament
proteins, the lamins, plus numerous integral and peripheral proteins of the inner
membrane, which bind lamins [1, 2]. Two
different types of lamins can be distinguished according to their expression
patterns and biochemical properties. Btype lamins are constitutively expressed
throughout development and are essential
for cell viability. A-type lamins, which are
expressed only in differentiated cells, are
not essential for development, but serve yet
unknown functions in tissue homeostasis.
More recent studies have also identified
lamins in the nuclear interior, where they
form complexes with nucleoplasmic lamin
binding proteins, such as lamina-associated
polypeptide 2α (LAP2α) [3].
The discovery of novel binding partners of lamins and of lamina-associated
polypeptides has significantly changed our
view of the functions of lamin complexes
in recent years. Apart from the long-known
function of the lamina as a scaffolding
framework providing mechanical stability

for the nucleus, recent studies suggested
that lamin complexes are also involved in
chromatin organization and chromosome
segregation as well as in DNA replication
and RNA processing [1, 4].
The hypothesis that many diverse nuclear
functions are directly or indirectly linked to
the nuclear lamina is supported by recent
findings revealing that mutations in Atype lamins or in some of their binding partners give rise to an increasing
scope of diverse genetic diseases known as
laminopathies [5]. Mutations in the LMNA
gene that encodes A-type lamins result
in a broad range of disease phenotypes,
affecting skeletal and heart muscle, adipose, nerve and bone tissue. The molecular
mechanisms of these diseases are completely unknown. At least some of the
pathological phenotypes may be the result
of impaired interactions of mutant lamins
with chromatin proteins and with proteins
in transcriptional complexes. The identification of novel (tissue-specific) lamin
binding partners is therefore an essential
first step in unravelling lamin functions and
has to be followed by a detailed molecular analysis of the interactions, including
analysis of interaction domains, binding
strengths, assembly dynamics and molecular structure.
Here we describe two in vitro techniques, which have been used to analyse the interaction of lamins with LAP2α

PROTOCOL 6.6

2
im
en
tin

57

9

V

31

1−

9−

1
17

17

V

1−

2
im
en
tin

57
9−

31
31

17

1−

1−

17

1

LA
S-

35

Lamin C

9

P2
a

Lamin C

31

(a)

227

97 kD
68 kD

43 kD

Ponceau

LAP2a overlay

LAP2a

LAP2a
tin

V

im

en

E
N

SW

93

3
1−
6

18

8−

69

3
69
0−
41

N
E
im
en
tin
V

SW

69

3

3
1−

69

8−

69
0−

18

41

35

S-

La

m

3

in

C

(b)

97 kD
68 kD

43 kD

29 kD
Ponceau

LamicC overlay

Figure 6.3 (a) Overlay of in vitro translated [35 S]-labelled LAP2α onto transblotted fragments of
lamin C and the intermediate filament protein vimentin (negative control), showing that LAP2α interacts with the C-terminal domain of lamin C. (b) Overlay of in vitro translated [35 S]-labelled lamin
C onto transblotted recombinant LAP2α fragments or salt-washed nuclear envelope fractions of rat
liver (SWNE, containing both lamin A and C, as positive control) and vimentin (negative control),
revealing binding of lamin C to the C-terminal 78 residues of LAP2α. Ponceau S stains of blots and
autoradiograms of in vitro translated proteins (left) and of overlays (right) are shown

and with chromatin: the in vitro overlay
binding assay, which allows identification
of interaction domains, and the in vitro

nuclear assembly assay, which reveals the
dynamic properties of lamin–chromatin
interactions during the cell cycle.

PROTOCOL 6.6
Nuclear matrix–lamin interactions: in vitro
blot overlay assay

Introduction
Transblotted proteins immobilized on a
nitrocellulose membrane are incubated
with a radioactively labelled binding partner. If various fragments representing
different domains of the protein are immobilized onto the membrane, this assay identifies interaction domains and may also
reveal a rough determination of relative
binding strengths of different domains. A
major pitfall of this assay is the denaturation of immobilized proteins during SDSPAGE and blotting, which may, despite
partial renaturation of proteins on the
membrane during incubation in a binding buffer, cause unspecific interactions.
Therefore negative controls, applying noninteracting proteins, which have similar
structure and/or properties as analysed proteins, should always be included.

Reagents
Blocking buffer: 2% BSA in overlay buffer
Dilution buffer: 1% BSA in overlay buffer
with 1 mM PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride)
Overlay buffer: 10 mM Hepes/KOH (pH
7.4), 100 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2 ,
2 mM EGTA, 0.1% Triton X-100
PBST (0.05% Tween 20 in PBS)
Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS): 2.6 mM
KCl, 137 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM KH2 PO4 ,
8 mM Na2 HPO4 .7H2 O, pH 7.4

Ponceau S: 0.2% (w/v) Ponceau S, 3%
(w/v) trichloroaceticacid
Triton X-100, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)

Procedure
1. Separate bacterially expressed recombinant lamina proteins (bacterial cell
lysates are usually fine) by SDS-PAGE
and transblot onto nitrocellulose mem1
branes (0.2 µm). 
2. Stain nitrocellulose membranes with
immobilized proteins using Ponceau
S to visualize proteins and estimate
protein quantity, followed by thorough
2
washing in PBST. 
3. Incubate in overlay buffer for 1 h with
three changes (to allow renaturation of
proteins), then block the membranes for
30 min in blocking buffer.
4. In the meantime, the interaction partner to be tested is transcribed and
translated in vitro and [35 S]-labelled,
using the TNT Quick coupled transcription/translation system (Promega,
Madison, WI), according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
5. Probe the membranes with 100 µl of
the standard in vitro translation reaction
mixture (diluted 1 : 50 in overlay buffer)
containing the [35 S]-labelled protein for
3 h at room temperature, while gently
moving the incubation chamber.
6. Wash extensive in overlay buffer and
air-dry the nitrocellulose.

PROTOCOL 6.6

7. Detect bound protein by autoradiography. Quantify signals on autoradiograms by densitometric scanning and
normalize using the intensities detected
on the Ponceau S-stained blot, thus providing a rough estimation of the relative binding strengths of the tested
fragments.

Notes

1 Various lamina fragments covering
different regions of the protein can

229

be applied to one gel in order to
determine the binding domains.


2 If renaturation of proteins is critical
for interaction, avoid denaturing Ponceau S stain on the blot used for
overlay, and use separate membranes
prepared in parallel for estimation of
protein amounts).

PROTOCOL 6.7
Nuclear matrix–lamin interactions: in vitro
nuclear reassembly assay

Introduction
Metaphase cell lysates containing metaphase chromosomes and lamina proteins,
or isolated chromosomes and chromosomefree metaphase cell lysates, are incubated
at 37 ◦ C for different time periods in order
to investigate the dynamic interaction of
different lamina proteins with chromatin
during nuclear reassembly after mitosis.
Furthermore, dominant negative mutants
interfering with the assembly can be tested
in this assay.

Reagents
Complete culture medium: Dulbecco’s
Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM),
10% fetal calf serum (FCS), 50 U/ml
penicillin, 50 µg/ml streptomycin
KHM buffer: 50 mM Hepes/KOH (pH
7.0), 78 mM KCl, 4 mM MgCl2 , 10 mM
EGTA, 8.4 mM CaCl2 , 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 20 µM cytochalasin B
3× SDS-PAGE sample buffer: 186 mM
Tris/HCl (pH 6.8), 300 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 6% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 0.1% bromphenol blue, 30%
glycerol

Equipment
Heraeus Megafuge 1.0
Incubator (37 ◦ C, 8.5% CO2 )
Metal ball cell cracker (EMBL, Heidelberg)

Plastic cell culture flasks 175 cm2 (Nunc)
Sterile hood
Thermoblock for Eppendorf tubes

Procedure (adapted from ref. 6)
A. Synchronization of cells
1. Plate NRK (normal rat kidney) cells
in ten 175 cm2 cell culture flasks
and allow to grow to approximately
60–70% confluency in complete medium at 37 ◦ C and 8.5% CO2 .

2. Replace the medium with complete
medium plus 2 mM thymidine in order
to arrest cells at the G1-S phase boundary.
3. After 10 h incubation in thymidine
medium, wash the monolayer of cells
three times with sterile PBS and incubate in complete medium for 4 h.
4. Add 0.2 µg/ml nocodazole (from a
10 mg/ml stock solution in 100%
DMSO) and incubate cells for a further
10 h.
5. Harvest the loosely attached prometaphase cells using a mechanical shakeoff.
B. Preparation of mitotic lysates
1. Pellet mitotic cells from ten flasks at
1000 rpm (Heraeus Megafuge, 1.0R)
for 3 min.

2. Wash twice in PBS and incubate in
30 ml complete medium containing

PROTOCOL 6.7

231

nocodazole (0.2 µg/ml) and cytochalasin B (20 µM, added from a 20 mM
stock in 100% DMSO) for 45 min at
37 ◦ C to destroy microtubules and actin
filaments.

inhibitors (0.1 µM calyculin A; 0.1 µM
okadaic acid (Invitrogen); 1 mM orthovanadate; 0.5 mM beta-glycero-phosphate (Sigma-Aldrich)) and place on ice
to prevent further assembly.

3. Sediment mitotic cells at 1000 rpm
(Heraeus Megafuge, 1.0R) for 3 min,
wash twice with ice-cold PBS containing 0.2 µg/ml nocodazole and resuspend in an equal volume of ice-cold
KHM buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors (3.3 µg/ml leupeptin,
3.3 µg/ml aprotinin, 3.3 µg/ml pepstatin A, 1 mM PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride)).

4. Centrifuge the collected samples at
2000 rpm (Heraeus Megafuge, 1.0R)
for 10 min at 4 ◦ C to separate the soluble, cytoplasmic from the insoluble,
cytoskeleton/chromatin fractions.

4. Homogenization is accomplished best
by pressing the suspension 10–15 times
through a metal ball cell cracker
(EMBL, Heidelberg) equipped with a
tight-fitting ball (r = 8.008 or 8.006
mm) on ice. Alternatively, cell suspension can be pressed several times
through a bent needle (27G), or cells
can be lysed in a potter using a tightly
fitting glass pestle. Efficiency of cell
breakage is controlled in the phase contrast microscope using a 40× objective.
C. In vitro reassembly

1. For control assembly reactions, dilute
the mitotic NRK cell lysate, containing
chromosomes and soluble phosphorylated lamina proteins, with half the
lysis volume of ice-cold KHM buffer
supplemented with protease inhibitors
(see above).
2. Incubate for different time intervals
between zero and 2 h at 37 ◦ C, to
allow dephosphorylation and assembly
of lamin structures at the chromosomal
surface.
3. At different time points, transfer aliquots of the incubation mixture to a
precooled tube, mix with phosphatase

5. Resuspend the pellet in 1 12 times the
original aliquot volume of 1× SDSPAGE sample buffer.
6. Mix the supernatant with half its
volume of 3× SDS sample buffer.
7. Analyse the samples by SDS-PAGE
and immunoblotting using specific
antibodies to the lamina proteins of
interest (Figure 6.4A).
8. Samples can also be prepared for
immunofluorescence microscopy (Figure 6.4B). For this, 70 µl aliquots of
cell lysates are mixed with formaldehyde (37% w/v solution) to a final
formaldehyde concentration of 3.7%
(w/v).
9. Spin samples onto 18× 18 mm glass
coverslips for 20–30 s at 500 rpm
(Heraeus Megafuge, 1.0R) in a cytospin rotor.
10. Following centrifugation, coverslips
should be immediately immersed in
1 ml 3.7% formaldehyde for 20 min,
and then processed for immunolabelling.

D. Assembly with exogenous chromosomes

1. Remove endogenous chromosomes from
mitotic cell lysates by centrifugation
at 2000 rpm (Heraeus Megafuge, 1.0R)
for 5 min at 4 ◦ C.

232
(a)

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

0 min

30 min

(b) DNA

60 min 120 min

LAP2a

LAP2a

0 min
LAP2b

DNA

0 min
LAP2a

LaminA
LaminC
60 min

SL PL SL PL SL PL SL PL

60 min

Figure 6.4 (a) In vitro nuclear assembly around endogenous chromosomes. Mitotic NRK cell lysates
were incubated at 37 ◦ C and insoluble pellet fractions (PL ) and soluble supernatant fractions (SL ) were
collected by centrifugation at 2000 g at indicated time points. Samples were tested by immunoblot
analysis using monoclonal antibodies to LAP2α, LAP2β (lamina associated polypeptide 2β) and to
lamins A/C. Immunoblots are shown, revealing a redistribution of the proteins from a soluble chromosome-free fraction to a sedimentable chromosome-containing fraction within 30 min incubation.
(b) Immunofluorescence analysis of in vitro assembled nuclear structures. Assembly mixtures containing exogenous chromosomes and chromosome-free mitotic cell lysates were spun on coverslips after
0 or 60 min incubation and processed for immunofluorescence microscopy using antibodies to the
indicated proteins and Hoechst dye to stain DNA. Confocal images are shown. Bar, 5 µm

2. Mix chromosome-free supernatants with
mitotic chromosomes (OD260 = 3) isolated from nocodazole arrested Chinese
hamster ovary (CHO) cells by sucrose
gradient centrifugation (for details see
ref. 7).
3. Perform assembly reactions exactly as
with endogenous chromosomes.
E. Assembly with recombinant proteins

1. To analyse the effects of proteins or
protein fragments on the assembly, add
bacterially expressed recombinant proteins, either purified or as whole bacterial cell lysates (if protein concentration
is high) to the nuclear assembly mixtures, at concentrations ranging from
twofold to eightfold the concentration
of the endogenous proteins.
2. Perform the assembly reaction exactly
as in the control sample.

3. Control assemblies should always be
carried out in parallel, as assembly
efficiencies may vary from experiment
to experiment.

Acknowledgements
We thank Thomas Dechat, University
of Vienna, for providing data shown in
Figure 6.3, and Sylvia Vlcek, University
of Vienna, for her helpful comments on
the manuscript. Work in the authors’ laboratory was supported by grants from the
Austrian Science Research Fund (FWF
P15312), the Austrian National Bank and
the Österreichische Muskelforschung (to
R.F.).

References
1. Goldman, R. D., Gruenbaum, Y., Moir, R. D.,
Shumaker, D. K. and Spann, T. P. (2002)
Genes Dev., 16, 533–547.

PROTOCOL 6.7

2. Foisner, R. (2001) J. Cell Sci., 114, 3791–
3792.
3. Dechat, T., Korbei, B., Vaughan, O. A.,
Vlcek, S., Hutchison, C. J. and Foisner, R.
(2000) J. Cell Sci., 113, 3473–3484.
4. Cohen, M., Lee, K. K., Wilson, K. L. and
Gruenbaum, Y. (2001) Trends Biochem. Sci.,
26, 41–47.
5. Burke, B. and Stewart, C. L. (2002) Nat. Rev.
Mol. Cell Biol., 3, 575–585.
6. Burke, B. and Gerace, L. (1986) Cell, 44,
639–652.
7. Vlcek, S., Korbei, B. and Foisner, R. (2002) J.
Biol. Chem., 277, 18898–18907.

Safety hazards
Working safely with radioactivity

[35 S] emits β-rays with a maximum β
energy of 0.167 MeV and a half-life of
87.4 days. A Geiger-Müller counter is suitable for the detection of β-emitters. β
particles can affect superficial layers of
tissues and represent an external hazard.
They are also potential internal hazards,
if radioactivity gets inside the body via
inhaled gas particles or via the mouth or
via skin cuts. Best protection from the
external hazard can be attained by reducing
exposure time to radioactive material. This
can be achieved by planning and preparing the experiments carefully before starting bench work. Furthermore, intensity of
electromagnetic radiation decreases with
the square of the increasing distance. The
use of shields between the body and the
radioactive samples is also highly recommended, as β-rays may have a range of up
to a few metres in air, while 1 cm of Plexiglas will stop any rays. This will, however,
generate Bremsstrahlung, a form of X-rays,
which are also potentially harmful. To protect from internal hazards, the most important rule is to prevent contamination of the
working environment and the individual.
This is achieved by restricting the working

233

area for radioactive substances to a particular location in the lab. Furthermore, all
equipment, materials and waste have to be
labelled and the working area should be
monitored regularly. Waste should be minimized and disposed of according to local
rules and guidelines.

Other hazards

In principle, all substances which are cytotoxic or influence cellular functions and
parameters, such as phosphorylation, cell
cycle progression and proteolytic activities, are to be considered as potential
hazards.
The phosphatase inhibitors are toxic
if swallowed or inhaled, and upon prolonged or repeated exposure are also toxic
if absorbed through the skin. Therefore,
when handling such substances, one should
wear gloves. They should be used only in
a well-ventilated area and kept closed or
covered when not in use.
Inhalation of protease inhibitor phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride may result in spasm,
inflammation or oedema of the larynx and
bronchi, chemical pneumonitis and pulmonary oedema. When handling, avoid dust
formation.
Cytochalasin is a cell-permeable fungal
toxin that disrupts contractile microfilaments by inhibiting actin polymerization
and thus interferes with many cellular processes. It is a very powerful toxin and
should be handled with extreme caution.
Nocodazole is an antimitotic agent that
disrupts microtubules by binding to βtubulin, thus affecting microtubule dynamics, spindle function and Golgi complex
formation. It arrests the cell cycle at the
G2/M phase boundary and induces apoptosis in several normal and tumour cell
lines and is therefore also considered very
toxic.

PROTOCOL 6.8
Preparation of Xenopus laevis egg extracts and
immunodepletion
Tobias C. Walther
Introduction
Egg extracts from Xenopus laevis have
been used as cell-free systems to study
mitotic events and nuclear functions such
as nuclear envelope (NE) formation and
replication; see Lohka and Masui [1]. A
major advantage of the system is that large
volumes of Xenopus eggs can be obtained
cheaply with relatively low effort. Importantly, in contrast to mammalian mitotic
homogenates, egg extracts will efficiently
package naked DNA into chromatin and
NE precursors are not limiting in this system. In combination with immunodepletion of proteins, egg extracts provide a
powerful system to study nuclear architecture, function and dynamics.

Reagents
10 × MMR: 1 M NaCl, 20 mM KCl,
10 mM MgCl2 , 20 mM CaCl2 , 1 mM
EDTA, 50 mM HEPES/KOH, pH 8.0
D-buffer: 2% w/v cysteine in 0.25 ×
MMR, pH 7.8
Sucrose buffer 250 (S250): 250 mM sucrose,
50 mM KCl, 2.5 mM MgCl2 , 10 mM
HEPES/KOH, pH 7.5
Sucrose buffer 250+ (S250+) take S250
and add to:

Final
concentration

Stock

Per ml
extract

Substance

DTT
Cycloheximide
(CHX)
CytochalasinB
(CytB)
Trasylol
Leupeptin
Pepstatin

1 mM
44 µg/ml

1M
20 mg/ml

1 µl
2.5 µl

5 µg/ml

10 mg/ml

0.5 µl

1×
2 µg/ml
1 µg/ml

100×
10 mg/ml
10 mg/ml

10 µl
0.2 µl
0.1 µl

Blocking buffer: S250+ supplemented
with 50 mg/ml BSA
Sucrose buffer 500 + (S500+): take S250+
and add 1.25 ml 2 M sucrose/10 ml
Ionophore A21387 2 mg/ml in DMSO
100 mM NaBO4 pH 9.0, 100 mM ethanolamine pH 8.0, 100 mM glycine pH 2.0,
10 mM Tris/HCL pH 7.4

Equipment
Beakers (800 ml)
Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge with
swinging-bucket rotor
Microcolumns (800 µl)
Microfuge
Ultracentrifuge with swing-out rotor (5 ml
tubes)

PROTOCOL 6.8

235

Procedure

2. Spin 20 min at 20 000 g to crush eggs.

Day 0

3. Take supernatant (= ‘low-speed extracts’) and add to:

Inject 10 frogs with 500 U pregnant
mare’s serum gonadotropin (PMSG) into
the dorsal lymph sac 4–14 days before the
extract preparation.
Day 1

Inject 1000 U human chorionic gonadotropin (2000 U/ml in water) per frog, incubate
at 16 ◦ C for 16–18 h in 1 × MMR.

f.c.

Stock

1 mM
44 µg/ml
5 µg/ml
Protease
inhibitor
cocktail

1M
20 mg/ml
10 mg/ml

Per ml
extract
1 µl
2.5 µl
0.5 µl

Substance
DTT
CHX
CytB

4. Spin 35 min at 200 000 g.
5. Remove cytosolic (orange) phase, leaving lipids (on top) and pellet behind.

Day 2

6. Dilute c.0.3 fold with S250+.

A. Collect eggs

7. Spin 35 min at 200 000 g.

1. Pour off buffer with eggs (from frog
containers). Avoid eggs that are in
large clumps or ‘ropes’!
2. Wash eggs with c.500 ml 1 × MMR.
3. Dejelly eggs in D-buffer up to 10 min,
eggs become closely packed; swirl
every 30 s.
4. Rinse eggs four times with c.500 ml
1 × MMR.
5. Activate eggs by adding 8 µl A23187
(2 mg/ml) per 100 ml 1 × MMR; animal cap contraction becomes visible
after 3 min; leave up to 10 min (usually 7 min).
6. Wash three times with 1 × MMR, take
care not to expose eggs to air, remove
white eggs.
◦

7. Incubate up to 25 min at 22 C.
8. Rinse eggs three times with S250.
9. Wash eggs with S250(+).

B. Extract preparation
1. Transfer eggs to 5 ml tubes, spin 60 s
at 2000 g to pack the eggs; remove
excess buffer.

8. Remove cytosol, add glycerol to f.c.
3% (v/v) snap freeze and/or process
for immunodepletion.
9. Wash membranes: resuspend membranes in c.20 × vol. in S250 (+) and
lay carefully on top of 800 µl S500(+)
buffer cushion.
10. Spin 15 min at 15 000 g.
11. Resuspend membranes in c.10th of
cytosol vol. and snap freeze immediately.

C. Preparation of column for
immunodepletion (should be done in
advance)
1. Rotate 1–2 mg antibody with 0.5 ml
protein A sepharose in a volume of
5 ml for 1 h at room temperature.
2. Wash beads with 2 × with 5 ml 0.2 M
sodium borate buffer pH 9.0.
3. Resuspend beads in 5 ml 0.2 M
sodium borate buffer pH 9.0 and
add 13 mg of dimethylpimelimidate
(DMP) from a freshly opened bottle
(final concentration 10 mM).

236

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

4. Rotate for 30 minutes at room temperature.
5. Add another 13 mg of DMP, rotate
30 min at room temperature.
6. Stop reaction by washing beads 1×
with 0.2 M ethanolamine pH 8.0 and
incubating at room temperature for 2 h
in this buffer. Check coupling efficiency by measuring protein concentration of antibody solution before and
after cross-link.
7. Wash column with 5 ml PBS, 5 ml
10 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.4.
8. Pre-elute column with 5 ml 100 mM
glycin pH 2.0.

D. Immunodepletion
1. Add 400 µl freshly prepared cytosolic
extract to antibody or mock column,
rotate 30 min to 1 h at 4 ◦ C.
2. Collect first depletion as above (step 2),
and add to second antibody column.
3. Rotate and collect as above, snap freeze.

Notes
Buffers should be around 16 ◦ C before
lysis of eggs and ice-cold for all subsequent steps.
When jelly coat has been removed wash
eggs very carefully.

9. Wash column with 5 ml PBS.
10. Transfer antibody (or mock) beads
(250 µl each) to two 800 µl microcolumns.
11. Drain columns mounted on a 2 ml
tube by spinning 10 s at 1000g.
12. Rotate 30 min with 400 µl blocking
buffer.

Reference
1. Lohka, M. J. and Masui, Y. (1983) Roles of
cytosol and cytoplasmic particles in nuclear
envelope assembly and sperm pronuclear formation in cell-free preparations from amphibian eggs. J. Cell Biol., 98, 1222–1230.

PROTOCOL 6.9
Nuclear assembly in vitro and
immunofluorescence
Martin Hetzer
Introduction
The molecular mechanisms of nuclear
assembly are not well understood. Many
analyses have been carried out in a
cell-free system based on Xenopus egg
extracts that recapitulate pronuclear formation after fertilization. The first step
in nuclear assembly is decondensation of
sperm DNA. Subsequent events involve
binding of membranes to chromatin, fusion
of membranes to form the nuclear envelope (NE), insertion of nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) and nuclear growth accompanied by further chromatin swelling. For
a detailed review see Gant and Wilson [1]. In egg extracts individual steps
of nuclear assembly can be separated and
analysed biochemically. The formation of
a functional nucleus can be visualized by
immunofluorescence using antibodies specific for NE proteins or NPC components.

Reagents
HSP: 250 mM sucrose, 15 mM Hepes/
KOH, pH 7.4, 0.5 mM spermidine tetrachloride, 0.2 mM spermine
HSPP: HSP + 0.3 mM PMSF, 10 µg/µl
leupeptin
PBS
20× Energy mix: Creatine phosphate (CP)
200 mM (51 mg/ml), ATP 10 mM, GTP

10 mM, CP-kinase 0.5 mg/ml First mix
the CP, ATP and GTP. Measure pH
and add 1 M Hepes/KOH, pH 7.3 for
buffering if necessary. Add sucrose to a
final concentration of 250 mM. Finally
add kinase. Freeze in aliquots. Keep at
−80 ◦ C
20× glycogen: 150 mg/ml oyster glycogen
in 10 mM Hepes/KOH, pH 7.5
Acetate buffer: 100 mM KAc, 3 mM
MgAc, 5 mM EGTA, 20 mM Hepes/
KOH, pH 7.4, 150 mM sucrose, 1 mM
DTT
30%S: 30% sucrose (w/v) in acetate buffer
FIX: 8% formaldehyde in PBS
IF buffer: 0.1% Triton X-100, 0.02% SDS,
10 mg/ml BSA in PBS
Poly-L-lysine 0.1% w/v in water
Vectashield mounting solution

Equipment
Coverslips and slides
Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge with
swinging-bucket rotor
Scissors, 1 ml syringe, glass plate, cheesecloth
Watchmaker’s forceps
Water bath at 20 ◦ C

238

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Procedure
A. Preparation of sperm head chromatin
from Xenopus laevis

(see Gurdon, J.B. [2]; for extract preparation, see Protocol 6.8 )
1. Put male Xenopus laevis in ice water
for ∼40 min.
2. Take frog, cut away upper part of the
head (use strong scissors), kill by sticking forceps into spinal chord.
3. Take testis, remove fat and connective
tissue.
4. Resuspend in HSP buffer using forceps and chop testis into pieces.
5. Disperse further by pressing pieces
through 1 ml syringe on glass plate.
6. Filter through cheesecloth, wash (final
vol. from two testes ∼6 ml).
7. Pellet by centrifugation 2000 rpm at
4 ◦ C, wash once with HSPP 10 ml.
8. Resuspend in 1 ml HSPP, add 50 µl
10 mg/ml lysolecithin, incubate 5 min
at room temperature.
9. Quench by adding 10 ml HSPP + 3%
BSA, chill.

exclusion from sperm then permeabilization was successful.
B. Nuclear assembly

1. To assay NE formation 13–15 µl of
cytosolic extract (see Protocol 6.8) is
transferred into an Eppendorf tube.
Demembrenated sperm heads are added
to a concentration of 103 /µl (stock
is 103 /µl). Gently mix with pipette
and place reaction on ice for 5 min
(to decondense sperm chromatin). Add
2 µl 10× membranes and 1 µl 20×
glycogen.
2. Incubate at 20 ◦ C in a water bath for
60–90 min.
3. Reactions are stopped on ice and
immediately fixed for 20 min by adding
100 µl AB-buffer and 100 µl 8% FIX
(8% paraformaldehyde).
4. Layer sample on top of ice-cold 30%
S in a tube containing a poly-L-lysinecoated coverslip (11 mm diameter).
5. Spin at 1000 g for 10 min.
6. Remove supernatant and recover the
coverslip with watchmaker’s forceps.

10. Pellet by centrifugation at 2000 rpm
for 10 min.

7. If the reactions contain fluorescently
labelled components dip the coverslip
in PBS and mount on a microscopy
slide.

11. Wash with 3 ml HSPP + 0.3% BSA,
centrifuge as above.

C. Immunofluorescence

12. Resuspend in 2.5 ml HSPP + 0.3%
BSA + 30% glycerol.
13. Count 1/10 dilution: No. of sperm in
1 ‘grossquadrat’ × 104 = sperm/ml.
14. Dilute to 1000 sperm/µl.
15. Aliquot in 10 µl and freeze in liquid
N2 .
16. Test: use 2 µl sperm heads + 2 µl
Trypan Blue 0.4%; if there is no

1. Put coverslip on a grid or parafilm and
permeabilize the nuclei for 30 min with
IF buffer at room temperature.
2. Incubate for 1 h in IF buffer containing
the primary antibody.
3. Wash 3× with 500 µl IF buffer.
4. Incubate for 1 h in IF buffer containing the secondary antibody coupled to
a fluorophor.

PROTOCOL 6.9

5. Wash 3× with 500 µl IF buffer.
6. Wash the coverslip with IF buffer
(+410 mM NaCl), incubate with
Hoechst/DAPI for 1 min, mount the
coverslip with Vectashield solution and
analyse samples by confocal fluorescence microscopy.

Notes
Optimal salt concentration for the washing
step has to be determined for each antibody. Incubate the coverslips in the dark.

239

References
1. Gant, T. M. and Wilson, K. L. (1997) Nuclear
assembly. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol., 13,
669–695.
2. Gurdon, J. B. (1976) Injected nuclei in frog
oocytes: fate, enlargement, and chromatin dispersal. J. Embryol. Exp. Morphol., 36, 523–
540.

PROTOCOL 6.10
Nucleocytoplasmic transport measurements
using isolated Xenopus oocyte nuclei
Reiner Peters
Introduction

2.5 mm diameter drill

The exchange of matter between cell
nucleus and cytoplasm, involving some of
the most significant cellular molecules and
molecular assemblies such as ribonucleoprotein particles, ribosomal subunits and
transcription factors, is mediated by the
nuclear pore complex (NPC), a large transporter spanning the nuclear envelope. In
the past, transport across the NPC has been
studied almost exclusively in intact cells
(e.g. by expression of GFP constructs, cell
fusion and microinjection), in semi-intact
cells (e.g. by selective permeabilization of
the plasma membrane employing the detergent digitonin [1]), and in artificial nuclei
reconstituted in cell extracts [2, 3]. Here,
the protocol of a transport assay is given
which employs manually isolated nuclei of
Xenopus oocytes [4]. The assay is easy,
fast and convenient, employs synchronized
primary cells, completely avoids the use of
detergents and yields quantitative kinetic
data. The large size of Xenopus oocyte
nuclei facilitates the combination of transport measurements with other functional
as well as biochemical and structural studies. A complementary protocol pertaining
to isolated nuclear envelopes is given as
Protocol 6.11.

Amphibian Ringer’s solution: 88 mM
NaCl, 1 mM KCl, 0.8 mM MgSO4 ,
1.4 mM CaCl2 , 5 mM Hepes (pH 7.4)

Reagents and materials
Tissue culture dishes, e.g. Falcon no.
353004

Mock 3 intracellular medium: 
1 90 mM
KCl, 10 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2 ,
1.0 mM
N -(20.1 mM
CaCl2 ,
hydroxyethyl)ethylene-diaminetriacetic
acid (HEDTA), 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.3)
Transport solution: mock 3 containing
0.5 µM of a fluorescent protein containing a nuclear localization sequence
(NLS) such as GG-NLS [5] or Alexa488-P4K [4], 0.5 µM karyopherin α2,
0.5 µM karyopherin β1, 2 µm Texasred-labelled 70 kDa dextran, energy mix
(final concentrations: 2 mM ATP, 25
mM phosphocreatine, 30 units/ml creatine phosphokinase, 200 µM GTP,
2
20 g/l BSA 
Piece of Xenopus laevis ovary

Equipment
Forceps, e.g. Dumont no. 5
GELoader Tips (i.e. very fine pipette
tips made by Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany)
Stereomicroscope
Confocal laser scanning fluorescence
microscope
Image processing program (e.g. ImageJ)

PROTOCOL 6.10

241

Fill the microchamber with ∼5 µl of
mock 3.

Procedure
1. Prepare a microchamber by drilling a
hole of 2.5 mm diameter into the bottom of a tissue culture dish and gluing
a cover slide to the bottom of the dish.

2. Manually isolate and purify a nucleus
from a Xenopus oocyte. Remove a stage
VI oocyte (∼1.2 mm diameter, Figure 6.5(a)) from a piece of Xenopus

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)
Microchamber
Bottom
of
dish

1.0 mm

Nucleus
Coverslip

2.5 mm

Figure 6.5 Specimen for assaying nucleocytoplasmic transport in isolated Xenopus oocyte nuclei.
The nucleus of a stage VI Xenopus oocyte (a) was isolated manually (b) and, after manual purification
with a fine glass needle, deposited in a microchamber (c). The microchamber (d) has a volume of
5 µl. (From ref. 4)

242

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

ovary, kept in amphibian Ringer’s
solution, and transfer it into a small
glass dish containing mock 3. Using
a stereomicroscope at ∼16× total
magnification and fine forceps open the
oocyte and set free the nucleus (Figure 6.5(b)). Transfer the nucleus into
another small glass dish containing
fresh mock 3. Further purify the nucleus
from adhering yolk particles by repeatedly touching the nucleus with a microcapillary. Transfer the nucleus into the
microchamber (Figure 6.5(c)), strictly
avoiding the nucleus touching the air–
water interface.
(a)

Import substrate
P4K

Control substrate
TRD70

3. Mount the microchamber on the
stage of a confocal laser scanning
microscope. Visualize the nucleus in
through-light at low magnification (10×
or 16× objective). Focus onto the
largest perimeter of the nucleus. Adjust
3 wavelength, multiplier
laser power, 
voltages, pinhole, etc. so that both the
transport substrate (NLS protein) and
the control substrate (Texas-red labelled
70 kDa dextran) will be optimally
imaged.
4. Use a GELoader Tip to inject ∼10 µl
of the transport solution into the microchamber. Start timer and scanner

(b)
e.s rim

intranuclear space

rim

e.s

Fluorescence (a.u.)

a
2 min

150
30 min
Fe
100
Fi(∞)
50

0

5 min

2 min

−400

−200

0
Distance (µm)

200

400

(c)
b

10 min

control, extranuclear
substrate, nuclear rim
substrate, extranuclear
substrate, intranuclear
control, intranuclear

Fluorescence (a.u.)

200
160
120
80

30 min
40
0
1000 mm

0

10

20

30

Time (min)

Figure 6.6 Example of a transport measurement. (a) A Xenopus oocyte nucleus was incubated with
a solution containing a NLS-protein (P4K) and a control substrate (TRD70). Scans were taken at
indicated times after transport solution addition. (b) Profiles through the nucleus showing the time
development of the transport substrate fluorescence. (c) Time development of mean intra- and extranuclear fluorescence of transport and control substrate. (From ref. 4)

PROTOCOL 6.10

243

(t = 0). Continue with scanning at intervals properly resolving transport kinetics (Figure 6.6(a)).


2 BSA serves to balance intranuclear osmotic pressure. Dialyse stock BSA
solution (100 g/l) against mock 3.

5. Evaluate the image series (Figure
6.6(b)), using an image processing program such as Image J (public domain
Java version by W. Rasband, http://rbs.
info.nih.gov/ij/) to derive Fsi , Fse , Fci ,
Fce , the mean corrected intra- and extranuclear fluorescence intensities of transport or control substrate, as well as the
nuclear radius R (Figure 6.6(c)). The
number Ni (t) of imported substrate
molecules can then be calculated
according to:


3 Set laser power as low as compatible with a sufficient image quality to
avoid photobleaching.

Ni (t) = (Fi /Fe ) Ce VN L
where Ce is the substrate concentration
in the transport solution, VN is the nuclear volume (= 4/3π R 3 ) and L is
Avogadro’s number. In addition, intensity profiles (Figure 6.6(b)) may be
obtained.

Notes
This procedure will take approximately 1 h.


1 Mock 3 is an intracellular mock medium adjusted, however, to 3 µM free
Ca++ . Prepare a fresh batch every day.

References
1. Adam, S. A., Stern-Marr, R. and Gerace, L.
(1990) Nuclear protein import in permeabilized mammalian cells requires soluble cytoplasmic factors. J. Cell Biol., 111, 807–816.
2. Forbes, D. J. Kirschner, M. W. and Newport,
J. W. (1983) Spontaneous formation of
nucleus-like structures around bacteriophage
DNA microinjected into Xenopus eggs. Cell,
34, 13–23.
3. Lohka, M. J and Masui, Y. (1983) Formation
in vitro of sperm pronuclei and mitotic chromosomes induced by amphibian ooplasmic
components. Science, 220, 719–721.
4. Radtke,T., Schmalz,D., Coutavas,E., Soliman,
T. M. and Peters,R. (2001) Kinetics of protein
import into isolated Xenopus oocyte nuclei.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 98, 2407–2412.
5. Keminer, O., Siebrasse, J. P. Zerf, K. and
Peters. R. (1999) Optical recording of signalmediated protein transport through single nuclear pore complexes. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA, 96, 11 842–11 847.

PROTOCOL 6.11
Transport measurements in microarrays of
nuclear envelope patches by optical single
transporter recording
Reiner Peters
Introduction
A most powerful approach to the experimental analysis of membrane transport
processes is single transporter recording. However, previously this was possible only in the case of ion channels using the electrophysiological patch
clamp method [1]. In optical single transporter recording (OSTR) [2, 3] membranes
are attached to microarrays of cylindrical test compartments and transport
across membrane patches that may contain single transporter or transporter populations is recorded by confocal microscopy.
OSTR features a very high sensitivity,
single-transporter resolution, multiplexing
of transport substrates and parallel data
acquisition (for review, see ref. 4). Here,
a protocol for the measurement of nuclear
export [5, 6] is given. For a complementary method, employing isolated Xenopus
oocyte nuclei, see Protocol 6.10.

Reagents and materials
Tissue culture dishes, e.g. Falcon no.
353004
3.5 mm diameter drill
Polycarbonate track etched (PCTE) membrane filters, type Cyclopore Transpar-

ent (Whatman, Maidstone, Kent, UK),
available in pore sizes of 0.1 to 8.0 µm
Eastman Instant Adhesive no. 910
Amphibian Ringer’s solution: 88 mM
NaCl, 1 mM KCl, 0.8 mM MgSO4 ,
1.4 mM CaCl2 , 5 mM Hepes (pH 7.4)
Mock 3 intracellular medium: 
1 90 mM
KCl, 10 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2 , 0.1
mM CaCl2 , 1.0 mM N -(2-hydroxyethyl)
ethylene-diaminetriacetic
acid
(HEDTA), 10 mM Hepes (pH 7.3)
Transport solution: mock 3 containing
1 µM of a fluorescent protein containing
a nuclear export signal (NES) such
as GG-NES [5], 1 µM of the nuclear
export receptor CRM1, 1 µM Ran-GTP,
2
10 g/l BSA 
Piece of Xenopus laevis ovary

Equipment
Forceps, e.g. Dumont no. 5
GELoader Tips (i.e. very fine pipette
tips made by Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany)
Stereomicroscope
Confocal laser scanning fluorescence microscope
Image processing program (e.g. Image J)

PROTOCOL 6.11

245

(a) Intact nucleus

(b) Perforated nucleus

(c) Isolated nuclear envelope

(e)
(d) Transport substrate
and confocal microscopy

NPC
Isoporous
filter

Objective

Figure 6.7

Confocal plane
Oil
Coverslip

Preparation of a specimen for OSTR measurements of nuclear transport

Procedure
1. Prepare an OSTR chamber by drilling a
hole of 3.5 mm diameter into the bottom
of a tissue culture dish. Apply a piece
of optically clear double-sticky tape to a
clean coverslip (15 mm×15 mm). Cut a
PCTE membrane filter into small pieces
(5 mm×5 mm) and place a filter piece,
shiny side up, on the tape. Attach the
cover slip-filter assembly to the culture
dish such that the filter forms the bottom
of the hole. Fill the microchamber with
12 µl of mock 3. If the pores of the filter
do not fill spontaneously with mock 3,
swim the chamber on an ultrasonic bath
and apply a short pulse (some seconds)
of ultrasound. Put a moistened piece of
laboratory tissue into the chamber. Close
the chamber lid.

2. Manually isolate and purify a nucleus
from a Xenopus oocyte, as described
in Protocol 6.10, step 2. Transfer the
purified nucleus into the OSTR chamber. Attach the nucleus firmly to the
PCTE filter by pressing the nucleus
against the filter using a small glass rod
(Figure 6.7(a)). Use a very fine steel
needle or a glass microcapillary to open
the nucleus (Figure 6.7(b)). Remove the
nuclear contents and purify the nuclear
side of the nuclear envelope by washing it three times with 15 µl of mock 3
(Figure 6.7(c)).
3. Use a GELoader Tip to inject ∼
15 µl of the transport solution into
the microchamber (Figure 6.7(d)). The
transport solution, containing 10 g/l
BSA, will sink to the bottom of the

246

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

(a)

GG-NES, CRM1, RanGTP, GTP
GG-NES, GTP
GG-NES, CRM1, GTP

(b)

Measuring field within
nucleus-covered area

GG-NES

70 kD dextran

2.0

GG-NES, RanGTP, GTP
1.5

Fin/out

2 min

4 min

1.0

0.5

0.0
6 min
(c)

GG-NES, CRM1, RanGTP
GG-NES, CRM1,Ran(Q69L)GTP
GG-NES, CRM1, RanGTPg S

2.0
8 min

Fin/out

1.5

Reference field
outside nucleuscovered area

1.0

0.5
62.5 µm

0.0
0

100

200

300
400
Time (s)

500

600

Figure 6.8 Example of an OSTR measurement of signal-dependent nuclear protein export. (a) Raw
data. A transport solution containing an export complex (i.e. a 1 : 1 : 1 complex of GG-NES, CRM1 and
RanGTP) and a control substrate (Texas-red labelled 70 kDa dextran) was added to the OSTR chamber
at t = 0 min and confocal scans of the oil–filter interface of a nucleus-covered area acquired at the
indicated times. After transport had reached a plateau a nucleus-free area was imaged for reference. (b)
Data showing that only the complete export complex was transported. (c) Data showing that hydrolysis
of Ran-bound GTP was required for export. (From ref. 5)

chamber replacing the pure mock 3.
Remove surplus buffer. Start the timer
(t = 0).
4. Mount the microchamber on the stage
of a confocal laser scanning microscope. Visualize the nucleus in throughlight at low magnification (10× objective). Place the nucleus into the centre
of the field of vision. Switch to a 40fold, oil immersion objective without
moving the OSTR chamber. Focus on
the interface between oil and filter. Start

scanner, adjust microscope parameters,
and continue with scanning at intervals
properly resolving transport kinetics
(Figure 6.8(a)). After recording transport kinetics in the nucleus-covered
area, shift the nucleus out of the
field of view and obtain scans of a
free area of the filter for reference
(Figure 6.8(a), bottom).
5. Evaluate the image series, using an
image processing program such as
Image J (public domain Java version by

PROTOCOL 6.11

W. Rasband, http://rbs.info.nih.gov/ij/).
We have written a plug-in to that
program which automatically finds the
filter pores, measures their fluorescence intensity, subtracts the local background, and plots the time-dependent
background-corrected fluorescence for
each filter pore individually (examples
are given in Figure 6.8(b)).

Notes
This procedure will take approximately
30 min.


1 Mock 3 is an intracellular mock
medium adjusted, however, to 3 µM
free Ca++ . Prepare a fresh batch every
day.

2 Dialyse BSA stock solution (100 g/l)
against mock 3.

247

References
1. Neher, E. and Sakmann, B. (1976). Singlechannel currents recorded from membrane of
denervated frog fibres. Nature, 260, 779–802.
2. Tschödrich-Rotter, M. and Peters, R. (1998)
An optical method for recording the activity
of single transporters in membrane patches. J.
Microsc., 192, 114–125.
3. Peters, R., Sauer, H., Tschopp, J. and Fritzsch, G. (1990) Transients of perforin pore
formation observed by fluorescence microscopic single channel recording. EMBO J., 9,
2447–2451.
4. Peters, R. (2003) Optical single transporter
recording: transport kinetics in microarrays of
membrane patches. Ann. Rev. Biophys. Biomol.
Struct., 32, 47–67.
5. Siebrasse J. P., Coutavas, E. and Peters, R.
(2002) Reconstitution of nuclear protein export
in isolated nuclear envelopes. J. Cell Biol.,
158, 849–854.
6. Siebrasse J. P. and Peters, R. (2002) Rapid
translocation of NTF2 through the nuclear
pore of isolated nuclei and nuclear envelopes.
EMBO Rep., 3, 887–892.

PROTOCOL 6.12
Cell permeabilization with Streptolysin O
Ivan Walev
Introduction
Delivery of macromolecules into the cytosol, with retention of cell viability, is
increasingly being employed by cell biologists. Most of the existing methods
for introducing macromolecules into the
cell require considerable methodological
expertise [1]. Pore-forming bacterial toxins have found widespread application
as tools to study protein trafficking in
eukaryotic cells because, under appropriate experimental conditions, the plasma
membrane can be selectively permeabilized while the membranes of internal compartments remain intact [2, 3]. With these
approaches, bacterial toxin attack is generally lethal, so the possibilities of conducting cell biological studies after permeabilization have been restricted. Recently
a simple method for reversible cell permeabilization using the bacterial toxin Streptolysin O (SLO) has been described [4].
SLO is the prototype of a toxin family that have been termed oxygen-labile
or sulfydryl-activatable toxin (also termed
cholesterol-dependent toxins). This is because the toxin spontaneously loses activity in the presence of atmospheric oxygen, and regains activity upon reduction
(e.g. with DTT). The reactivity of the single cysteine residue in the SLO-molecule
is responsible for this property. However,
the single cysteine residue in SLO can be
replaced by alanine, without loss of activity [5]. This mutagenized SLO can be iso-

lated from E. coli and is no longer prone
to oxygen-dependent inactivation [6]. SLO
generates very large transmembrane pores,
readily allowing delivery of molecules
with mass up to 150 kDa into cytosol. Reversible permeabilization of adherent and
non-adherent cells requires use of low
SLO concentrations. Resealed cells remain
viable for days and retain their capacity to
endocytose and to proliferate [4].

Reagents
Streptolysin-O (SLO): available from sev1
eral biochemical suppliers 
Hepes buffered saline solution (HBSS):
30 mM Hepes, 150 mM NaCl (pH
7.2)

Procedure
1. Suspend the cells in HBSS without
2
Ca2+ and Mg2+ , for 5–10 min. 
2. Permeabilization step: discard the supernatants and add SLO dissolved in the
3
same medium for 10 min at 37 ◦ C. 
The protein or agent to be delivered to
the cytosol is included at the permeabilization step.
3. Resealing step: add surplus ice-cold
medium (without washing) containing
Ca2+ and Mg2+ (final Ca2+ concentration 1–2 mM) and incubate the cells for
4
at least 60 min at 37 ◦ C. 

PROTOCOL 6.12

Notes

1 SLO preparations may contain contaminating proteases or DNases. Such
contaminants may create artefacts.
Overall, it is therefore worthwhile to
check whether a given SLO preparation is contaminant-free. Our procedure produces contaminant-free recombinant
SLO
(Email
to:
<hgmeyer@mail.uni-mainz.de>).
Because this SLO mutant does not
contain a cysteine residue, activation
by reduction is not necessary.

2 Cells: adherent and non-adherent cells
can be used. Mouse cells are more
resistant to SLO. Some adherent cells
do not tolerate the 5–10 min without
Ca2+ and detach from plastic. Permeabilization can be measured light
microscopically by Trypan Blue or
propidium iodide staining.

3 In all cases, selection of an appropriate toxin concentration is pivotal to
success. Thus, the required SLO concentration will vary depending on cell
target and density, and must be determined immediately before the delivery

249

experiment by titration. The goal is to
identify the toxin concentration that
causes permeabilization of 60–80%
of the total cell population under the
same conditions.


4 HBSS: some deviation of pH may
help. Addition of serum to the medium
is good, but not absolutely necessary.

References
1. Lauer, J. L. and Fields, G. B. (1997) Methods
Enzymol., 289, 564–571.
2. Bhakdi, S., Weller, U., Walev, I., Martin, E.,
Jonas, D. and Palmer, M. (1993) Med. Microbiol. Immunol., 182, 167–175.
3. Ahnert-Hilger, G., Bader, M. F., Bhakdi, S.
and Gratzl, M. (1988) J. Neurochem., 52,
1751–1758.
4. Walev, I., Bhakdi, S. C., Hofmann, F., Djonder, N., Valeva, A., Aktories, K. and Bhakdi,S.
(2001) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 98,
3185–3190.
5. Pinkney, M., Beachey, E. and Kehoe, M.
(1989) Infect. Immun., 57, 2553–2558.
6. Weller, U., Müller,L., Messner,M., Palmer,M.,
Valeva, A., Tranum-Jensen, J., Agrawal, P.,
Biermann, C., Döbereiner, A., Kehoe, M. A.
and Bhakdi, S. (1996) Eur. J. Biochem., 236,
34–39.

PROTOCOL 6.13
Nanocapsules: a new vehicle for intracellular
delivery of drugs
Anton I. P. M. de Kroon, Rutger W. H. M. Staffhorst, Ben de
Kruijff and Koert N. J. Burger
Introduction
Liposomes, aqueous compartments surrounded by lipid bilayers, have been widely
used as transport vectors to deliver (impermeant) substances into the cytoplasm of
cells. Examples include the delivery of
chemotherapeutic agents, DNA for transfection, and fluorescent probe molecules
(for reviews see refs 1 and 2). The molecular mechanism of the liposome–cell interaction leading to uptake of the liposome
contents depends on the lipid composition
of the liposome membrane and the cell
type involved. Liposome–plasma membrane fusion has been reported in a number
of cases (e.g. [3]). Endocytosis is considered the major route of entry for liposomes
into cells (reviewed in ref. 4).
The efficiency of encapsulation of the
compound of interest in the liposomes is
an important determinant of the efficiency
of uptake by the cell. The structural properties of liposomes allow for highly efficient
encapsulation of hydrophilic compounds
and lipophilic compounds in the aqueous
interior and in the lipid bilayer of the liposome, respectively [1]. Compounds that do
not meet either of these criteria were so far
not amenable to efficient encapsulation in
a lipid bilayer coat.
One such compound is the poorly
water-soluble anti-cancer drug cisplatin,

cis-diamminedichloroplatinum (II), which
is commonly used in the treatment of
a variety of solid tumours, including
genito-urinary, head and neck, and lung
tumours [5]. Encapsulation of this drug
into liposomes has many advantages including the reduction of premature inactivation of this highly reactive molecule
upon entry in the blood and the reduction
of deleterious side-effects such as nephro-,
oto- and neurotoxicity [6].
The liposomal formulations of cisplatin
developed so far (see e.g. ref 7) suffer
from a limited bioavailability of the drug
in the tumour [8]. A key factor is likely
the low water solubility (7 mM at 37 ◦ C)
and low lipophilicity of cisplatin, leading to liposomal formulations with low
drug-to-lipid molar ratios (of the order
of 0.02). Serendipitously, an alternative
method was recently discovered, enabling
the encapsulation of cisplatin in a lipid
formulation with superior efficiency [9].
Our method takes advantage of the limited solubility of the drug in water, and
produces cisplatin nanocapsules, nanoprecipitates of cisplatin surrounded by a single
lipid bilayer, which exhibit an unprecedented drug-to-lipid ratio and an unprecedented in vitro cytotoxicity. The cisplatin
nanocapsules may turn out to be the
paradigm for encapsulating compounds

PROTOCOL 6.13

with limited solubility in water and with
low lipophilicity in a lipid bilayer coat.

Technical principle
Repeated freezing and thawing of a concentrated aqueous solution of cisplatin
in the presence of anionic phospholipids
result in the formation of cisplatin nanocapsules. The preparation of cisplatin nanocapsules requires the presence of negatively
charged phospholipids and of positively
charged aqua-species of cisplatin, pointing to an essential role for electrostatic
interactions in the mechanism of formation. A solution of cisplatin in water, in
the absence of added chloride, contains
a mixture of the neutral dichloride- and
dihydroxo-species of cisplatin with low
solubility in water, and positively charged
aqua-species of cisplatin with a much
higher solubility [5]. In the model proposed for the mechanism of nanocapsule
formation [9], cisplatin is concentrated in
the residual fluid during freezing, forming small aggregates when the solubility
limit of the dichloro-species is exceeded.
As freezing proceeds, the nanoprecipitates
of the dichloro-species of cisplatin become
covered by the positively charged aquaspecies, which have a higher solubility
limit. The negatively charged membranes
interact with the positively charged cisplatin aggregates and then reorganize to
wrap the aggregates in a phospholipid
bilayer coat. The resulting nanocapsules do
not redissolve upon thawing.

Procedure
1. Cisplatin is dissolved in MilliQ water
to a concentration of 5 mM, which
is facilitated by incubating at 55 ◦ C
for 30 min. The solution is incubated
overnight in the dark at 37 ◦ C to ensure
full equilibration.
2. Stock solutions of 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC) and 1,

251

2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoserine
(DOPS) are prepared in chloroform
(concentration ∼5 mM). The precise
concentrations are determined by phosphate analysis [10].
3. Aliquots corresponding to 0.6 micromole of each phospholipid are mixed,
the solvent is removed by rotatory evaporation, and the lipid film is further
dried under vacuum overnight.
4. The dry lipid film is hydrated by adding
1.2 ml of the 5 mM cisplatin solution
in water and incubating for 15 min at
37 ◦ C.
5. After brief homogenization on a vortex
mixer, the dispersion is transferred
to a glass tube and subjected to 10
freeze–thaw cycles using ethanol/dryice (−70 ◦ C) and a water bath (37 ◦ C).
6. The resulting colloidal solution is transferred to microfuge tubes and centrifuged for 4 min at 470g (2100 rpm
in an Eppendorf centrifuge) to collect
the nanocapsules.
7. After removal of the supernatant, the
fluffy white layer on top of the yellow pellet, corresponding to large liposomes, is removed by a micropipette.
The yellow pellet containing the cisplatin nanocapsules, is resuspended in
1 ml water and centrifuged as above in
order to wash away non-encapsulated
cisplatin.
8. Upon resuspending the final pellet in
0.5 ml water, the nanocapsules are
stored at 4 ◦ C until use.
Alternatively, the nanocapsules are separated from contaminating liposomes by
density gradient centrifugation. Briefly, the
dispersion obtained after the freeze–thaw
cycles is loaded on top of a step gradient consisting of 1 ml of each 1.8, 0.6
and 0.2 M sucrose in 10 mM Pipes-NaOH,
1 mM EGTA, pH 7.4. After centrifugation

252

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Figure 6.9 Electron micrograph of cisplatin nanocapsules visualised by negative staining. A dilute
suspension of nanocapsules was transferred to a carbon-formvar coated grid, and stained with 4%
(w/v) uranyl acetate for 45s. Scale bar, 100 nm

at 4 ◦ C for 30 min at 400 000g, the pellet
fraction corresponding to the nanocapsules
is collected and washed as above.
Instead of DOPS, other anionic phospholipids like dioleoyl-phoshatidylglycerol
(DOPG) and dioleoyl-phosphatidic acid
(DOPA) can be used to prepare cisplatin
nanocapsules. DOPC can be replaced by
dioleoyl-phosphatidylethanolamine
(DOPE) or sphingomyelin. The method is
sensitive to high chloride concentrations
and alkaline pH, because these conditions
prevent the formation of the positively
charged aqua-species. Instead of hydrating a lipid film with 5 mM cisplatin, it
is also possible to add the cisplatin solution to preformed DOPC/DOPS liposomes
and then start the freeze–thaw cycles. The
cisplatin nanocapsules can be stored after
lyophilization, and retain cisplatin upon
rehydration.

Characterization
1. Encapsulation efficiency

The phospholipid content of the nanocapsules is determined by phosphate analysis [10]. The cisplatin content of the

nanocapsules is assessed by flameless
atomic absorption spectrometry (NFAAS)
using K2 PtCl2 as a standard [11]. Analysis of the cisplatin nanocapsules prepared
according to the above protocol, typically
yields a Pt/phosphate molar ratio of 11 ±
1. Based on the size of the nanocapsules
(see below), this number is estimated to
correspond to an internal cisplatin concentration exceeding 0.5 M, which is far
beyond the solubility limit of cisplatin and
consistent with the quasi-crystalline structure of the encapsulated cisplatin [9]. The
method allows encapsulation of cisplatin
with an efficiency of approximately 30%.
2. Shape and size

Analysis by negative stain electron microscopy reveals bean-shaped particles consisting of an electron-dense core surrounded by a bright layer (excluding
stain), corresponding to the bilayer coat
(Figure 6.9). The nanocapsules have a heterogeneous size distribution, with 75% of
the population having a length between 50
and 250 nm and a width of around 50 nm.
Size analysis by dynamic light scattering yields consistent results. Nanocapsules

PROTOCOL 6.13

of smaller size and with a narrower size
distribution have been obtained by highpressure extrusion through polycarbonate
filters with a 200 nm pore size [9].
3. Delivery of contents

The cytotoxicity of the cisplatin nanocapsules towards the human ovarian carcinoma IGROV-1 cell line has been compared to that of free cisplatin. The IC50
value (the drug concentration at which
cell growth is inhibited by 50%) of cisplatin administered as nanocapsules is two
orders of magnitude smaller than that of
the free drug [9]. The higher cytotoxicity
is explained by the reduced inactivation of
the drug, due to the lipid coat sequestering it from reaction with substrates in the
extracellular environment. Upon binding to
the cell surface or endocytic uptake of the
nanocapsules, the coat is destabilized, and
after membrane passage, cisplatin can exert
its cytotoxic effect.

253

water and low lipophilicity that are not efficiently encapsulated in conventional liposomes. Alternatively, compounds of interest may be co-encapsulated together with
cisplatin.
Like the surface of conventional liposomes, the membrane surface of nanocapsules can be engineered to include poly
(ethyleneglycol)-conjugated lipids (reviewed in ref. 2). This results in more stable
nanocapsules without affecting the cytotoxicity [12]. It is expected that the technologies developed for liposomes, including the attachment of ligands or antibodies
for purposes of targeting, can also be
applied to nanocapsules.

Acknowledgement
Financial support by the Dutch Cancer
Society (project UU2001-2493) is gratefully acknowledged.

References
Comments
Cisplatin nanocapsules represent a new
lipid formulation of cisplatin, distinct from
conventional liposomal formulations in
that the drug is present as a nanoprecipitate
surrounded by a bilayer. This results in a
drug-to-lipid ratio that exceeds that of liposomal formulations by two to three orders
of magnitude and probably accounts for
the typical bean-like shape of the nanocapsules. The high encapsulation efficiency
of cisplatin in nanocapsules is expected
to increase the bioavailability of the drug
and thus improve the therapeutic index as
compared to liposomal formulations of cisplatin. Data obtained so far indicate that
the cisplatin nanocapsules can gain access
to the cell interior via endocytosis [9]. The
method for preparing cisplatin nanocapsules may be applicable to a variety of
other compounds with limited solubility in

1. Drummond, D. C., Meyer, O., Hong, K., Kirpotin, D. B. and Papahadjopoulos, D. (1999)
Pharmacol. Rev. 51, 691–743.
2. Lian, T. and Ho, R. J. Y. (2001) J. Pharm.
Sci., 90, 667–680.
3. Garrett, F. E., Goel, S., Yasul, J. and Koch,
R. A. (1999) Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1417,
77–88.
4. Düzgünes, N. and Nir, S. (1999) Adv. Drug
Deliv. Rev., 40, 3–18.
5. Lippert, B. (1999) Cisplatin: Chemistry and
Biochemistry of a Leading Anticancer Drug.
Wiley-VCH, New York.
6. Hacker, M. P. (1991) In: The Toxicity of Anticancer Drugs (G. Powis and M. P. Hacker,
eds), p. 82. McGraw-Hill, New York.
7. Newman, M. S., Colbern, G. T., Working,
P. K., Engbers, C. and Amantea, M. A. (1999)
Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol., 43, 1–7.
8. Meerum Terwogt, J. M., Groenewegen, G.,
Pluim, D., Maliepaard, M., Tibben, M. M.,
Huisman, A., ten Bokkel Huinink, W. W.,
Schot, M., Welbank, H., Voest, E. E., Beijnen, J. H. and Schellens, J. H. M. (2002)

254

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol.,
49,
201–210.
9. Burger, K. N. J.,
Staffhorst, R. W. H. M.,
de Vijlder, H. C., Velinova, M. J., Bomans,
P. H., Frederik, P. M. and de Kruijff, B.
(2002) Nat. Med., 8, 81–84.
10. Rouser, G., Fleischer, S. and Yamamoto, A.
(1970) Lipids, 5, 494–496.
11. Burger, K. N. J., Staffhorst, R. W. H. M. and
de Kruijff, B. (1999) Biochim. Biophys. Acta,
1419, 43–54.

12. Velinova, M. J., Staffhorst, R. W. H. M.,
Mulder, W. J. M., Dries, A. S., Jansen, B. A.
J., de Kruijff, B. and de Kroon, A. I. P. M.
(2004) Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1663,
135–142.
Note added in proof: The molecular architecture of the cisplatin nanocapsules was
recently solved (Chupin, V., de Kroon, A. I.
P. M., and de Kruijff, B. (2004) J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 126, 13816–13821.)

PROTOCOL 6.14
A rapid screen for determination of the
protective role of antioxidant proteins in
yeast
Luis Eduardo Soares Netto
Introduction
Yeast has been successfully employed as
a model to study several biological processes. Indeed, Leland H. Hartwell and
Paul M. Nurse received the Nobel Prize in
2001 for the discovery of genes in yeast
involved in cell cycle regulation, which
has had a great impact on the understanding of processes such as cancer. Some of
the advantages of using yeast as a model
system are: (1) this micro-organism grows
very rapidly and media used to cultivate
it are very simple and inexpensive; (2) it
is very amenable to genetic manipulations
such as gene disruption; (3) its biology is
very well studied and (4) its genome has
been completely sequenced and is publicly
available.
There has been considerable interest
in the study of antioxidant enzymes in
yeast. Yeast as well as bacteria, mammals
and plants possess several enzymatic systems capable of decomposing peroxides.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae possesses five
peroxiredoxins (a type of thiol-dependent
peroxidase, many of them thioredoxindependent peroxidases); two catalases; three
glutathione-dependent peroxidases and one
cytochrome c peroxidase. Although a partial
redundancy of their roles is observed, they
definitively have distinct roles. For example:

cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase I (cTPxI)
is important for protection of cells with
dysfunctional mitochondria, whereas mitochondrial thioredoxin peroxidase I is important for respiratory-competent cells [1–
3]. More recently, results have been obtained
indicating that cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase II is specifically important for cell protection against organic peroxides independently of the functional state of mitochondria [4]. One approach that has been very
helpful for us is a viability test based on serial
dilutions as described below. Using this
approach, we were able to test mutant strains
under several different conditions and found
one in particular, where a gene deletion rendered cells very sensitive to oxidative stress.
Several concentrations of oxidants can be
tested as well as the effect of various carbon
sources. Changing the carbohydrate present
in the media is an interesting manipulation
because yeast physiology and biochemistry
are very dependent on the carbon source.
For example, yeast grown under glucose
get most of its ATP from glycolysis, has
few mitochondria and this organelle contains few cristae. In contrast, when yeast is
grown in glycerol or ethanol it only produces
ATP from oxidative phosphorylation and
possesses many active mitochondria [5].
It is important to emphasize that this
approach can also be employed for the

256

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

study of other protective roles, for example
against heat stress, osmotic stress and alkylation damage. Proteins from other organisms can also be studied. In this case, it
would be necessary to verify if a heterologous gene can complement the sensitivity
observed for a given mutant strain.
After testing several conditions by this
protocol and finding one where the mutant
strain is specifically sensitive, a more accurate and quantitative assay (colony counting) can be performed. A disadvantage of
colony counting assay is that it is very time
consuming. Examples of this strategy are
described in refs [2] and [4].

Reagents
Preparation of medium and plates

A. Synthetic medium
Per litre, add:
1.7 g Yeast nitrogen base without amino
acids or ammonium sulfate (YNBAA/AS)
5 g (NH4 )2 SO4
20 g of glucose or other carbon source
(2%)
This medium can support the growth of
yeast with no nutritional requirements.
Generally, however, yeast strains present
nutritional requirements. Therefore, nutrients should be added as described in
Table 6.1. Synthetic media should be autoclaved before use. Threonine and aspartic
acid work better when added after autoclaving, therefore stock solutions of these
amino acids should be prepared and sterilized by filtration. These amino acids can
then be added to a synthetic medium in
laminar flow.

Table 6.1 Nutrients to be added with yeast
strains with deficiencies in metabolic processesa

Nutrient

Adenine
(hemisulfate
salt)
L-arginine (HCl)
L-aspartic acid
L-glutamic acid
(monosodium
salt)
L-histidine
L-leucine
L-lysine
(mono-HCl)
L-methionine
L-phenylalanine
L-serine
L-threonine
L-tryptophan
L-tyrosine
L-valine
Uracil

Final
Amount
concentration of nutrient
(ug/ml)
added (mg)b
40

40

20
100
100

240
100
100

20
60
30

20
60
30

20
50
375
200
40
30
150
20

20
50
375
200
40
30
150
20

a

These data were obtained from Ausubel et al. [6].
The amount of nutrient was added per litre of synthetic
media.
b

2% (20 g of agar per litre of medium).
The medium is autoclaved and then left
for 45–60 min at room temperature until
cooled to about 50 ◦ C, which can be felt
if one can hold the flask comfortably. At
this point, the medium should be poured
into plates. Drugs and other compounds to
be tested should also be added when the
medium is at 50 ◦ C, to avoid undesirable
thermal decomposition. More details about
preparation of media can be obtained from
Ausubel et al. [6].

Procedure

B. Preparation of plates

Determination of hydroperoxide tolerance

Solid synthetic medium is prepared as
described above with addition of agar

1. Grow yeast cells overnight in complete
synthetic media with various carbon

PROTOCOL 6.14

sources; in most cases, 2% glucose or
with 2% glycerol.
2. The next day, dilute inoculate to 3 ×
106 cells per ml (which corresponds
to approximately 0.1 OD600 nm ) and
then cultivate until the cell density
reaches approximately 3 × 107 cells per
ml (which corresponds to approximately 1.0 OD600 nm ). This takes about
10 h, which ensures that cells are well
adapted to the carbon source present in
the medium.
3. Dilute cell suspension to OD600 nm =
0.2 and make four further 1/5 dilutions
of the cell suspensions.
4. Place a 10 µl droplet of each dilution
into complete synthetic medium + agar
with 2% glucose or the other carbon
sources as described in Figure 6.10. A

257

control plate should contain media components alone, whereas the test plate
contains peroxide (or other compound
to be investigated).
5. Incubate plates for 30 or 48 h, depending on the results observed. In some
cases, a differential effect can only be
found after only one of these time
periods.

Comments
1. In the control plate, there is no addition
besides the components of the media.
It is important to be very careful in
the determination of OD600 nm before
the dilutions in order to guarantee that
mutant and wild-type strains will grow
equally.
2. Cells are grown in synthetic medium
to avoid the reaction of peroxides with

OD600nm = 0.2
1/5

WT
Dilution

0

1/5
1/5

1/5
1/25

1/5
1/125

1/625
10 ul

10 ul 10 ul 10 ul
10 ul

10 ul 10 ul

10 ul

10 ul

10 ul

control
plate

media +
peroxide
10 ul

10 ul 10 ul

10 ul

10 ul 10 ul

10 ul 10 ul

10 ul

10 ul

Dilution

mutant

0

1/5
1/5

1/25
1/5

1/125
1/5

1/625
1/5

OD600nm = 0.2

Figure 6.10 Scheme viability of yeast cells in plates after serial dilutions. Cells were submitted to
four 1/5 dilutions (200 ul to 1 ml) in synthetic media; 10 µl of undiluted and 1/5, 1/25, 1/125 and
1/625 diluted suspensions were added to control plates as well as to the plates with the compounds to
be tested. In control plates, the two strains grew equally which showed that their cell densities were
the same in the undiluted samples. In the experimental plate, the mutant strain did not grow in the
1/125 and in the 1/625 dilutions, indicating that this gene deletion rendered cells sensitive to peroxide
treatment

258

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

extracellular components present in a
rich medium such as glutathione [7].
It is important to use synthetic rather
than rich media such as YPD (yeast
peptone dextrose) because glutathione
and other substances are not very well
controlled and their concentration can
vary from different lots of media, which
may compromise the reproducibility of
the assay.
3. Peroxides, mitochondrial inhibitors or
other stressful compounds can be added
to the plates under several different conditions, in order to find one where deletion of a gene severely retards growth.
Plates can be incubated for different
intervals, which can also interfere with
the results. We usually incubate plates for
30 or 48 h. It may be interesting to vary
the carbon source because it provokes
dramatic changes in yeast biochemistry
and physiology as mentioned above.
4. It is important not to use small volumes
to make the dilutions. We generally
diluted 200 µl of cell suspension into
1 ml of synthetic media. In this way,
errors due to manipulation of pipettes
are minimized.

References
1. Kowaltowski, A. J., Vercesi, A. E., Rhee,
S. G. and Netto, L. E. S. (2000) Catalases and

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

thioredoxin peroxidase protect Saccharomyces
cerevisiae against Ca2+ -induced mitochondrial
membrane permeabilization and cell death.
FEBS Lett., 473, 177–182.
Demasi, A. P. D., Pereira, G. A. G. and Netto,
L. E. S. (2001). Cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase I is essential for the antioxidant defense of
yeast with dysfunctional mitochondria. FEBS
Lett., 509, 430–434.
Monteiro, G., Pereira, G. A. G. and Netto,
L. E. S. (2002) Regulation of mitochondrial
thioredoxin peroxidase I expression by two different pathways: one dependent on CAMP and
the other on heme. Free Radical Biol. Med., 32,
278–288.
Munhoz, D. C. and Netto, L. E. S. (2004)
“Cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase I and II are
important defenses of yeast against organic
hydroperoxide insult, J. Biol. Chem., 279,
35219–35227.
Pon, L. and Schatz, G. (1991) Biogenesis of
Yeast Mitochondria in the Molecular and Cellular Biology of the Yeast Saccharomyces.
Vol 1: Genome Dynamics, Protein Synthesis
and Energetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, New York.
Ausubel, F. M., Brent, R., Kingstone, R. E.,
Moore, D. D., Seidman, J. A., Smith, J. A. and
Struhl, K. (1994) Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
In: Current Protocols in Molecular Biology,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York.
Maris, A. F., Assumpção, A. L., Bonatto, D.,
Brendel, M. and Henriques J. A. (2001) Diauxic shift-induced stress resistance against
hydroperoxides in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
is not an adaptive stress response and does
not depend on functional mitochondria. Curr.
Genet., 39, 137–149.

PROTOCOL 6.15
In vitro assessment of neuronal apoptosis
Eric Bertrand
Introduction
Apoptosis is a specific form of cell death
which is triggered and executed by the
cell’s own machinery; as such it is considered as a kind of ‘suicide’. Elimination of cells through apoptosis contributes to many important physiological
processes such as development, inflammation and adult tissue homeostasis [1, 2].
Also, excessive apoptosis has been associated with a number of conditions, like
neurodegenerative diseases, ischaemia or
Aids. At first, the definition of apoptosis was essentially based on morphological
features: cell shrinkage, condensation of
cytoplasm and nucleus, clumping of chromatin, blebbing of the membrane and ultimately fragmentation in apoptotic bodies.
Afterwards, it was observed that the alterations of chromatin were also accompanied
by a cleavage of nuclear DNA into nucleosomal fragments; however, this type of
DNA degradation is not entirely specific of
apoptosis. At the biochemical level, most
of the characteristic changes observed during apoptosis are mediated by the caspases,
a family of cysteine proteases. The caspases cleave a number of substrates within
the cell including structural proteins and
enzymes, thereby modifying their function.
Caspase activation is currently considered
as the most reliable marker of apoptosis.
The protocols included therein should
prove useful to the reader who wants

to investigate whether a particular treatment induces apoptosis on neural cell cultures. Some of the issues that should be
addressed in the course of such a study
are: is the treatment toxic, does it induce
apoptosis, which caspases are activated?
Toxicity can be assessed and quantified
with the TUNEL assay, while reversal
of the toxic effect by a caspase inhibitor
such as ZVAD indicates the involvement
of apoptosis. ZVAD is a broad-range caspase inhibitor, some caspase inhibitors are
more selective than ZVAD, but they are
usually not entirely specific. For instance,
DEVD preferentially inhibits caspase-3 but
is also active against caspase 8, 7 and
10 [3]. Therefore, even if DEVD blocks
the apoptosis induced by the treatment,
a direct demonstration of caspase-3 activation using immunostaining is required.
Finally, a very specific inhibition of a
given caspase can be achieved with antisense oligonucleotides coupled to the cell
permeable carrier penetratin.

Reagents
PBS: GIBCO/Invitrogen, cat. no. 14200059
zDEVD-fmk: Tebu, cat. no. P414
zVAD-fmk: France Biochem, cat. no.
727610
Vectastain ABC-AP kit: Vector Laboratories, cat. no. AK-5200
NBT/BCIP: Pierce, cat. no. 34042

260

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

In situ Cell Detection Kit, AP: Roche
Diagnostics Cat N◦ 1 684 809
Anti p20 antibody: Pharmingen, cat. no.
557035
J peptide: Syntem,
Penetratin peptide and oligonucleotides:
Quantum, cat. no. 151300

the cell type studied and the type of signal observed (fluorescence, alkaline phosphatase, horseradish peroxydase); the manufacturer gives a number of useful pieces
of advice in this respect (http://www.rocheapplied-science.com). This protocol has
been used to detect apoptosis on rat and
mouse cortical neurons and it should be
applicable to other species and neuronal
types.

Procedures
Immunocytochemical methods to study
apoptosis at the single cell level

The protocols within this section are
intended for cells that have been cultured in ELISA wells; with some adjustments on solution volumes they can be
adapted to glass coverslips and other plate
formats. The cells were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde at room temperature for
30 min or overnight at 4 ◦ C.

TUNEL staining

TUNEL stands for TdT mediated dUTP
nick end labelling; this reaction labels
DNA strand breaks by incorporating modified nucleotides at the 3 -OH termini. During apoptosis, nuclear DNA is degraded to
nucleosomal fragments which are detected
by the TUNEL reaction. In this protocol
we used the alkaline phosphatase version
of the In Situ Cell Death Detection Kit
provided by Roche Diagnostics. In most
cases we followed the instructions of the
manufacturer, however we obtained a better specificity of the staining on primary
cultures of cortical neurons by reducing
the incubation times for the 1 + 2 reaction mixture (DNA labelling solution) and
the converter-AP solution (alkaline phosphatase coupled antibody). Some adjustment of incubation times and other parameters might be necessary, depending on

1. Wash cells 3× with PBS and then
permeabilize in a 0.1% sodium citrate/0.1% triton solution for 2 min on
ice (at 4 ◦ C).
2. Wash wells 2× with PBS.
3. Add 50 µl of TUNEL 1 + 2 reaction mixture (enzyme solution + label
solution) from Roche Diagnostics kit
for 30 min at 37 ◦ C.
4. Wash wells 3× with PBS.
5. Incubate the cells for 15 min at 37 ◦ C
in 50 µl of converter-AP solution
(alkaline phosphatase coupled antibody).
6. Prepare NBT/BCIP substrate solution
for alkaline phosphatase:
100 mM Tris pH 9.5
10 mM NaCl
5 mM MgCl2
1 mM levamisole to inhibit endogenous phosphatases
7. Add NBT/BCIP according to the manufacturer’s guidelines.
8. Wash wells 3× in PBS, add 100 µl
of NBT/BCIP substrate solution and
incubate for approximately 10 min at
room temperature. Follow the course
of the reaction and block it by adding
10 µl of 0.5 M EDTA in the wells
when the staining is intense enough.

PROTOCOL 6.15

9. Wash wells 3× in deionized water and
let them dry out for 1–2 h.
10. Count cells using a phase contrast
microscope.

Fractin staining

Fractin is a cleavage product of actin after
its processing by caspase-1 and caspase3, we used an affinity-purified antibody
provided by Dr Greg Cole to detect fractin.
This antibody has been tested in vitro on
mice and can also be used on human
and mouse brain sections with a few
adaptations.
1. Wash cells 3× with PBS, then block
and permeabilize in PBS 10% FCS/
0.2% Triton for 1h at room temperature.
2. Incubate overnight at 4 ◦ C with purified
primary antibody diluted 1/2000 in PBS
10% SVF/0.2% triton.
3. Wash wells 3× with PBS, incubate
2 h at room temperature with secondary biotinylated anti-rabbit antibody from Vectastain ABC-AP (alkaline phosphatase) kit at 1/200 in PBS
5% SVF/0.2% triton.
4. Wash wells 3× again with PBS, incubate 1 h at room temperature with A +
B complex from ABC-AP Vectastain
kit at 1/200 (A + B complex was preformed for 40 min in PBS).
5. Wash wells 3× with PBS, add 100 µl
of NBT/BCIP substrate solution and
incubate for approximately 10 min at
room temperature. Follow the course
of the reaction and block it by adding
10 µl of 0.5 M EDTA in the wells when
the staining is intense enough.
6. Wash wells 3× with deionized water
and let them dry out for 1–2 h.

261

p20 staining

The p20 antibody (Pharmingen) is targeted
against the active (17–22 Kd) form of
caspase-3 which is a cleavage product of
a larger (37 Kd) propeptide; it can be used
for Western blots with a few adaptations.
The immunocytochemistry procedure is
exactly the same as for the fractin staining
except that the dilution for the purified
primary antibody is 1/500. So far, this
antibody has been used on human and
murine cells.
Inhibition of apoptosis

In our hands, the irreversible caspase
inhibitors zVAD-fmk at 100 µM and
zDEVD-fmk at 200 µM were effective
at inhibiting apoptosis occurring through
caspase-3 activation. We also used antisense oligonucleotides coupled to cellpermeant peptides as described by Troy
et al. [4] at a concentration of 200 nM.
Oligonucleotide sequences directly coupled to the cell-permeant vector penetratin
are commercially available from Quantum Biotechnologies. The penetratin peptide and its properties have been described
in detail by Derossi et al. [5] and Dupont
et al. [6]. Its amino acid sequence is:
RKQIKIWFQNRRMKWKK.
The oligonucleotides used were designed
by Troy et al. [4] and their sequences are:
Sequence for antisense caspase-1 CCTCAGGACCTTGTCGGCCAT
Sequence for antisense caspase-3 GTTGTTGTCCATGGTCACTTT
These sequences correspond to rat caspases; if you investigate another species
you should check these sequences and
modify the oligonucleotides accordingly.
The caspase-3 antisense oligonucleotide
has proven effective on murine cells [7].
Note that the peptide/oligonucleotide
conjugate should be kept away from reducing agents as the two parts are linked by
a disulfide bond. The coupling takes place

262

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

%age of TUNEL-positive cells

40

30

20

10

0
Ctrl

Figure 6.11
deviation)

J 0.25 µM

J 0.5 µM

J 1 µM

Toxicity of peptide J on primary cultures of cortical neurons (error bars represent standard

between a thiol function at the 5 end of the
nucleotide and a modified cysteine at the
N -terminal part of the penetratin peptide.
More details on the chemistry involved in
the coupling can be found in Troy et al. [8]
and Dupont et al. [6].

Examples
The cell-permeable peptide J has been used
to induce apoptosis; it contains a cytoplasmic juxtamembrane sequence of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) linked to a
penetratin vector. Our intent was to simulate an excessive generation of amyloid
precursor protein (APP) juxtamembrane
fragments by internalizing J in cortical
neurons (more detail in Bertrand et al. [7]).
Peptide J RKQIKIWFQNRRMKW
KKKYTSIHHG
(APP juxtamembrane sequence is underlined)
The following experiments were performed on E15 rat cortical neurons which
were cultured in ELISA wells precoated

with polyornithine, as in ref. 7. The treatments were applied 2 h after plating;
whenever necessary the cells were incubated with ZVAD 1 h before peptide
J addition.
We first wanted to determine whether
this peptide was toxic at concentrations
in the micromolar range. We compared
the number of TUNEL-positive cells of
four conditions after 24 h of culture: neurons treated with 0.25 M, 0.5 M, 1
M of peptide J and untreated controls
(Figure 6.11). For each condition, about
300 cells were counted on the diameter
of six ELISA wells (for a total of 2000).
There is no significant difference between
control, J 0.25 M and J 0.5 M conditions (Student, p > 0.05), whereas the percentage of TUNEL positive cells is higher
for J 1 M than for the control (Student,
p < 0.001). We conclude that the peptide
J is toxic at 1 M but not at the lower
concentrations.
In the next experiment we tested whether
the toxicity of the peptide J can be
blocked by the caspase inhibitor ZVAD

PROTOCOL 6.15

263

%age of TUNEL-positive cells

40

30

20

10

0
Ctrl

J 1 µM

ZVAD

J/ZVAD

Figure 6.12 The caspase inhibitor ZVAD reduces the toxic effect of peptide J (error bars represent
standard deviation)

(Figure 6.12). We studied rat E15 cortical neurons and observed the effect of
ZVAD on J 1 M treated and untreated
cells, these cells were fixed after 18 h
of treatment. For each condition, 300
cells were counted on the diameter of
one ELISA well, and the experiment was
repeated three times with similar results.
The toxicity of peptide J is very effectively
reduced by ZVAD which also reduces
TUNEL-staining in the control (p < 0.001
in both cases, Khi2 test). This means that
the toxic effect of peptide J is mediated by
the caspases and that the TUNEL-staining
in our system is caused by apoptosis.
Data on the activation of caspase-3 by
APP juxtamembrane peptides can be found
in Bertrand et al. [7], along with some
in vivo results.

References
1. Jacobson, M. D., Weil, M. and Raff, M. C.
(1997) Programmed cell death in animal
development. Cell, 88, 347–354.
2. Nagata, S. (1997) Apoptosis by death factor.
Cell, 88, 355–365.

3. Garcia-Calvo, M., Peterson, E. P., Leiting, B.,
Ruel, R., Nicholson, D. W. and Thornberry,
N. A. (1998) Inhibition of human caspases by
peptide-based and macromolecular inhibitors.
J. Biol. Chem., 273, 32 608–32 613.
4. Troy, C. M., Rabacchi, S. A., Friedman, W. J.,
Frappier, T. F., Brown, K. and Shelanski, M. L.
(2000) Caspase-2 mediates neuronal cell death
induced by beta-amyloid. J. Neurosci., 20,
1386–1392.
5. Derossi, D., Chassaing, G. and Prochiantz, A.
(1998) Trojan peptides: the penetratin system
for intracellular delivery. Trends Cell Biol., 8,
84–87.
6. Dupont, E., Joliot, A. and Prochiantz, A.
(2002) Penetratins. In: CRC Handbook on Cell
Penetrating Peptides Ü. Langel, ed.), CRC
Press.
7. Bertrand, E., Brouillet, E., Caille, I., Bouillot, C., Cole, G. M., Prochiantz, A. and Allinquant, B. (2001) A short cytoplasmic domain
of the amyloid precursor protein induces apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. Mol. Cell. Neurosci.,
18, 503–511.
8. Troy, C. M., Derossi, D., Prochiantz, A.,
Greene, L. A. and Shelanski, M. L. (1996)
Downregulation of Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase leads to cell death via the nitric
oxide–peroxynitrite pathway. J. Neurosci., 16,
253–261.

PROTOCOLS 6.16–6.20
The mitochondrial permeability transition
[1–5]
Judie B. Alimonti and Arnold H. Greenberg†
Introduction
Mitochondrial permeability transition (PT)
occurs when the PT pore opens allowing
solutes and water to enter the mitochondrial matrix, often accompanied with the
loss of the mitochondrial membrane potential (m). Direct measurement of the
opening of the PT pore is best ascertained
using calcein AM. The non-fluorescent calcein AM is membrane permeable, and
upon entering the cell is cleaved by
esterases to become fluorescent and membrane impermeable. CoCl2 is added to
eliminate calcein fluorescence in the cytoplasm so that only the mitochondria will

fluoresce. Calcein exits the mitochondria
only upon opening of the PT pore, therefore it is an indicator of PT. Since a closed
PT pore is required to maintain m, the
loss of m can also be used to determine
PT. However, remember that loss of m
can occur independently of PT, therefore
you must verify that it is due to PT by
either adding a PT inhibitor or calcein AM.
The utilization of fluorescent cationic dyes
that accumulate around a membrane with
a transmembrane potential allow the measurement of m. The stronger the membrane potential the more dye accumulates
at a membrane.

PROTOCOL 6.16
The mitochondrial permeability transition: PT
and m loss determined in cells or isolated
mitochondria with confocal laser imaging
[2, 4, 5]

Equipment
For cells and isolated mitochondria

Chambered glass coverslips (e.g. Nunc 12565-103N)
Inverted confocal microscope
Pipette and tips
Polystyrene ice container and ice
Tabletop centrifuge and rotors

Freshly isolated mitochondria and S100
(see Protocols 4.7–4.10)
Assay buffer: 220 mM sucrose, 68 mM
mannitol, 10 mM Hepes-KOH, 10 mM
KCl, 5 mM KH2 PO4 , 2 mM MgCl2 ,
0.5 mM EGTA, 5 mM succinate, 2 µM
rotenone, pH 7.2

Procedure
Cells

Reagents
For cells and isolated mitochondria

Calcein AM (1 mM stock in DMSO)
Tetramethylrhodamine (TMRM: 10 mM
stock in DMSO)
Carbonylcyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP: 100 mM stock in DMSO)
Cyclosporin A (10 mM stock in ethanol)

For cells only
Tissue culture medium
Cell buffer: Hanks balanced salt solutions
(HBSS), 10 mM Hepes pH 7.2

For isolated mitochondria only
Buffer H: 300 mM sucrose, 5 mM TES,
and 200 µM EGTA, pH to 7.3 with
NaOH. (TES = N-tris[hydroxymethyl]methyl-2-aminoethanesulfonic acid).

1. Seed adherent cells onto a chambered
1 Incubate 1–2 days in
glass coverslip. 
a humidified 37 ◦ C/ 5% CO2 incubator
until the cells are in log phase.
2. Pretreat the cells with any PT inhibitors
(i.e. 10 µM cyclosporin A or 50 µM
Bongkrekic acid) as necessary before
incubating the cells with the PT induc2
ers for the required times. 
3. Gently wash the cells twice and resuspend in cell buffer.
4. Load the cells with the fluorescent
marker. Add 1 µM calcein AM and
3 Incubate for 10–15
1–5 mM CoCl2 . 
min at room temperature. Wash four
times then resuspend in cell buffer.
5. Imaging is performed on an inverted
confocal microscope using a band bypass filter of 488 nm for calcein, and

266

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Nomarski optics for transmitted light
images of the same cells. Cells containing mitochondria with a closed PT
pore will fluoresce whereas the cells
that have undergone PT have less or no
fluorescence. The level of fluorescence
per cell can then be quantitated using
imaging software, along with the number of cells with high, medium or low
4 If you are also
levels of fluorescence. 
using 100 nm TMRM to measure m
in the same cells then you will have to
switch the optics back and forth from
488 nm for calcein, to a band bypass
filter of 568 nm for TMRM.
Isolated mitochondria

1. Add 20 µg/ml freshly isolated mitochondria in H buffer to a chambered
5
Centrifuge at 1475g,
coverslip. 
5 min, 4 ◦ C. Wash off the excess layers
6
of mitochondria. 
2. Resuspend in assay buffer containing
100 nM TMRM, 8 µM calcein AM.
Incubate 10–15 min at room temperature. Wash four times and resuspend in
assay buffer with TMRM, along with
the S100 if required.
3. Pretreat with any PT inhibitors (i.e.
10 µM cyclosporin A, 30 min or
50 µM Bongkrekic acid) as necessary
before incubating the mitochondria with
the PT inducers for the required times.
4. Imaging is performed on an inverted
confocal microscope using a band bypass filter of 488 nm for calcein, and
568 nm for TMRM. Take an image
before adding the PT inducer, then at
various time points to follow PT and
7
loss of m. 

Notes

1 For non-adherent cells you can cytospin them onto a glass coverslip, dry
off the surrounding area and apply a

non-toxic, non-reactive grease around
the cells to form a well. Alternatively, you can use a polylysine-coated
chambered coverslip to help the cells
adhere.


2 If your PT inducer acts rapidly then
you can stain your cells with the
fluorophores first and take a baseline
picture on the confocal microscope
before adding your PT inducer and
following the loss of fluorescence.

3 CoCl2 is toxic to the cells over
extended times, therefore must be
washed out. You may have to adjust
the CoCl2 concentration for each
cell line to determine the minimum
concentration of CoCl2 required to
quench the cytoplasmic calcein yet
remain non-toxic.

4 If you induce PT before staining
then you must standardize the staining and confocal settings for all of
the samples. Remember to include an
untreated sample for your negative
control, and CCCP 50–100 µM treatment for your positive control. The PT
inhibitor cyclosporin A (10–20 µM)
can be added to block the PT inducers
to verify your test substance works on
the PT pore.

5 Alternatively, add 20 µg/ml freshly
isolated mitochondria in H buffer to
a six-well plate containing a 22 ×
30 mm coverslip. Centrifuge at
1475g, 5 min, 4 ◦ C. The coverslip
can either be added to an enclosed
heated stage that passes buffer over
it, or dry off the surrounding area
and apply a non-toxic, non-reactive
grease around the mitochondria to
form a well.

6 Mitochondria are sticky but adhere
loosely to the coverslip, so you will
have to gently wash off the excess
multiple layers of mitochondria for

PROTOCOL 6.16

easier viewing on the confocal microscope.


7 The confocal laser can induce PT
in isolated mitochondria, therefore
limit the exposure to the laser, and
include an untreated mitochondria

267

sample for the same time period as the
experiment to determine the stability
of the mitochondria under experimental conditions. CCCP 50–100 µM
treatment is your positive control.

PROTOCOL 6.17
The mitochondrial permeability transition:
measuring PT and m loss in isolated
mitochondria with Rh123 in a fluorometer
[1, 2]

Reagents
Freshly isolated mitochondria and S100
(see Protocols 4.7–4.10 )
Carbonylcyanide m-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP: 100 mM stock in DMSO)
Rhodamine 123 (Rh123) (16 mM stock in
DMF)
Cyclosporin A (10 mM stock in ethanol)
Assay buffer: 220 mM sucrose, 68 mM
mannitol, 10 mM Hepes-KOH, 10 mM
KCl, 5 mM KH2 PO4 , 2 mM MgCl2 ,
0.5 mM EGTA, 5 mM succinate, 2 µM
rotenone, pH 7.2

Equipment
Fluorometer
96-well non-fluorescent black plates
Pipettes and tips
5% CO2 /37 ◦ C humidified incubator

plate with a final mitochondrial concentration between 0.75 and 1 mg/ml and a
minimum volume of 0.1 ml/well. Also
add the S100 if required.
2. The positive control for m loss is
CCCP (50–100 µM final). Pretreatment
with PT inhibitors like cyclosporin A
(10–20 µM, 30 min) should be used to
verify that the m loss is due to PT.
Add the PT inducers for the required
time at 37 ◦ C.
3. Add the fluorescent dye Rh123
(5 µM). 
1 The fluorometer requires
an excitation/emission filter of 485/535
nm. Take readings during the linear
range (5–20 min) of the accumulation
2 
3
of Rh123. 

Notes

Procedure


1 As Rh123 accumulates around respiring mitochondria the fluorescence decreases since Rh123 fluorescence is
quenched at high concentrations, so
the higher the m the lower the fluorescence. This is unique to Rh123.

1. Load freshly isolated mitochondria in
assay buffer in triplicate onto a 96-well


2 The results can be expressed as the
percentage of maximum m loss,

PROTOCOL 6.17

using the CCCP sample as the maximum loss. The mitochondria will deteriorate with time and the background
increases with longer incubations.


3 Alternatively, you can incubate the
mitochondria with Rh123 until the

269

quenching is complete. You then add
your PT inducer and watch for the
increase in fluorescence.

PROTOCOL 6.18
The mitochondrial permeability transition:
measuring PT and m loss in cells and
isolated mitochondria on the FACS [1, 4, 5]

Equipment
FACS and FACS tubes
Pipettes and tips
Polystyrene ice container and ice
5% CO2 /37 ◦ C humidified incubator
Tabletop centrifuge

10 mM Hepes pH 7.2. Resuspend at
1 × 106 cells in 12 ml HBSS, 10 mM
Hepes pH 7.2.
2. Label the cells with the Rh123 (2 µM)
2
for 10 min at room temperature. 
Read on a FACS in FL1.
Mitochondria

Reagents
Freshly isolated mitochondria and S100
(see Protocols 4.7–4.10 )
Rh123 (16 mM stock in DMF)
JC-1 (10 mg/ml stock in DMSO)
DiOC6 (3) (100 µM stock in DMSO)
For cells: Hanks balanced salt solution
(HBSS), 10 mM Hepes pH 7.2
For mitochondria: Assay buffer: 220 mM
sucrose, 68 mM mannitol, 10 mM Hepes-KOH, 10 mM KCl, 5 mM KH2 PO4 ,
2 mM MgCl2 , 0.5 mM EGTA, 5 mM
succinate, 2 µM rotenone, pH 7.2

Procedure
Cells

1. Treat the cells with the PT inhibitors
1
and inducers for the required times. 
Wash the cells twice with HBSS,

1. Pre-incubate 50 µg/ml of freshly isolated mitochondria in 12 ml assay buffer
with PT inhibitors (10–20 µM cyclosporin A) for 30 min before adding the
1
PT inducers for the required time. 
2. Label the mitochondria with the Rh123
(5 µM) for 10 min at room tempera2 Read on a FACS in FL1.
ture. 

Notes

1 The positive control for m loss
is CCCP (50–100 µM final). There
will be a shift in fluorescence with a
change in m.

2 Other dyes that can be utilized include
DiOC6 (3) (25 nM : mitochondria or
40 nM : cells), or JC-1 (5 µg/ml :
mitochondria or 1 µM : cells). JC-1
fluoresces green when it is a monomer
but red when it aggregates about a
mitochondria with high m.

PROTOCOL 6.19
Measuring cytochrome c release in isolated
mitochondria by Western blot analysis [2, 4]

Equipment
SDS-PAGE apparatus
96-well U-bottom tissue culture plate
Pipette and tips
5% CO2 /37 ◦ C humidified incubator

Reagents
Freshly isolated mitochondria and S100
(see Protocols 4.7–4.10)
Assay buffer: 220 mM sucrose, 68 mM
mannitol, 10 mM Hepes-KOH, 10 mM
KCl, 5 mM KH2 PO4 , 2 mM MgCl2 ,
0.5 mM EGTA, 5 mM succinate, 2 µM
rotenone, pH 7.2

U-bottom plate with or without S100,
in a final volume of 60 µl.
2. Pretreat with any PT inhibitors (i.e.
10 µM cyclosporin A, 30 min) as necessary before incubating the mitochondria with the PT inducers at 37 ◦ C for
the desired time period, usually within
0–4 h.
3. Centrifuge the plate at 760g, 5 min.
Add 30 µl of supernatant to 7.5 µl of
5× SDS loading buffer. Boil for 5 min
then add 10 µl to a standard 15% SDSPAGE gel for Western blotting. Use
antibodies recognizing cytochrome c to
verify cytochrome c release into the
supernatant and mitochondrial dysfunc1
tion. 

Cyclosporin A (10 mM stock in ethanol)
PT inducers
Cytochrome c antibody (Pharmingen)

Procedure
1. Add 1 mg/ml freshly isolated mitochondria in assay buffer to a 96-well

Note

1 Cytochrome c release is a measure
of mitochondrial dysfunction but not
necessarily PT. Pre-incubating with
PT pore inhibitors can confirm that the
release of cytochrome c may be due to
PT.

PROTOCOL 6.20
Protein import into isolated mitochondria
[3, 4]

The influence of anti-apoptotic proteins
such as Bcl-2 on the inhibition of PT
can be examined with mitochondria overexpressing Bcl-2. Bcl-2high mitochondria
can be obtained by isolating them from
cells over-expressing Bcl-2, or by loading
the isolated mitochondria with Bcl-2 using
a protein import protocol.

Reagents
Freshly isolated mitochondria and S100
(see Protocols 4.7–4.10 )
Buffer 1: 250 mM sucrose, 10 mM HepesKOH, 2 mM K2 HPO4 , 5 mM Na succinate, 1 mM ATP, 0.08 mM ADP, 1 mM
DTT, pH 7.5
Buffer 2: 20 mM Hepes-KOH, 10 mM
KCl, 2.5 mM Mg Cl2 , 1 mM EDTA,
1 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.5
Buffer 3: 250 mM sucrose, 10 mM HepesKOH, 1 mM DTT, pH 7.5
Assay buffer: 220 mM sucrose, 68 mM
mannitol, 10 mM Hepes-KOH, 10 mM
KCl, 5 mM KH2 PO4 , 2 mM MgCl2 ,
0.5 mM EGTA, 5 mM succinate, 2 µM
rotenone, pH 7.2
Bcl-2 protein

Equipment
37 ◦ C water bath
Eppendorfs

Pipettes and tips
Microcentrifuge

Procedure
1. 50 µl 1 mg/ml freshly isolated mitochondria in buffer 1 is added to 50 µl
buffer 2 containing 0.125–0.5 µg/ml
Bcl-2 protein (higher concentrations
may be toxic). Incubate 30 min at
37 ◦ C.
2. Layer 100 µl onto a 500 µl cushion
of buffer 3 and centrifuge at 14 500g,
5 min, 4 ◦ C.
3. Resuspend pellet in 10 µl of assay
buffer. The mitochondria can then be
used in the confocal, fluorometer, cellfree (Western), or FACS protocols.

References
1. Susin, S. A., Larochette, N., Gueskens, M.
and Kroemer, G. (2000) Quantitation of the
mitochondrial transmembrane potential in cells
and isolated mitochondria. Meth. Enzymol.,
322, 205–208.
2. Alimonti, J. B., Shi, L., Baijal, P. K.
and Greenberg, A. H. (2001) Granzyme B
induces BID-mediated cytochrome c release
and mitochondrial permeability transition. J.
Biol. Chem., 276, 6974–6982.
3. Goping, I. S., Gross, A., Lavoie, J. N.,
Nguyen, M., Jemmerson, R., Roth, K.,
Korsmeyer, S. J. and Shore, G. C. (1998) Regulated targeting of BAX to mitochondria. J.
Cell Biol., 143, 207–215.

PROTOCOL 6.20

4. Vande Velde, C., Cizeau, J., Dubik, D., Alimonti, J., Brown, T., Israels, S., Hakem, R.
and Greenberg, A. H. (2000) BNIP3 and genetic control of necrosis-like cell death through
the mitochondrial permeability transition pore.
Molec. Cell. Biol., 20, 5454–5468.

273

5. Castedo, M., Ferri, K., Roumier, T., Metivier, D., Zamzami, N. and Kroemer, G. (2002)
Quantitation of mitochondrial alterations associated with apoptosis. J. Immunol. Meth., 265,
39–47.

PROTOCOL 6.21
Formation of ternary SNARE complexes in vitro
Jinnan Xiao, Anuradha Pradhan and Yuechueng Liu
Introduction
SNARE (soluble NSF attachment protein
receptor) proteins have been shown to play
essential roles in vesicular transport [1].
In nervous systems, v (vesicle)-SNARE
and t (target)-SNAREs interact with each
other to form a tight ternary complex.
The assembly of such a ternary complex allows the opposing membranes to
be pulled into close proximity, permitting synaptic vesicle fusion to proceed and
release neurotransmitters [2]. The neuronal
SNARE core complex includes v-SNARE
synaptobrevin (also known as VAMP), tSNAREs syntaxin and SNAP-25. While
both synaptobrevin and syntaxin are membrane proteins with a single C-terminal
transmembrane domain, SNAP-25 attaches
to membranes via post-translational palmitoylation of its cysteine residues.
Many studies involving vesicular trafficking require reconstitution of the
SNARE core complex in vitro. For instance, GST-fusion protein pull-down
assay is often used to investigate proteins implicated in regulation of membrane fusion via their interactions with the
SNAREs. This short protocol will focus on
the isolation of recombinant SNAREs and
the reconstitution of the SNARE core complex in vitro (see Figure 6.13).

Equipment
Tabletop microcentrifuge and 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes

Figure 6.13 An example of reconstituted
SNARE ternary complexes analysed by SDSPAGE and stained with Coomassie Blue. The
apparent molecular weights for the SNAREs are:
60 kDa (EST-SyntaxinTM), 32 kDa (6 × HisSNAP-25), and 20 kDa (Synaptobrevin). Prestained molecular weight marker is shown on the
left. The molecular weights for the markers are
(in kDa): 106, 78, 50, 32, 26, 20

37 ◦ C Incubator, with shaker
Sonicator (e.g. Virtis Virsonic 50)
Rotating shaker (e.g. Labquake Shaker)

Reagents
LB bacterial culture media
IPTG (e.g. Sigma, GIBCO)
Glutathione-agarose (e.g. Pierce Chemicals)
Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)

PROTOCOL 6.21

Thrombin cleavage and capture kit (e.g.
Novagen)
6 × His-tagged SNAP-25, in a bacterial
expression plasmid vector (e.g. Invitrogen’s pTrcHis, Qiagen’s pQE)
Syntaxin with deleted transmembrane
domain (syntaxinTM) in pGEX-2T
Synaptobrevin in pGEX-2T

Procedure
1. Prepare
6 × His-SNAP-25,
GSTsyntaxinTM and GST-synaptobrevin.
The procedure for GST fusion protein purification has been described in
detail by Smith and Johnson [3]. For
affinity purification of 6 × His-tagged
proteins using Ni-NTA agarose, follow
the manufacturers’ instructions (e.g.
Qiagen’s The QIAexpressionist). Dialyse the purified His-SNAP-25 against
PBS overnight at 4 ◦ C with at least
three buffer changes. The purified proteins should be kept at 4 ◦ C for shortterm (<5 days) storage. For long-term
storage, the proteins can be kept in
−20 ◦ C freezer (avoid repeated freezing/thawing). The GST-syntaxinTM
agarose is kept at 4 ◦ C and it is stable
for at least 2 weeks.
2. Add 5 units of biotinated thrombin to
∼1 ml slurry of GST-synaptobrevin in
PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100.
Mix the sample well by gently reversing
the microcentrifuge tube several times
and put the tube onto a rotating shaker.
1
Incubate overnight at 4 ◦ C. 
3. Centrifuge for 2 min in a microcentrifuge at maximum speed at 4 ◦ C. Collect the supernatant containing synaptobrevin. Wash the agarose beads once
with PBS by centrifugation at 4 ◦ C.
Use ∼0.4–0.5 ml PBS which is about
the same volume as the agarose beads.

275

Combine the supernatants. However, if
one wants a more concentrated synaptobrevin preparation, it will be better
to keep them separated, since the first
supernatant usually has more synaptobrevin.
4. Add at least 30 µl streptoavidin-agarose
to the supernatant and incubate for
20–30 min at room temperature. Again,
use a rotating shaker for continuous
mixing of the sample.
5. Centrifuge the sample for 5 min at
room temperature and at maximum
speed. Collect the supernatant and discard the pellet. Dialyse the sample
against PBS overnight at 4 ◦ C with three
buffer changes.
6. Aliquot 100 µl of His-SNAP-25 (0.2
mg/ml), 100 µl of synaptobrevin (0.15
mg/ml) and 100 µl agarose slurry of
GST-syntaxinTM (∼0.5 mg/ml) and
mix in a 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tube
by gently reversing the tube several
2
times. 
7. Place the mixture on a rotator and
3
incubate overnight at 4 ◦ C. 
8. Centrifuge the sample in a microcentrifuge at maximum speed for 2 min at
4 ◦ C. Discard the supernatant (or keep
it for further experiments). Wash the
agarose resin with 1 ml PBS three times
at 4 ◦ C by centrifugation.
9. The agarose beads containing ternary
complexes can be boiled in SDS sample
buffer and directly analysed by SDSPAGE, or immunoblot analysis using
specific antibodies against the SNAREs.
Alternatively, the complexes can be
eluted with 5 mM reduced glutathione
for further experiments.

Notes
This procedure will take approximately
48 h (not including the preparation of

276

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

His-SNAP-25, GST-syntaxinTM, and
GST-synaptobrevin).


1 Triton X-100 is helpful in releasing the synaptobrevin from the GST
agarose.

2 The molar ratio for the ternary complex in vivo is 1 : 1 : 1.

3 Incubation time can be shorter, e.g.
1 h at room temperature. However,

overnight incubation at 4 ◦ C seems to
produce more complexes.

References
1. Jahn R. and Südhof T. C. (1999) Ann. Rev.
Biochem., 66, 863–911.
2. Brunger A. T. (2001) Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.,
11, 163–173.
3. Smith, D. B. and Johnson, K. (1988) Gene,
67, 31–40.

PROTOCOL 6.22
In vitro reconstitution of liver
endoplasmic reticulum
Jacques Paiement and Robin Young
Introduction
In vitro reconstitution is among the most
important and widely used strategies in
studying membrane traffic [1]. We describe
here an in vitro assay which allows study
of the reconstitution of rat liver endoplasmic reticulum. Membrane derivatives
of liver endoplasmic reticulum (ER) are
incubated under specific conditions leading to membrane fusion and the formation
of large ER membrane complexes. Following incubation the reconstituted ER membranes are studied by electron microscopy.
Depending on the type of ER derivative
(i.e. rough or smooth?) used in the reconstitution assay the assembly products will
exhibit different structural properties and
can be distinguished based on morphological criteria. Examples are described
below.

Reagents
ATP (100 mM) to be stored in aliquots in
powder form in a dessicator at −80 ◦ C
(High grade. Sigma Chemicals cat. no.
A-7699)
Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail
(1 tablet/ml = 50 × concentrated) stored
at −20 ◦ C (Roche Applied Science cat.
no. 1697498)

Creatine Phosphokinase (1 U/µl) to be
stored in aliquots in powder form in
a dessicator at 4 ◦ C (Roche Applied
Science cat. no. 127566)
DTT (250 mM) to be stored in aliquots
in powder form in a dessicator at 4 ◦ C
(Sigma Chemicals cat. no. D-0632)
GTP (25 mM) to be stored in aliquots in
powder form in a dessicator at −80 ◦ C
(High grade. Sigma Chemicals cat. no.
G-8877)
MgCl2 (125 mM), filtered on Whatman
no. 42 ashless filter to remove any
particulate matter in solution
Phosphocreatine (50 mM) to be stored in
aliquots in powder form in a dessicator
at 4 ◦ C (Roche Applied Science cat. no.
621714)
Sucrose-Imidazole (0.25 mM sucrose,
3 mM imidazole, pH 7.4), filtered on
Whatman no. 42 ashless filter to remove
any particulate matter in solution
tER derived membranes (see ‘Fractionation of rough and smooth microsomes
from rat liver homogenates’, Protocol
6.22 for preparation)
Tris-HCl buffer (200 mM, pH 7.4), filtered on Whatman no. 42 ashless filter to remove any particulate matter in
solution

278

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Equipment
Polypropylene conical microcentrifuge
tubes (1 ml)
Incubation bath, with shaker (37 ◦ C)

Procedure 
1
1. Prepare test samples and all stock
solutions on ice (ensure all solutions
are at least 4 ◦ C prior to preparation
of medium).
2. Prepare stock solutions of DTT, creatine phosphokinase and phosphocreatine. Remove protease inhibitor stock
from −20 ◦ C and put on ice to
thaw.
3. The following reagents are added to
each tube to produce a final incubation
mixture of 250 µl:
• 125 µl Tris buffer to produce final
concentration of 100 mM,
• 10 µl MgCl2 to produce final concentration of 5 mM,
• 1.8 µl creatine phosphokinase to
produce final concentration of 7.3
U/ml,
• 10 µl phosphocreatine to produce
final concentration of 2 mM,
• 10 µl DTT to produce final concentration of 0.1 mM,
• 5 µl protease inhibitor cocktail to
produce final concentration of 1×.
4. Take membranes out of −80 ◦ C and
place on ice.
5. Add sucrose-imidazole (amount added
is calculated to bring final incubation
volume to 250 µl, after addition of all
reagents).
6. Take GTP and ATP out of −80 ◦ C and
keep on ice.

7. Prepare stock ATP and add 5 µl to
each tube to produce a concentration
of 2 mM.
8. Prepare stock GTP and add 10 µl to
each tube to produce a concentration
of 1 mM.
9. Verify membranes are thawed and add
150 µg of membrane protein to each
tube.
10. Incubate at 37 ◦ C for 90 min with
constant oscillation, with additional
manual agitation every half-hour.
11. At end of 90 min add 5 and 10 µl of
2
ATP and GTP respectively. 
12. Continue incubation for an additional
90 min at 37 ◦ C with constant oscillation, with additional manual agitation
of individual tubes every half-hour.

Comments
The incubation medium described here
contains factors that will stimulate fusion
of membranes of classical rough microsomes [2, 3], fusion of membranes of lowdensity rough microsomes [4–7], fusion of
membranes of smooth microsomes [4–7]
and fusion of membranes of the nuclear
envelope [8]. The reconstituted elements
formed as a consequence of membrane
fusion have been characterized by a variety of biochemical, histochemical and
immunocytochemical procedures [2–8].
The factors involved in the transformation
of various ER membrane subdomains are
summarized in a review [9].
Figure 6.14 shows in vitro reconstituted
transitional endoplasmic reticulum (tER).
Derivatives of liver tER were incubated
using the specific incubation conditions
described above. Following incubation the
membrane sample was fixed in suspension
and processed as described previously [7].
The two domains of the tER are recognizable based on morphological criteria. The

PROTOCOL 6.22

279

Figure 6.14 Micrograph of reconstituted hepatocyte ER showing a membrane complex consisting
of branching and anastomosing smooth tubules in continuity with peripheral rough ER cisternae. The
arrow points to closely apposed membranes of two rough ER cisternae. One cisterna is dilated and
contains the arrow and the arrowheads, the other cisterna is flattened and tightly bound at the periphery
of the dilated cisterna. Ribosomes are mainly observed between the two cisternae. Arrowheads point
to ribosomes. f, fenestrations; t, smooth tubes.

rER domain consists of parallel cisternae
limited by ribosome-studded membranes
and the sER domain consists of a network of interconnecting tubules limited
by smooth membranes devoid of attached
ribosomes.

Notes
This procedure will take approximately
4 h.


1 Similar cell-free incubation conditions
for reconstitution of tER have previously been summarized and include
variations in concentration of certain
reagents and other parameters of incubation [4–6].

2 This will compensate for potential
nucleotide hydrolysis during incubation by membrane nucleotidases.

References
1. Mellman, I. and Warren, G. (2000) Cell, 100,
99–112.

2. Paiement, J. and Bergeron, J. J. M. (1983) J.
Cell Biol., 96, 1791–1796.
3. Paiement, J., Beaufay, H. and Godelaine, D.
(1980) J. Cell Biol., 86, 29–37.
4. Roy, L., Bergeron, J. J. M., Lavoie, C., Hendriks, R., Gushue, J., Fazel, A., Pelletier, A.,
Morré, D. J., Subramaniam, V. N., Hong, W.
and Paiement, J. (2000) Mol. Biol. Cell., 11,
2529–2542.
5. Lavoie, C. Chevet, E., Roy, L., Tonks, N. K.,
Fazel, A., Posner, B. I., Paiement, J. and Bergeron, J. J. M. (2000) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 25,
13 637–13 642.
6. Lavoie, C., Paiement, J., Dominguez, M., Roy,
L., Dahan, S., Gushue, J. N. and Bergeron, J. J. M. (1999) J. Cell Biol., 146,
285–299.
7. Lavoie, C., Lanoix, J., Kan, F. W. K. and
Paiement, J. (1996) J. Cell Sci., 109, 1415–
1425.
8. Paiement, J. (1984) Exp. Cell Res., 151,
354–366.
9. Paiement, J. and Bergeron, J. (2001) Biochem.
Cell Biol., 79, 587–592.

PROTOCOL 6.23
Asymmetric incorporation of glycolipids into
membranes and detection of lipid flip-flop
movement
Félix M. Goñi*, Ana-Victoria Villar, F.-Xabier Contreras
and Alicia Alonso
Introduction
Assemblies of glycosphingolipids and cholesterol are believed to form microdomains
(‘rafts’) with specific functions in membrane
traffic and signal transduction. Flask-shaped
60 nm invaginations of the cell plasma membrane, termed caveolae, may be the sites
at which these domains cluster and selfstabilize [1, 2]. Rafts and caveolae recruit
specific membrane proteins which are implicated in cell signalling [3, 4].
These domains have a particular asymmetric disposition as glycosphingolipids
and glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)linked proteins locate preferentially in the
outer leaflet [1, 2, 5, 6]. While artificial lipidic vesicles (liposomes) have been extremely useful in the understanding of multiple
aspects of membrane structure and function,
no simple technology was available for the
reliable preparation of liposomes with asymmetrically distributed lipids. In view of the
structural and functional importance of rafts
and caveolae, we have recently described the
preparation of liposomes with GPI and/or
glycosphingolipids located preferentially in
the outer monolayer [7].
Cell membrane asymmetry, however, is
not a static phenomenon. Instead, it arises
from a series of concerted transmembrane

movements, leading to a time-invariant
distribution of bilayer components. Lipid
asymmetry in particular is known to be
altered in physiological or pathological
events such as recognition by phagocytes,
blood coagulation, or apoptosis [8]. The
collapse of lipid asymmetry is often known
as lipid ‘scrambling’.
Sphingomyelinases cleave the sphingophospholipid sphingomyelin yielding
phosphorylcholine and ceramide [9, 10]. In
turn, ceramide may alter a number of
membrane properties: it increases lipid
order, gives rise to ceramide-rich separate domains, and destabilizes the lamellar
structures, inducing membrane permeabilization and membrane fusion [4, 11–14].
In this context, we have developed an
assay to test transmembrane (‘flip-flop’)
lipid movement induced by sphingomyelinase via ceramide formation [15]. Both the
preparation of asymmetric vesicles and the
flip-flop assay are described below.

A. Asymmetric incorporation
of glycolipids into liposomal
membranes
Materials

GM3 monosialoganglioside (e.g. Matreya
1
Inc. or other supplier) 

PROTOCOL 6.23

Neuraminidase (EC 3.2.1.18) from Clostridium perfringens (Sigma)
FITC-dextran (fluorescein isothiocyanatedextran, average molecular weight 4400
Da) (Sigma)
Egg lipids (sphingomyelin, phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylethanolamine) are
purchased from Lipid Products, UK
Cholesterol, 8-aminonaphthalene-1, 3, 6trisulfonic acid (ANTS) (Molecular
Probes Inc.)
p-Xylenebis (pyridinium bromide) (DPX)
(Molecular Probes Inc.)
Liposomes (large unilamellar vesicles obtained by extrusion through polycarbonate filters 100–400 nm pore diam2
eter [16]) 
Procedure

Asymmetric incorporation of glycolipids
1. Incorporate GPI or GM3 to liposomes
prepared by extrusion, by drying the
glycolipid from organic solvent and
resuspend in a volume of methanol
equivalent to 5% of the vesicle suspen3
sion volume. 
2. Add vesicles to the methanolic glycolipid solution with vortex mixing.
3. Incubate the vesicles for 15 min [7]. 
4
Representative results

The mild character of the bilayer perturbation caused by glycolipids during their incorporation under our conditions is demonstrated by an experiment
in which fluorescent molecules (FITCdextran, molecular weight 4400 Da) are
entrapped in the vesicles. These molecules
are self-quenching and their fluorescence
increases upon dilution [17]. As shown

281

in Figure 6.15, neither methanol nor GPI
in methanolic solution is able to release
FITC-dextran molecules from the liposomes. As expected, addition of 0.025%
(w/v) Triton X-100 releases the whole
vesicular contents. Similar experiments
with GM3 instead of GPI also fail to show
any vesicle leakage secondary to ganglioside insertion (not shown). When ANTSDPX, the molecular weight of which is one
order of magnitude below that of FITCdextran 4400, is entrapped in the vesicles,
incorporation of GPI is accompanied by
partial release of the dyes, while GM3 is
completely inactive in this respect [7].
The asymmetric insertion of GM3
into the outer monolayer of liposomes
is shown in the following experiment.
Large unilamellar vesicles of either
phosphatidylethanolamine : phosphatidylcholine : cholesterol (2 : 1 : 1) or phosphatidylethanolamine : phosphatidylcholine (2 : 1) are added to GM3 ganglioside in methanolic solution (5 mole %
of total lipid). After vortexing and incubation at room temperature, the vesicles
(0.3 mM) are treated with neuraminidase
(0.16 U/ml), an enzyme known to degrade
the glycosidic part of gangliosides, releasing sialic acid. In this preparation, lipids
other than GM3 are not hydrolysed by neuraminidase. Furthermore, neuraminidase
cannot cross the membrane and reach
the inner liposomal compartment. Neuraminidase is assayed in 10 mM Hepes, pH
5.6, 39 ◦ C, with continuous stirring. Total
lipid concentration is 0.3 mM. Enzyme
concentration is 0.16 U/ml. Aliquots are
removed from the reaction mixture at regular intervals and extracted with chloroform/methanol/hydrochloric acid (200/100/
1, by volume). Sialic acid is assayed
in the aqueous phase with the resorcinol method [18]. The enzyme activity is
shown as a function of time in Figure 6.16.
After 60 min, when c.75% of the ganglioside appears to have been cleaved,

282

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES
120

TX-100

100
Fluorescence (a.u.)

80
60

GPI in
methanol

Methanol

40
20
0
−20

1

3

2

−40
0

10

20
Time (min)

30

40

Figure 6.15 Asymmetric incorporation of GPI into the outer monolayer of liposomes, and its effect on
the permeability barrier properties of the vesicles. Lipid composition was phosphatidylethanolamine :
phosphatidylcholine : cholesterol 2 : 1 : 1 mole ratio. Liposomes were large unilamellar vesicles containing entrapped FITC-dextran (average molecular weight 4400 Da). The various reagents were added
as indicated by the arrows. The encircled figures at the bottom correspond to the times at which average diameters were measured by quasi-elastic light scattering. Average particle diameters were: 1,
131.9 ± 1.1 nm; 2, 129.7 ± 2.3 nm; 3, complete heterogeneity (polydispersity 1.0). Taken from ref. 7,
with permission

(A) 100
% Hydrolysed GM3 sialic acid

TX-100
80

60

40

20

0
0

20

40
60
Time (min)

80

100

Figure 6.16 Neuraminidase cleavage of GM3 that had been asymmetrically inserted into the outer
monolayer of liposomes. Lipid composition as in Figure 6.15. Total lipid concentration was 0.3 mM.
GM3 concentration was 0.015 mM. Enzyme concentration was 0.16 U/ml. Experiment started in the
absence of detergent, Triton X-100 (0.025% w/v) added at the time indicated by the arrow. Taken
from ref. 7, with permission

Triton X-100 (0.025% w/v final concentration) is added in order to terminate
the membrane barrier effect (Triton X-100
under these conditions permeabilizes the

liposomal membranes to large molecules,
see Figure 6.15). No further hydrolysis
occurs during the following 30 min. This is
interpreted as an indication that most, if not

PROTOCOL 6.23

all, of the GM3 molecules were originally
located in the outer monolayer and were
accessible to neuraminidase. Independent
experiments had shown that the lack of
further hydrolysis after membrane permeabilization by Triton X-100 was not due to
a detergent-induced enzyme inactivation.

B. Detection of lipid
transmembrane (flip-flop)
movement
Materials

Sphingomyelinase (E.C. 3.1.4.12) from
5
Bacillus cereus (Sigma) 
Other materials, liposome preparation and
asymmetric incorporation of lipids are
performed as described in section A,
above. When required, neuraminidase
(0.16 U/ml) is added to the hydration
buffer. In this case, non-entrapped neuraminidase is removed by gel filtration
through Sephadex G-75
6
Anti-neuraminidase IgG 

Procedure

Ganglioside flip-flop translocation
in lipid bilayers
1. Treat LUV composed of SM : PE :
Ch (2 : 1 : 1 mole ratio) with GM3 ganglioside in methanol to obtain vesicles
containing GM3 (∼10 mole % of total
lipid) located exclusively on the outer
7
leaflet, as described above. 
2. Add sphingomyelinase to the suspension of these vesicles to induce SM
hydrolysis, that reaches equilibrium
after c.20 min, when c.40% of SM has
been hydrolysed (Figure 6.17(a)).
3. Addition of Triton X-100 after 60 min
causes membrane disruption, but SM
hydrolysis does not go beyond 50%

283

30 min after detergent addition, i.e.
90 min after sphingomyelinase addi8
tion. 
4. Remove aliquots of the vesicle suspension at fixed times after sphingomyelinase addition, and analyse for the GM3
product of neuraminidase activity, sialic
acid. GM3 is hydrolysed almost in parallel with SM, except that no saturation
9
was observed (Figure 6.17(b)). 

Comment
It is necessary to rule out the possibility of neuraminidase coming out from
the vesicles as a result of sphingomyelinase activity. Ceramides increase membrane permeability, and efflux of molecules
up to 40 kDa has been observed in
sphingomyelin-treated vesicles [13]. Neuraminidase has a molecular mass of 70
kDa. In order to clarify this aspect, a
control experiment can be performed in
which any extravesicular neuraminidase
would be neutralized by a specific antibody. With this aim, a polyclonal antineuraminidase antibody was raised in rabbits,
and it was checked that the purified
antineuraminidase IgG at 50 µg/ml completely abolished neuraminidase activity
at 0.16 U/ml. The same concentration of
IgG had no effect on sphingomyelinase
activity. When the experiment described
in Figure 6.17 is repeated with 50 µg/ml
antineuraminidase antibody in the medium,
the results are exactly the same (data not
shown). It can be concluded that GM3
hydrolysis is catalysed by neuraminidase
inside the vesicles, thus sphingomyelinase
activity causes GM3 to flip to the inside
lipid monolayer.

Notes

1 Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is
purified from rat livers as described by
Varela-Nieto et al. [19].

284

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES
(a) 100

% Hydrolysed SM

80
Triton X-100

60
40
20
0
0

20

40
Time (min)

60

80

% Hydrolysed GM3

(b) 100
Triton X-100

80
60
40
20
0
0

20

40
Time (min)

60

80

Figure 6.17 Flip-flop of GM3 ganglioside induced by sphingomyelinase activity, in large unilamellar
vesicles. (a) Time-course of sphingomyelin hydrolysis by external sphingomyelinase. (b) GM3 ganglioside hydrolysis by entrapped neuraminidase. Average values ± SEM. Vesicle composition was
sphingomyelin : phosphatidylethanolamine : cholesterol (2 : 1 : 1, mole ratio) + 10 mole % GM3 on
the outer leaflet only [15]


2 Several lipid compositions based on
sphingomyelin, phosphatidylcholine
and phosphatidylethanolamine with or
without cholesterol have been used
with similar results from the point
of view of glycolipid incorporation.
When required, liposomes are prepared containing entrapped fluorescent
dyes, such as ANTS-DPX [20], or
FITC-dextrans [17]. In these cases the
fluorescent probes are included in the
lipid hydration buffer during liposome
preparation, and the non-entrapped

probes are removed from the vesicles
in a Sephadex G-75 separation column.


3 Glycolipids have been used at molar
fractions of up to 0.1 of total lipid.

4 In our experience this incubation is
allowed to proceed at room temperature because the lipids used in liposome preparation are of natural origin,
and their mixtures are expected to be
in the fluid state at room temperatures.
Other lipid compositions may require
incubation at higher temperatures.

PROTOCOL 6.23


5 Sphingomyelinase is used in the presence of 2 mM o-phenantroline in
order to inhibit traces of contaminant phospholipase C activity. Previous studies had shown that ophenantroline does not affect sphingomyelinase activity.

6 Raise antibody in rabbits and purify
using a Hi-trap protein G affinity column. The crude antibody (1 ml) is
passed through the column and the latter is washed three times with 20 mM
phosphate, pH 7 buffer. Antineuraminidase IgG is eluted from the
affinity column with a 0.1 mM glycine-HCl, pH 2.7 buffer.

7 The vesicles contain neuraminidase
and, when kept at 4 ◦ C, the vesicles
are stable for at least 12 h. No significant amount of GM3 is hydrolysed in
this period of time.

8 Previous experiments had shown that
this Triton X-100 concentration did
not inhibit sphingomyelinase or neuraminidase.

9 After addition of Triton X-100, virtually all GM3 is cleaved by neuraminidase. The data suggest that, as
a consequence of sphingomyelinase
activity, GM3 is flipping to the inner
leaflet, thus becoming accessible to
neuraminidase.

References
1. Simons, K. and Ehehalt, R. (2002) J. Clin.
Invest., 110, 597–603.
2. Razani, B., Woodman, S. E. and Lisanti,
M. P. (2002) Pharmacol. Rev., 54, 431–467.

285

3. Kenworthy, A. (2002) Trends Biochem. Sci.,
27, 435–437.
4. Kolesnick, R. N., Goñi, F. M. and Alonso, A.
(2000) J. Cell. Physiol., 184, 285–300.
5. Simons, K. and Ikonen, E. (1997) Nature,
387, 569–572.
6. Hooper, N. M. (1998) Curr. Biol., 8, R114–
R116.
7. Villar, A. V., Alonso, A., Pañeda, C., VarelaNieto, I., Brodbeck, U. and Goñi, F. M.
(1999) FEBS Lett., 457, 71–74.
8. Bevers, E. M., Comfurius, P., Dekkers,
D. W. C. and Zwaal, R. F. A. (1999) Biochim.
Biophys. Acta, 1439, 317–330.
9. Barenholz, Y., Roitman, A. and Gatt, S.
(1966) J. Biol. Chem., 241, 3731–3737.
10. Goñi, F. M. and Alonso, A. (2002) FEBS
Lett., 531, 38–46.
11. Basañez, G. and Edwards, K. (1997) Biophys. J., 72, 2630–2637.
12. Goñi, F. M. and Alonso, A. (2000) Biosci.
Rep., 20, 443–463.
13. Montes, L. R., Goñi, F. M. and Alonso, A.
(2002) J. Biol. Chem., 277, 11 788–11 794.
14. Ruiz-Argüello, M. B.,
Goñi, F. M.
and
Alonso, A. (1998) J. Biol. Chem., 273,
22 977–22 982.
15. Contreras, F. X., Villar, A. V., Alonso, A.,
Kolesnick, R. N. and Goñi, F. M. (2003)
278, 37169–37174 .
16. Mayer, L. D., Hope, M. H. and Cullis, P. R.
(1986) Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 858, 161–
168.
17. Ostolaza, H., Bartolomé, B., Ortiz de
Zárate, I., de la Cruz, F. and Goñi, F. M.
(1993) Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1147, 81–88.
18. Wybenga, L. E., Epand, R. F., Nir, S., Chu,
J. W. K., Sharon, F. J., Flanagan, T. D. and
Epand, R. M. (1996) Biochemistry, 35,
9513–9518.
19. Varela-Nieto, I., Alvarez, L. and Mato, J. M.
(1993) Handb. Endocr. Res. Tech., 20, 391–
405.
20. Ellens, H., Bentz, J. and Szoka, F. C. (1986)
Biochemistry, 25, 4141–4147.

PROTOCOL 6.24
Purification of clathrin-coated vesicles
from rat brains
Brian J. Peter and Ian G. Mills
Introduction
Clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs) are endocytic and trafficking organelles which are
highly enriched in the coat protein clathrin,
as well as AP complexes and a number of
other proteins involved in vesicle budding
and endocytosis. There are other protocols
published detailing their purification [1, 2],
but this protocol is quick (1 day) and useful for purifying small amounts of CCVs
sufficient for Western blots, EM, or further
clathrin purification.

Reagents
Frozen rat brains 
1
HKM buffer (25 mM Hepes pH 7.4,
125 mM potassium acetate, 5 mM magnesium acetate, 1 mM dithiothreitol)
HKM buffer with 12.5% Ficoll and 12.5%
sucrose, and HKM buffer made up with
deuterium oxide (D2 O) with 8% su2
crose 
Protease inhibitor cocktail III (Calbiochem)

Equipment
Low-speed refrigerated centrifuge and
rotor (e.g. Sorvall SS34 rotor or equivalent)
Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer (with both
45 and 15 ml tubes)

Preparative ultracentrifuge and rotors (e.g.
Beckman type 70 Ti, type 45 Ti, SW 40
Ti + tubes, or equivalent)

Procedure
1. Crush 10 rat brains into small pieces
while still frozen; this can be done in a
sealed bag immediately after removing
brains from freezer, or under liquid
3
nitrogen with a mortar and pestle. 
2. Make up to 40 ml with HKM and add
Calbiochem protease cocktail set III.
3. Homogenize brains in a 50 ml potterElvehjem
homogenizer
(10–15
strokes). Avoid frothing.
4. Spin at 7000 rpm (5800gmax ) for
20 min in an SS34 rotor.
5. Collect supernatant with a pipette. Be
careful to minimize carryover of the
loose lipid pellet.
6. Ultracentrifuge
at
45 000 rpm
(208 000gmax ) for 40 min in a type
70 Ti rotor.
7. Resuspend pellet in 10 ml of HKM.
Homogenize pellet in a 15 ml homogenizer.
8. Add an equal volume of HKM containing Ficoll (12.5% w/v) and sucrose
(12.5% w/v). Mix by inversion to
ensure homogeneity.

PROTOCOL 6.24

287

10. Dilute the supernatant 1 : 5 in HKM.


1 Brains can be purchased from Harlan Seralab Loughborough, UK and
should be stored at −80 ◦ C. (Fresh
brains can also be used.)

11. Centrifuge at 35 000 rpm (142 000gmax )
for 60 min in a type 45 Ti rotor.


2 All buffers should be ice-cold during
the procedure.

12. Resuspend pellet in 15 ml of HKM
and homogenize.


3 Alternatively, mince the brains with
scissors after adding the cold buffer.

4
13. Leave on ice for about 1 h. 


4 For clathrin purification, steps 13 and
14 can be omitted, as they decrease
final protein yield. Pellets should be
resuspended in 800 mM Tris-HCl pH
8.0 and incubated in rotating tubes
overnight at 4 ◦ C. Pellet the vesicles
at 50 000 rpm in a Beckman TLA100
rotor (20 min spin). The supernatant
is highly enriched in clathrin. Clathrin
can be purified away from AP complexes and other proteins by gel filtration or ion exchange chromatography.

9. Spin in a type 70 Ti rotor at 25 000 rpm
(64 000gmax ) for 20 min.

14. Spin at 13 000 rpm (17 000gmax ) for
10 min in a type 70 Ti rotor to
sediment insoluble material.
15. Layer supernatant over a cushion
of 8% (w/v) sucrose made up with
D2 O and HKM. Spin supernatant at
25 000 rpm (80 000gmax ) in a swingout rotor (SW40) for 2 h.
16. Resuspend the pellet in HKM to yield
a cloudy suspension. Fractions can be
snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and
stored at −70 ◦ C or used immediately.

Notes
This procedure will take approximately
9 h. All steps should be done at 4 ◦ C.

References
1. Pearse, B. M. (1983) Isolation of coated vesicles. Methods Enzymol., 98, 320–326.
2. Keen, J. H., Willingham, M. C. and Pastan,
I. H. (1979) Clathrin-coated vesicles: isolation, dissociation and factor-dependent reassociation of clathrin baskets. Cell, 16, 303–312.

PROTOCOL 6.25
Reconstitution of endocytic intermediates on
a lipid monolayer
Brian J. Peter and Matthew K. Higgins
Introduction
Lipid monolayers have been used for
many years as templates for the formation of two-dimensional crystals of soluble proteins (reviewed in ref. 1) and,
more recently, membrane proteins [2]. The
principle of the assay is that phospholipids, when placed onto an aqueous
droplet, adopt a conformation in which
the hydrophobic tails point towards the air
while the hydrophilic head groups contact
the solution. Proteins of interest interact
with the head groups and are concentrated
in a two-dimensional array. A hydrophobic
electron microscope grid interacts with the
lipid tails, allowing the monolayer to be
removed from the droplet and studied in
the electron microscope. The lipid monolayer composition can be tailored to simulate the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane, and thus can be used in conjunction
with purified proteins to reconstitute early
stages of endocytosis. While the fluidity
and flexibility of a lipid monolayer are not
the same as those of a lipid bilayer with
aqueous solution on either side, this technique can nonetheless be useful for studying the properties of different proteins and
their interactions with clathrin. The formation of clathrin coats can be observed using
negative stain electron microscopy, while
the use of platinum shadowing can reveal
the degree of invagination of these coats.

For examples, see refs 3 and 4. A gallery
of images obtained with this technique can
be view on the web (http://www2.mrclmb.cam.ac.uk/groups/hmm/epsin/EM/).

Reagents
Chloroform
Cholesterol (Avanti), dissolved to 10 mg/ml
in Chloroform
Clathrin (purified) HKM buffer (25 mM
Hepes pH 7.4, 125 mM potassium acetate, 5 mM magnesium acetate, 1 mM
1
dithiothreitol) 
Methanol
Phosphatidylinositol and Phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (Avanti polar lipids), dissolved to 1 mg/ml in 3 : 1 chlo2
roform: methanol. 
Phosphatidylserine, phosphatidylcholine
and phosphatidylethanolamine (Sigma)
dissolved in chloroform to 10 mg/ml.
Purified AP180, epsin or other clathrinand lipid-binding protein.
Uranyl acetate, 2% w/v (Biorad), with
0.0025% w/v polyacrylic acid (Sigma)
3
in water 

Equipment
Carbon and collodion-coated gold electron
microscopy grids (e.g. G204G from
Agar Scientific Ltd, coated first with

PROTOCOL 6.25

collodion or formvar, and then with a
thin layer of evaporated carbon)
Forceps for handling EM grids – self-locking spring forceps are especially useful
Humid chamber, or covered container with
a wet paper towel inside
Parafilm
Teflon block with 60 µl wells allowing for
side injection (see Figure 6.18)
Transmission electron microscope
Vacuum evaporator, 0.2 mm diameter piece of platinum wire (TAAB Laboratories), 1 mm thick tungsten wire
(also TAAB) (necessary for platinum
shadowing)
Whatman filter paper or similar, for
blotting EM grids

Procedure
1. Make up a lipid mixture containing
10% cholesterol, 40% PE, 40% PC

289

and 10% PtdIns(4,5)P2 to a final concentration of 0.1 mg/ml in a 19 : 1
mixture of chloroform : methanol
(methanol is necessary to maintain
PtdIns(4,5)P2 solubility). This mixture should be made on the day the
monolayer is made. If stored, it should
be stored under argon at −80 ◦ C in a
glass vial with a glass or Teflon lid,
for not longer than 3 days.
2. Arrange Teflon block in humid chamber, and fill wells of Teflon block
with HKM buffer. Fill the wells with
40–60 µl of buffer, such that the total
volume in the well will be 60 µl after
4
injection of protein samples. 
3. Carefully pipette (or inject with
Hamilton syringe) 1 µl of lipid mixture on to the buffer in the well. As
a negative control, inject pure chloroform without any lipid (this will test
for lipid dependence of any structures

(b)
(a)

(b)
(a)

Figure 6.18 Top (above) and cross-section (below) views of the Teflon block used for monolayer formation. The block contains eight wells for processing samples in parallel. Main buffer well (a) should
be 4 mm in diameter × 5 mm deep (or deeper) for a 60 µl sample volume. The monolayer is formed
on top of a buffer droplet in well (a), and proteins and buffer are injected later through the side port (b)

290

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

seen, such as whether clathrin baskets
form in solution instead of clathrin
5
coats on the monolayer surface). 
4. Incubate at room temperature for
60 min. The chloroform should evaporate, leaving a monolayer of lipid on
the surface of the buffer.
5. Carefully place one EM grid, carbon
side down, onto the top of each buffer
(a)

droplet. Grids should not glow discharged before use as a hydrophobic carbon film is required to adhere
to the hydrophobic lipid tails of
the monolayer.
6. Gently inject proteins into the side
injection well. Final protein concentrations in the well should be 0.5–2 µM
for the AP180/epsin/adaptor protein,
(b)

(c)

Figure 6.19 Electron micrographs of endocytic intermediates formed with the monolayer assay: (a)
structures formed by incubation of AP180 and clathrin; (b) structures formed by incubation of epsin1
and clathrin; (c) structures formed by incubation of AP180, AP2 complex, and clathrin after shadowing
with platinum. Scale bar in (b) = 300 nm and applies to all panels

PROTOCOL 6.25

and 30–500 nM for the clathrin. It is
often useful to try several concentrations, to account for differences in protein activity.
7. Incubate 60 min at room temperature.
8. Prepare uranyl acetate stain. Lay a
fresh piece of Parafilm on the bench,
and place two 30 µl drops side by side
on the Parafilm for each grid which
will be stained. Lay out a piece of
Whatman filter paper to blot buffer
and stain from grids. Lay out a second
piece of filter paper on which to set
grids to air-dry.
9. Gently inject approximately 30 µl of
buffer into the side injection port; this
will raise the grid up above the surface of the Teflon block. Immediately
grab the grid with forceps and lift it
vertically off of the droplet.
10. Blot the grid briefly by touching it to
the filter paper, then touch it to the first
stain droplet and blot immediately.
Touch the grid to the second stain
droplet, leave for 30 s, and blot briefly.
This leaves a film of stain on the
surface of the grid in which the protein
is embedded. If the grids will be
platinum shadowed, hold the grid to
the filter paper for several seconds
to ensure that the entire grid surface
dries. Lay the grid on another piece of
filter paper to dry.
11. For negative stain EM, grids can
be examined in the EM immediately
(see Figure 6.19). They are also stable
for several weeks, at least, at room
temperature.
12. If platinum shadowing is required, set
up the vacuum evaporator with a 2 cm
long piece of platinum wire coiled
tightly round a piece of 1 mm thick
tungsten wire. Place the grids to be
shadowed on a rotary platform at an

291

angle of 10◦ to the line between the
platform centre and the platinum coil.
Create a vacuum in the evaporator.
With a shield between the grids and
the wire, turn on the current to the
tungsten wire. When the platinum wire
melts, remove the shield and the platinum will evaporate onto the grids.
For rotary platinum shadowing, start
rotation of the platform immediately
before removing the shield. For single angle shadowing, the platform can
remain stationary during the evaporation; 1–2 min of evaporation is usually sufficient, but trials may need to
be done to account for differences in
evaporators.

Notes
This procedure will take approximately
3 h. All reagents should be of the highest
purity available, and buffers should be
filtered before use.


1 Clathrin should be dialysed into HKM
buffer and centrifuged for 20 min at
100 000gmax (e.g. 45 000 rpm in a
Beckman TLA100 rotor) immediately
prior to use to remove aggregates.
◦

2 Lipid stocks were stored at −80 C.


3 The addition of polyacrylic acid helps
to prevent the stain from precipitating
and forming uranyl acetate crystals.

4 It is important to ensure that the
surface of the droplet is either flat
or slightly concave. Overfilling the
Teflon wells leads to a convex droplet
surface, upon which the monolayer
does not form properly. Also, filling the wells with too little volume
(less than 35 µl, or depending on the
geometry of the block) can lead to an
uneven surface near the side injection
port.

292

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES


5 Trace lipid contamination (e.g. PtdIns
(4,5)P2 ) on the Teflon block can result
in misleading negative controls. The
Teflon block should be rinsed with
hot water, then ethanol, and finally,
soaked overnight in a mixture of
chloroform/methanol to remove any
protein or lipid residue. Hamilton
syringes are also susceptible to trace
lipid contamination.

References
1. Chiu, W., Avila-Sakar, A. J. and Schmid, M.
F. (1997) Electron crystallography of macromolecular periodic arrays on phospholipid
monolayers. Adv. Biophys., 34, 161–172.

2. Levy, D., Mosser, G., Lambert, O., Moeck, G.
S., Bald, D. and Rigaud, J. L. (1999) Twodimensional crystallization on lipid layer: a
successful approach for membrane proteins. J.
Struct. Biol., 127(1), Aug, 44–52.
3. Ford, M. G., Mills, I. G., Peter, B. J., Vallis, Y., Praefcke, G. J., Evans, P. R. and
McMahon, H. T. (2002) Curvature of clathrincoated pits driven by epsin. Nature 419(6905),
361–366.
4. Ford, M. G., Pearse, B. M., Higgins, M. K.,
Vallis, Y., Owen, D. J., Gibson, A., Hopkins,
C. R., Evans, P. R. and McMahon, H. T.
(2001) Simultaneous binding of PtdIns(4,5)P2
and clathrin by AP180 in the nucleation
of clathrin lattices on membranes. Science,
291(5506), 1051–1055.

PROTOCOL 6.26
Golgi membrane tubule formation
William J. Brown, K. Chambers and A. Doody
Introduction
Membrane tubules emanate from a variety of organelles including the Golgi complex, endosomes and lysosomes [1]. These
tubules are generally 60–80 nm in diameter, can extend for many microns in
length, and are believed to play a role
in various intracellular membrane trafficking pathways. Although recent studies
strongly suggest a role for a cytoplasmic
Ca2+ -independent phospholipase A2 enzyme in initiating the formation of Golgi
and endosome tubules [2, 3], the exact
molecular mechanisms of tubule formation
have not been elucidated. Progress in this
area has been advanced by the development of an in vitro reconstitution system
that was used to demonstrate that tubulation of Golgi membranes was absolutely
dependent on cytosolic protein [4, 5]. This
assay system should allow for the further characterization and identification of
cytosolic factors that are required for
tubules to form. This system should also
provide a means to identify molecular differences between the tubules and the main
body of the organelles from which they
grow (see Figure 6.20).

Reagents
Carbon- and formvar-coated electron microscope grids (300 mesh copper)
Extract of bovine brain cytosol (BBC)
and isolated rat liver Golgi complexes,

1 (See also
prepared as described [3]. 
Protocol 4.23)
2% w/v Phosphotungstic acid (PTA), pH
7.4 (stored at 4 ◦ C)
Stock solutions: 10 mM Hepes, pH 7.4
(stored at −20 ◦ C), 10 mM ATP (stored
at −20 ◦ C), 100 mM MgCl2 (stored at
−20 ◦ C), 25 mM Tris containing 50 mM
KCl (pH 7.4)

Equipment
Eppendorf 500 µl microfuge tubes, or
similar
Self-closing, fine-tipped forceps
Transmission electron microscope
Water bath (37 ◦ C)

Procedure
1. Thaw out all solutions and reagents
and put on ice. Do not thaw out by
running under hot water.
2. Pick up formvar/carbon-coated grids
with the self-closing forceps. Hold the
grids on the very edge. Be sure the
grids look uniformly coated. Use a
piece of white paper as a background.
3. Place the forceps on the white paper
with coated grid side up. Use a box,
e.g. the top of a pipette tip box, to
cover the ends of the forceps to keep
the grids from accumulating dust.
4. Place 500 µl microfuge tubes in an
appropriate holder.

294

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

(a)

(b)

Figure 6.20 (a) shows an example of a negatively stained Golgi stack that was incubated with BSA
as a negative control. These control Golgi stacks generally appear somewhat round, with a few vesicles
and possibly some short tubules. (b) shows a negatively stained Golgi stack that was incubated with
BBC to induce tubule formation. Under these conditions, numerous tubules, 60–80 nm in diameter
and ranging up to several microns in length, can be seen (arrows). Scale bars = 1 µm

5. Prepare Mg-ATP solution in the proportions below and put on ice. You
will need 1 µl/reaction.
80 µl Tris/KCl stock buffer
10 µl ATP
10 µl MgCl2
6. Prepare the tubulation buffer containing BBC. You will need 20 µl/reaction
(sample). When using BBC as a positive control, its final concentration
following dilution at this step should
be ∼3 mg/ml. For negative controls,
we use bovine serum albumin (BSA)
at an equivalent concentration. For
solutions with a high protein concentration (e.g. BBC, which is often
prepared and stored at ∼20 mg/ml),
use the following proportions: 85 µl 1
Tris/KCl, 1 µl Mg-ATP, 1 µl Hepes
buffer, 13 µl BBC.
7. Add 20 µl of Golgi suspension to each
microfuge tube.

8. Add 20 µl of tubulation buffer/BBC
solution to the Golgi tubes. Add the
tubulation buffer/BBC solution very
carefully to the Golgi suspension in
three aliquots over ∼15 s. Gently mix.
9. Place tubes in 37 ◦ C water bath and
incubate for up to 30 min.
10. Take 10 µl of a sample and puddle
onto the grid that is being held by
a forceps. Cover with the box top.
Let the suspension sit on the grid for
15 min at room temperature.
11. Carefully add 10 µl of 2% PTA to the
grid three times over 5 s. Do not let
the puddle spill over the edges of the
grid.
12. Blot off fluid from the edge of the grid
with a moist kimwipe.
13. Add 10 µl of PTA to the grid and blot
off fluid as in step 12. Repeat once
more.
14. Let grids dry and then store until EM
observation.

Protocol 6.26

Notes
Preparation of BBC (or cytosolic preparations from other tissues/cells) will take 2
days. Preparation of rat liver Golgi complexes will take 1 day. The tubulation
assay will take approximately 2 h.


1 Cytosolic extracts from other tissues
can also be used. These reagents generally give the best results if freshly
prepared, but they can be stored for several weeks at −80 ◦ C and still give good
results. However, they degrade with
time, so use them as soon as possible.

References
1. Brown, W. J., Chambers, K. and Doody, A.
(2003) Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) enzymes in

2.

3.

4.

5.

295

membrane trafficking:mediators of membrane
shape and function. Traffic, 4, 214–221.
De Figueiredo, P., Drecktrah, D., Katzenellenbogen, J. A., Strang, M. and Brown, W. J.
(1998) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 95,
8642–8647.
De Figueiredo, P., Doody, A., Polizotto, R. S.,
Drecktrah, D., Wood, S., Banta, M., Strang,
M. and Brown, W. J. (2001) J. Biol. Chem.,
276, 47 361–47 370.
Banta, M., Polizotto, R. S., Wood, S. A., de
Figueiredo, P. and Brown, W. J. (1995) Biochemistry, 34, 13 359–13 366.
Polizotto, R. S., de Figueiredo, P. and Brown,
W. J. (1999) J. Cell Biochem., 74, 670–683.

PROTOCOL 6.27
Tight junction assembly
C. Yan Cheng and Dolores D. Mruk
Introduction
When mammalian epithelial cells, such
as Sertoli cells, keratinocytes and MDCK
cells (Madin Darby canine kidney cells),
are cultured in vitro on a suitable substratum (e.g., Matrigel for Sertoli cells)
in chemically defined medium (e.g., F12/
DMEM, Ham’s F12 Nutrient Mixture/
Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s medium for
Sertoli cells) in either culture dishes or
bicameral units, they assemble tight junctions (TJs) within days (for reviews, see
refs 1–3). As such, this represents a useful in vitro system to investigate the biology and regulation of TJ dynamics (for
reviews, see refs 3 and 4). There are several techniques available in the literature
to monitor the assembly of epithelial cell
TJs quantitatively or semi-quantitatively,
which include restricted diffusion of [3 H]inulin, [125 I]-BSA or FITC-dextran across
the cell epithelium and maintenance of
non-equilibrium of the fluid level between
the apical and basal compartments of
the bicameral unit [5, 6] (see Figure 6.21).
While these techniques are helpful to monitor TJ assembly, they are either tedious,
require the use of radioactive isotopes, or
expensive equipment (such as a cytofluorometer to quantify FITC). We present
herein the use of a Millicell Electrical Resistance System (ERS) (Millipore
Corp.) to quantify the transepithelial electrical resistance (TER) across the cell

epithelium. This equipment is not expensive to purchase, the maintenance cost is
also minimal (except for the electrodes
which need periodic replacement), and yet
an investigator can quantitatively assess
the assembly, maintenance and/or regulation of TJs with precision and reproducibility. This technique has been tested vigorously against the other currently available
methodologies [5–8], and it was shown to
be the best technique to quantify TJ assembly in vitro.

Reagents and cell cultures
All reagents and enzymes used should
be standard laboratory reagents prepared
with Milli-Q quality water (such as PureLab PLUS from USFilter). Primary cultures of Sertoli cells are obtained from
20-day-old rat testes using procedures as
earlier described [5, 6, 9] and cultured on
Matrigel-coated (Matrigel : F12/DMEM,
1 : 7) bicameral units (Millicell-HA
0.45 µm-pore size culture plate insert
composed of mixed esters of cellulose
with 12 mm diameter; cat. no. PIHA 012
50, Millipore, Bedford, MA). Each treatment group should have at least triplicate culture inserts. Matrigel-coated bicameral units should be prepared 24 h prior
to cell plating and stored in a 35 ◦ C
CO2 incubator (95% air/5% CO2 , v/v)
as described to allow the Matrigel to
completely dry, which is essential to

Protocol 6.27

297

Figure 6.21 This is an electron micrograph that shows two Sertoli cells of an epithelium cultured on
a Matrigel-coated bicameral unit (nitrocellulose based) on day 4. Ag/AgCl electrodes (one placed into
the apical and the other into the basal compartment of the bicameral unit) are used to quantify the
electrical resistance (in ohms) when an electrical current, ∼20 mA, is sent across the cell epithelium.
Also note the non-equilibrium of the level of F12/DMEM between the two compartments when TJs
are formed between cells. SC, Sertoli cell nucleus. This figure is adapted from Lee and Cheng [10]
and used with permission from the publisher.

obtain TER readings with minimal intraexperimental variations. Care should also
be taken to avoid trapping air bubbles in
the Matrigel [6].

Equipment
Ag/AgCl electrodes (cat. no. MERS STX
01, Millipore) – electrodes need to be replaced after ∼12 months of routine use
when visible loss of Ag/AgCl is detected.
The electrodes are EVON chopstick electrodes. Each leaflet has an outer and inner
electrode; the outer electrode is a small
silver pad for passing current through the
nitrocellulose membrane of the bicameral
unit, whereas the inner electrode is a small
Ag/AgCl voltage sensor
CO2 humidified incubator at 35 ◦ C
Millipore Millicell ERS system (cat. no.
MERS 000 01)

Centrifuge set at room temperature
Shaking water bath with variable temperature control
Standard laboratory microscope and transmission electron microscope (TEM)

Procedure for TER measurement
1. Sertoli cells isolated from seminiferous
tubules immediately after their isolation
are plated immediately on Matrigelcoated bicameral units at 0.75–1 × 106
cells/cm2 and designated time 0. Each
culture insert is placed in a well of a
24-well dish with triplicate inserts for
the control and each treatment group.
Great care should be taken to avoid
trapping air bubbles between Sertoli
cells and the nitrocellulose membrane,
which have a tendency to form on

298

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Transepithelial electrical
resistance (TER,ohm×cm2)

60
50

Sertoli cells at 1.2 × 106 cells/cm2
Sertoli cells at 5 × 104 cells/cm2

40
30
20
10
0

1

3
1.5
4
2
3.5
6
5
Time of Sertoli cell culture (days)

7

Figure 6.22 The assembly of the Sertoli cell TJ-permeability barrier in vitro as monitored by TER
measurement across the Sertoli cell epithelium. In brief, Sertoli cells were cultured on Matrigel-coated
bicameral units at either 1.2 × 106 or 5 × 104 cells/cm2 . The TJ-barrier formed between Sertoli cells
when they were cultured at 1.2 × 106 cells/cm2 as manifested by a steady rise in the resistance across
the cell epithelium, yet it failed to form at the lower cell density due to the lack of cell proximity.
This figure is adopted from Mruk et al. [6] and used with permission from the publisher. *, p < 0.01
when compared to its corresponding control.

the periphery of the bicameral unit.
Also, it is important that cells are uniformly plated to avoid uneven clustering of cells across the epithelium. Cells
should not be disturbed thereafter for
at least 2–4 h. The same volume of
F12/DMEM (∼ 500 µl) should be used
for the apical and basal compartments
of the bicameral unit. The daily replacement of media should be of the same
volume. By 4–5 h after plating, the first
TER reading should be recorded and
daily thereafter as follows:
• To test the instrument, switch the
mode to RESISTANCE and turn the
power ON. Press the TEST R button.
With the RANGE SWITCH in the
2000 V position, the meter will read
approximately 1000, whereas in the
20 k range, the meter will read 1.00.
It is now ready for use.
• To test the electrodes, insert the
end-plug at the end of the electrode cable into the front panel of
the EVOM. Place the electrodes

into F12/DMEM. Turn the mode to
VOLTS. Press the power switch ON.
The reading will be ∼1–2 mV. After
15 min, adjust this voltage to 0 mV
at the adjustment labelled ZERO V
with a screwdriver.
2. The range should be set to 2000 ohm.
Switch the mode to RESISTANCE. Dip
one electrode inside the bicameral unit
on top of the cell layer (shorter end)
and the other electrode (longer end) into
the external solution (see Figure 6.22).
The electrode should be held straight
upright, as shown in Figure 6.22, and
not touching the bicameral unit nor the
side of the 24-well dish. However, the
longer end of the electrode should rest
on the bottom of the 24-well dish during
measurement (see Fig. 6.21). Press the
MEASURE R button for 2–3 s to send
an electrical current, ∼20 mA, across
the cell epithelium. A steady reading
of the resistance should result denoting
the tightness of the TJ-barrier. Cells
should be fed immediately thereafter

Protocol 6.27

and incubated at 35 ◦ C in a humidified
incubator (95% air/5% CO2 ) until the
next TER reading is taken.
• Do not rinse the electrodes between
recordings until readings within the
triplicate set of a treatment group
are completed. The electrodes can
then be dipped into empty wells with
F12/DMEM alone to remove treatment reagents by limiting dilutions.
• Caution must be exercised to ensure
that the cell layer is not touched with
the electrodes when taking measurements.
• If the depth at which the electrodes
are immersed into the external and
internal media varies between different bicameral units, slight differences
in your measurements will result.
• Dishes containing bicameral units
must adjust to room temperature for
best measurements (∼20 min).
• To sterilize the electrodes, soak them
in 70% alcohol (v/v with Milli Q
water). Electrodes must then be equilibrated in F12/DMEM for at least
2 h before use.
• The investigator must ensure that
bicameral units do not tilt to the
side of the 24-well dish but instead
sit centred in the 24-well dish when
TER measurements are taken.
• A total of four readings should be
taken per bicameral unit at 12-,3-,
6- and 9-o’clock positions and averaged.
• Data will be obtained and analysed
as follows:
–Measure background (bicameral
unit + media without cells)

–Measure
unknown
unit + media + cells)
–RESISTANCE
×
AREA = ohm × cm2

299

(bicameral
SURFACE

3. TER readings must be taken on a daily
basis. If a reagent is being tested to
monitor its effects on TJ assembly, it
should be removed once an effect is
identified to examine if the perturbed
TJ-barrier can be resealed to confirm
the specificity. Figure 6.22 shows the
typical result from an experiment to
assess the assembly of Sertoli cell TJpermeability barrier in vitro. It is noted
that the TJ-barrier assembles by 3–4
days when the TER reaches a plateau
level.

References
1. Gumbiner, B. and Simons, K. (1986) J. Cell
Biol., 102, 457–468.
2. Grima, J., Wong, C. S. C., Zhu, L. J., Zong,
S. D. and Cheng, C. Y. (1998) J. Biol.
Chem., 273, 21 040–21 053.
3. Cheng, C. Y. and Mruk, D. D. (2002) Physiol. Rev., 82, 825–874.
4. Lui, W. Y., Mruk, D. D., Lee, W. M. and
Cheng, C. Y. (2003) Biol. Reprod., 68, 1087–
1097.
5. Grima, J., Pineau, C., Bardin, C. W. and
Cheng, C. Y. (1992) Mol. Cell. Endocrinol.,
89, 127–140.
6. Mruk, D. D., Siu, M. K. Y., Conway, A. M.,
Lee, N. P. Y., Lau, A. S. N. and Cheng,
C. Y. (2003) J. Androl., 24, 510–523.
7. Lui, W. Y., Lee, W. M. and Cheng, C. Y.
(2001) Endocrinology, 142, 1865–1877.
8. Chung, N. P. Y. and Cheng, C. Y. (2001)
Endocrinology, 142, 1878–1888.
9. Cheng, C. Y., Mather, J. P., Byer, A. L. and
Bardin, C. W. (1986) Endocrinology 118,
480–488.
10. Lee, N. P. Y. and Cheng, C. Y. (2003)
Endocrinology, 144, 3114–3129.

PROTOCOL 6.28
Reconstitution of the major light-harvesting
chlorophyll a/b complex into liposomes
Chunhong Yang, Helmut Kirchhoff, Winfried Haase, Stephanie
Boggasch and Harald Paulsen
Introduction
The major light-harvesting chlorophyll
(Chl) a/b protein complex of photosystem
II (LHCIIb) is the most abundant membrane protein which comprises more than
50% of the total Chl in plants [1]. It is also
a very important protein in the biosphere,
because LHCIIb has a key function in the
conversion of solar energy to biochemical energy in plants. The main function
of LHCIIb is to absorb the solar energy
and to transfer excited electronic energy to
the reaction centre of photosystem (PS) II
under moderate illumination, and to adjust
energy transfer between PS II and PS I
under strong illumination [2]. LHCIIb can
be assembled in vitro from its recombinant
apoprotein and purified pigments in detergent solution [3, 4].
This protocol presents methods for reconstituting either native (Procedure A) or recombinant LHCIIb (Procedure B) into artificial liposomes made of thylakoid lipids.

Reagents
Bio-Beads SM-2 Adsorbent (Bio-RAD)
Chloroform
Ficoll (Amersham Biosciences) in Rb,
10%, 20%, 30%, 40%
Lipids (synthetic or isolated from plant
thylakoids): phosphatidylglycerol (PG),

digalactosyl diacylglycerol (DGDG),
monogalactosyl diacylglycerol (MGDG),
sulfolipid (SL)
Liquid nitrogen
Reconstitution buffer for Procedure A
(Rb): 10 mM Tricine pH 7.8 (KOH)
2× Reconstitution buffer for Procedure
B (Rb2): 20 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.5),
20 mM NaCl, 20 mM β-Mecaptoethanol
Triton X-100

Equipment
Extruder (LiposoFast, Avestin)
Polycarbonate membranes (pore diameter:
100 nm)
Rotary evaporator
Sonicator set up with a micro-tip, and a
bath sonicator
Ultracentrifuge
UV-Vis spectrophotometer

Procedure A
1. Mix 300 nmol lipids dissolved in
chloroform in a glass tube with a glass
stopper (47 mol% MGDG; 27 mol%
DGDG; 39 mol% SL; 14 mol% PG,
stoichiometries for grana thylakoids,
see ref. 5)

Protocol 6.28

2. Evaporate the chloroform phase carefully under an N2 stream and then in a
rotary evaporator at 40 ◦ C for 45 min
(lipids form a thin film on the glass
wall).
3. For the following steps the air in the
glass tube is removed by N2 . Add
1.35 ml Rb saturated with N2 .
4. Sonicate the suspension three times
for 10 s in an ice bath at low sonication power (the suspension becomes
opalescent).
5. Add 0.15 ml 5 mM Triton X-100
under constant slow stirring. Incubate
for 10 min under slow constant stirring.
6. Add 5 µl LHCIIb preparation (about
2 mM Chl in 0.37% (w/v) Triton X100). See Figure 6.25 for different
results depending on the amount of
LHCIIb added. Incubate for 20 min
under slow constant stirring. Take
a UV spectrum (200–350 nm) of
the undiluted solution and put this
aliquot back in the reconstitution
batch. (LHCIIb is isolated according
to ref. 6 with modifications given in
ref. 7.)
7. Add 8 mg Bio-Beads and incubate
under constant stirring overnight at
4 ◦ C. Take a spectrum as in step 6.
8. Remove the solution from Bio-Beads
with a pipette and put it in a fresh
glass tube. Add 16 mg Bio-Beads and
incubate for 1 h at room temperature
(RT). Take a spectrum as in step 6.
9. Repeat step 8. Quantity of removed
Triton X-100 is calculated from the
difference spectra steps 7–9 minus
step 6, according to the following
equation:
[Triton X-100] = (OD275 − OD300 )
∗ 1.46 [mM]

301

OD275 : maximum absorption of Triton
X-100, A275 at 1 cm pathlength;
OD300 : non-specific absorption, A300
at 1 cm pathlength.
10. Freeze (in liquid nitrogen) and thaw at
RT twice.
11. Put the sample on a Ficoll step gradient (10, 20, 30, 40%) and ultracentrifuge at 100 000g for 18 h.
12. Collect the green 30% Ficoll step band
in an Eppendorf cup and fill up the cup
with Rb. Centrifuge at about 20 000g
for 10 min at 7 ◦ C (removal of Ficoll).
13. Suspend the pellet in 1.2 ml Rb and
centrifuge again. Suspend the pellet
in a small volume of Rb (LHCIIbliposomes).
14. Characterization: lipid analysis by 2D
thin layer chromatography [8], absorption spectra, 77 K fluorescence spectra
and electron microscopy.

Procedure B
1. Prepare 100 µg recombinant LHCIIb
trimer complex according to refs 3
and 4.
2. Mix 1 mg lipids in chloroform at a
stoichiometry similar to that of natural
thylakoid lipids (without MGDG, PG:
21.4%; DGDG 61.9%; SL 16.7%) in
a glass tube.
3. Evaporate the chloroform phase in a
rotary evaporator at 40 ◦ C so that a
thin lipid film is formed on the inner
glass wall.
4. Add 100 µl Rb2 and 50 µl bidest
water, incubate at RT for 30 min.
5. Vortex the mixture vigorously until a
homogenous suspension is formed.
6. Sonicate the lipid suspension for 30 s
with 5 s interval between every 10 s
(the solution becomes opalescent).

302

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES
5

CD (mdeg)

0

−5

−10

−14
400

500

600
Wavelength (nm)

720

Figure 6.23 Circular dichroic absorption spectra of LHCIIb proteoliposomes and LHCIIb in 0.05%
(w/v) Triton X-100 solution. (solid line: LHCIIb trimer in Triton X-100 solution; dashed line: reconstituted LHCIIb trimer in proteoliposome)
16 0000 00
14 000 000

Fluorescence

12 000 000
10 000 000
8 000 000
6 000 000
4 000 000
2 000 000
0
600

650
700
Wavelength (nm)

750

Figure 6.24 77 K Fluorescence emission spectra of LHCIIb proteoliposomes and LHCIIb complexes
in 0.05% (w/v) Triton-X 100 solution upon excitation of Chl b at 470 nm. (solid line: LHCIIb trimer
in Triton X-100 solution; dashed line: reconstituted LHCIIb trimer in proteoliposome)

7. Freeze (in liquid nitrogen) and thaw
(at 25 ◦ C) the solution twice.
8. Force the lipid solution through a
polycarbonate membrane (pore diameter 100 nm) for about 20 times by
using an extruder (LiposoFast).

9. Add Triton X-100 solution so that the
end concentration of Triton X-100 is
1.5 mM, and add distilled water to
200 µl.
10. Add 100 µg LHCIIb trimer complex
in maximum 100 µL 0.05% (w/v)

Protocol 6.28
2.0

F700

1)
Fluorescence normalized

2

1.5
F700/F681

303

1.0

F681

1)
2)

1

3)

2)
0

0.5

650

700

750

800

Wavelength (nm)
3)
0.0
0

50

100

150

mol lipid / mol chlorophyll

Figure 6.25 77 K fluorescence emission spectra (excitation: 480 nm) of native LHCIIb liposomes and
electron microscopic pictures of freeze-fractured LHCIIb liposomes. The emission ratio F700/F681 is
a measure of the LHCIIb aggregation level. If the molar lipid : Chl ratio for the reconstitution is lower
than about 40, LHCIIb begins to aggregate (increase in F700/F681). The aggregated samples show a
hexagonal arrangement of the proteins (see left-hand EM picture). This is clear evidence for a random
protein orientation within the liposomes [3]. At high lipid : Chl ratios the protein is diluted enough so
that no aggregation occurs (right-hand EM picture)

Triton X-100 to the liposome solution
dropwise under sonication in a bath
sonicator.

14. Add 10 mg new Bio-Beads to the
supernatant and incubate at 4 ◦ C overnight.

11. Vortex the mixture for 1 min, incubate
at RT for 30 min.

15. Repeat step 13 and add 20 mg new
Bio-Beads to supernatant, incubate at
RT for 1 h.

12. Add 10 mg Bio-Beads, incubate at RT
for 1 h.
13. Centrifuge shortly, collect the supernatant.

16. Repeat step 15.
17. Centrifuge the tube shortly and collect
supernatant.

304

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

18. Analyse the proteoliposomes by spectroscopy.

complexes begin to aggregate when the
reconstitution has been done at a low
lipids : Chl ratio (see Figure 6.25).

Results
1. Circular dichoism (CD) in the visible
range shows that the pigment organization is very similar in LHCIIb proteoliposomes as it is in detergent solubilized
LHCIIb (Figure 6.23).
2. Low-temperature fluorescence spectroscopy can be used to check whether an
LHCIIb preparation is intact and functional, i.e. whether Chl b quantitatively
transfers its excitation energy to Chl
a. Low-temperature fluorescence upon
excitation of Chl b at 470 nm shows
that most fluorescence is emitted by Chl
a (680 nm) and only very little by Chl
b (660 nm) (Figure 6.24), demonstrating that only very little Chl b has been
disconnected from Chl a.
3. 77 K fluorescence emission spectra of
native LHCIIb liposomes and electron
microscopic pictures of freeze fractured
LHCIIb liposomes show that LHCIIb

Note
The whole procedure will take ∼2 days.

References
1. Kühlbrandt, W., Wang, D. N. and Fujiyoshi,
Y. (1994) Nature, 367, 614–621.
2. Allen, J. F. (1994) Physiol. Plant., 92,
196–205.
3. Hobe, S., Prytulla, S., Kühlbrandt W. and
Paulsen H. (1994) EMBO J., 13, 3423–3429.
4. Rogl, H., Kosemund, K., Kühlbrandt, W. and
Collinson, I. (1998) FEBS Lett., 432, 21–26.
5. Kühlbrandt, W., Thaler, T. and Wehrli, E.
(1983) J. Cell Biol., 96, 1414–1424.
6. Burke, J. J., Ditto, C. L. and Arntzen, C. J.
(1978) Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 187,
252–263.
7. Duchene, S. and Siegenthaler P. A. (2000)
Lipids, 35, 739–744.
8. Christie W. W. and Dobson G. (1999) Lipid
Technology, 11, pp. 64–66.

PROTOCOL 6.29
Reconstitution of photosystem 2 into
liposomes
Julie Benesova, Sven-T. Liffers and Matthias Rögner
A. Preparation of liposomes
Reagents

Buffer (20 mM MES, pH 6.5; 10 mM
MgCl2 ; 10 mM CaCl2 )
Chloroform
Phosphatidylcholine
in
chloroform
(25 mg/ml)
Phosphatic acid in chloroform (5 mg/ml) [1]
Equipment

Cryostat
Glass container with round bottom (50 ml)
Polycarbonate filter (Ø 10 mm, pore diameter 0.2 µm)
Rotavapor-R
Ultrasonication apparatus, with sonication
tip
Waterbath (7 l)
Procedure

1. Cool Rotavapor-R down to 4 ◦ C.
2. Mix the lipid stock solutions in the
glass with the round bottom.
3. Rotate for 120 rpm at 40 ◦ C, 30 min,
vacuum at −600 mbar.
4. Rotate for 120 rpm at 40 ◦ C, 1 h, vacuum at −1200 mbar.

5. Resuspend the obtained lipid layer
carefully in 3 ml ether and 1 ml
buffer.
6. Use the ultrasonic tip to make the suspension homogeneous.
7. Rotate for 120 rpm at 27.4 ◦ C, vacuum
at −225 mbar until the film is completely detached from the glass wall.
8. Add 2 ml of the buffer.
9. Rotate for 120 rpm at 27.4 ◦ C, vacuum
at −1200 mbar to remove ether completely.
10. Filter the liposome solution after about
90 min through the polycarbonate filter.

B. Reconstitution of photosystem 2
[1–3]
Introduction

The importance of this photosynthetic
membrane protein complex is based on
its role as a light-driven water-splitting
nano machine. It is the first component
of the photosynthetic electron transport
chain and transfers the electrons extracted
from water to plastoquinone. The size
of the membrane-integral part of this
complex is in the case of dimers (about
500 kDa) 190 × 100 × 40 Å. Beyond this

306

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

membrane-embedded part, the donor side
of this complex extends up to 55 Å
out of the membrane into the lumen
and the acceptor side up to 10 Å
into the stromal region [2]. The lumenexposed part performs the water-splitting
process while the membrane-embedded
part harbours the components of the
electron transport chain leading to lightdriven charge separation.
Reconstitution of the PS2 complex
into liposomes facilitates various studies
of structure/function relationships of PS2
including its assembly, parameters for its
orientation in the membrane, the process
of reversible mono-/dimerization and the
impact of the lipid composition on its
function.

• Remove water as above.

Reagents

3. Add buffer up to a final volume of 1 ml
and stir slowly in the dark at 20 ◦ C.

1 M Octylglucopyranosid (OGP): 146 mg/
0.5 ml buffer (= 30%)
Buffer (20 mM MES, pH 6,5; 30 mM CaCl2 ;
10 mM MgCl2 ; 1 M glycin-Betain
Liposome suspension (see above)
110–190 µg Chl PS2 (depending on activity of PS2)

4. Add 80 mg Biobeads and incubate for
1 h; repeat this step.

• Add again 200 ml water and stir for
30 min.
• Keep in 30–50 ml in the fridge (stable
for several weeks!).
Procedure

1. Mix 110–190 µg Chl PS2 (dependent
on activity, see above) and 180 µl liposome suspension; add buffer to a final
volume of 900 µl.
2. Add 1 M OGP stock solution in small
parts under mild stirring until the milky
suspension is clear (start with 66 µl
1 M OGP = 2% OGP final conc.; if still
cloudy, add in steps of 0.5%)

5. Add 160 mg Biobeads and incubate
again for 1 h with slow stirring (see
above).

References
Equipment

Biobeads (BioRad)
Cryostat
Water cooling by self-made glass cooler
Pretreatment of biobeads

• Stir 20–30 g Biobeads in 150–200 ml
methanol for 1 h at RT in a beaker.
• Remove the supernatant by Pasteur
pipette (connected to aspirator), after
short centrifugation.
• Add 200 ml water and stir for 1 h.

1. Rigaud, J.-L., Pitard, B. and Levly, D. (1995)
Reconstitution of membrane proteins into liposomes: application to energy-transducing membrane proteins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1231,
223–246.
2. Zouni, A., Witt, H. T., Kern, J., Fromme, P.,
Krauss, N., Saenger, W. and Orth, P. (2001)
Crystal structure of photosystem 2 from Synechoccus elongatus at 3.8 Å resolution. Nature,
409, 739–743.
3. Kruip, J., Karapetyan, N. V., Terekhovas, I. V.
and Rögner, M. (1999) In vitro oligomerization
of a membrane protein complex: liposomebased reconstitution of trimeric photosystem I
from isolated monomers. J. Biol. Chem., 274,
18 181–18 188.

PROTOCOL 6.30
Golgi–vimentin interaction in vitro and in vivo
Ya-sheng Gao and Elizabeth Sztul
Introduction
Intermediate filaments constitute one of the
three major cytoskeletal systems of eukaryotic cells. Intermediate filaments, especially those in epithelial cells, play a key
role in maintaining the physical integrity
of cells [1]. In cells of mesenchymal origin and in cultured cells, the intermediate
cytoskeleton is predominantly composed
of vimentin. The dynamics of the vimentin
cytoskeleton appear to be regulated by various cellular proteins, including proteins
associated with the Golgi complex [2].
To study the interactions of vimentin
with the Golgi complex, biochemical and
light microscopy based approaches are
most direct and easiest to follow. Importantly, biochemical approaches allow testing of compounds that might regulate the
vimentin–Golgi interaction by removing
or introducing such compounds into the
assay. Light microscopy approaches allow
the examination of the vimentin–Golgi
interactions within the architectural context
of the cell.

1. Biochemical assay for vimentin
binding to purified Golgi
membranes
Reagents

BSA (10 mg/ml in PBS)

ECL kit (PIERCE Chemical Co. or other
vendors)
HKM buffer (25 mM Hepes, 0.115 M
potassium acetate, 2.5 mM magnesium
chloride, pH 7.4)
HRP conjugated secondary antibodies
(Amersham Pharmacia Biotechnologies
or other vendors)
Isolated stacked Golgi membranes [3] purified through additional up-flotation (protocol below)
Mouse anti-GM130 (Transduction Laboratories) and goat anti-vimentin (ICN Biomedicals) antibodies
Nycodenz solution (60% in HKM) from
Life Technologies
Protein Assay Kit (from Bio-Rad Laboratories)
Purified vimentin (unpolymerized) from
cytoskeleton, Inc. or produced as
described in ref. 2
Sucrose solution (2 M, in HKM buffer)
Equipment

Densitometer
Eppendorf tubes
Equipment for SDS-PAGE (minigel) and
immunoblotting
Nitrocellulose membrane (Micron Separations Inc. or other vendors)
Pipettes

308

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Preparative ultracentrifuge equipped with
SW55 Ti and SW41 Ti rotors (Beckman
Coulter) or equivalents
Spectrophotometer
Ultra-Clear centrifugation tubes compatible with the above rotors (Beckman
Coulter or equivalent)
Vortex mixer
X-ray film and X-ray developing machine
Procedure 1

Part 1: Purification of Golgi membranes
Golgi membrane fractions isolated by
density-gradient centrifugation are likely
to be contaminated by cytosolic proteins
(such as vimentin subunits, vimentin
or Golgi interacting proteins) that may
interfere with the experiment. Therefore,
isolated Golgi membranes need to be
separated from the soluble contaminants by
up-flotation in Nycodenz gradient.
1. Isolate stacked Golgi membranes from
rat liver ([3]; see also Protocol 4.26).
2. Make 60% (w/v) Nycodenz in HKM
and prechill at 4 ◦ C.
3. Mix stacked Golgi membranes with
prechilled 60% Nycodenz solution to
make 40% Nycodenz final concentration (total volume should be less than
3 ml).

8. Take a portion of each fraction, process for SDS-PAGE, and transfer the
gel to nitrocellulose filter.
9. Immunoblot the nitrocellulose filter
with antibodies against the Golgi
marker protein GM130.
10. Pool GM130 containing fractions –
this represents purified Golgi membranes.
11. Quantify protein concentration in the
Golgi preparation using Protein Assay
Kit with BSA as standard.
12. Use the membrane preparation freshly,
or freeze in liquid nitrogen and store
at −80 ◦ C.

Part 2: Association of vimentin with
purified Golgi membranes
1. Commercially obtained vimentin should
be made up in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.4)
and 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol. For longterm storage, freeze at −80 ◦ C [2, 3].
2. Adjust protein concentration of the
Golgi membranes to about 0.25 mg/ml
with cold HKM buffer before use.
3. Adjust the concentration of vimentin to
about 2 mg/ml with 10 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 7.4 and 0.1% β-mercaptoethanol.
4. Add 0.05–0.075 mg Golgi and 0.01 mg
vimentin to an Eppendorf tube on ice,
mix briefly.

4. Load the Golgi mixture at the bottom
of a 5 ml Ultra-Clear centrifugation
tube.

5. Let the tube sit on ice for 3 h with intermittent mixing.

5. Overlay the Golgi mixture with 1 ml
of prechilled 36% and 1 ml of 32%
Nycodenz-HKM.

Part 3: Separation of membrane-bound
from non-bound vimentin

6. Centrifuge at 135 000g for 7 h at 4 ◦ C
in a swinging bucket rotor.

1. Add sufficient cold 2 M sucrose to the
vimentin–Golgi membrane mixture to
make 1.6 M sucrose and load the solution (less than 3 ml) at the bottom of a
5 ml Ultra Clear centrifugation tube.

7. Fractionate from top of the gradient by
pipetting 0.5 ml samples.

Protocol 6.30

309

2. Overlay with 1 ml prechilled 1.3 M and
1 ml of 0.8 M sucrose made in HKM.

(4) Centrifuge at 135 000g for 7 h at
4 ◦ C in a swinging bucket rotor.

3. Centrifuge at 135 000g for 7 h at 4 ◦ C
in a swinging bucket rotor.

(5) Fractionate from top of the gradient by pipetting 0.5 ml samples.

4. Fractionate from top of the gradient by
pipetting 0.5 ml samples.

(6) Take a portion of each fraction,
process for SDS-PAGE, and transfer the gel to nitrocellulose filter.

5. Take a portion of each fraction, process
for SDS-PAGE, and transfer the gel to
nitrocellulose filter.
6. Immunoblot the nitrocellulose filter with
antibodies against the Golgi marker protein GM130 and against vimentin (fractions that contain Golgi with associated
vimentin will be in the middle of the gradient).
7. Quantify the amount of vimentin
recovered with Golgi membranes by
densitometry. A proporition of vimentin
will fractionate with Golgi membranes
(Figure 6.26).

Notes
1. This procedure can be applied to test
whether a protein (or another compound) regulates the vimentin–Golgi
membrane interaction [4]. The modified procedure to test whether a protein
binds to Golgi membranes to promote/inhibit the vimentin–Golgi membrane interaction is listed below.
(1) Add the protein (purified or commercially available) to isolated
stacked Golgi membranes and
incubate at 4 ◦ C for 2 h.
(2) Add cold 2 M sucrose (in HKM
buffer) to the mixture to make
1.6 M sucrose and load (less than
3 ml) at the bottom of a 5 ml
centrifugation tube.
(3) Overlay the sample with 1 ml
ice-cold 1.3 M and 1 ml 0.8 M
sucrose in HKM.

(7) Immunoblot the nitrocellulose filter with antibodies against the
Golgi marker protein GM130.
(8) Pool GM130 containing fractions – this represents purified
Golgi membranes to which the
tested protein has bound.
(9) Quantify protein concentration in
Golgi preparation using Protein
Assay Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories)
with BSA as standard.
(10) Use the membrane preparation
for vimentin interaction assay as
described above.
2. When incubating vimentin with the
membranes, it is desirable to keep
the concentration of vimentin below
0.05 µg/ml to maintain vimentin in
its subunit form. Polymerized vimentin
is likely to aggregate with membranes. This makes separation of
membrane-bound vimentin from nonbound vimentin difficult.
3. To keep vimentin in its subunit form,
vimentin stock solution should not contain more than 5 mM salt.
Procedure 2: Immunofluorescence analysis
of vimentin–Golgi interaction

In cells, vimentin intermediate filaments,
microtubules and actin filaments are linked
together by cross-linking proteins [5].
Conventional immunofluorescence procedures cannot dissect the role of vimentin
intermediate filaments in Golgi binding

310

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

(a)

Vimentin Only

Reagents
− Vimentin

Vimentin + Golgi
− Vimentin
− GM130
1

2

3

4

5

8
11 (Fractions)
loading

(b)
− Vimentin
− GM130
1

2

3

4

5

6
7
loading

(Fractions)

Figure 6.26 Binding of vimentin to Golgi
membranes in vitro. (a) Recombinant vimentin
alone, or recombinant vimentin incubated with
purified Golgi membranes were loaded at the bottom of a sucrose density gradient and subjected
to equilibrium centrifugation. Fractions were collected from the top of the gradient. An equivalent amount of each fraction was processed by
SDS-PAGE, transferred to NC and immunoblotted with anti-vimentin and anti-GM130 antibodies. Vimentin remains in the load when centrifuged alone, but is recovered in a lower density
fraction containing the Golgi marker GM130
when incubated with Golgi elements. (b) Fractions 3 and 4 from panel A were combined, loaded
at the bottom of a sucrose density gradient and
subjected to another round of equilibrium centrifugation. Fractions were collected and analysed
as in (a). Vimentin remains associated with Golgi
membranes. Reproduced from The Journal of Cell
Biology, 2001, 152(5), 877–893, by copyright
permission of the Rockefeller University Press.

from the function of microtubules that
interact with the Golgi at the microtubule organizing centre. To dissociate
the roles of microtubules and vimentin
filaments, we describe a procedure that
disrupts the microtubular cytoskeleton in
cells, allowing the visualization of bona
fide vimentin–Golgi interactions [2].

Antibodies against vimentin (ICN Biomedicals) and GM130 (Transduction laboratories) or antibodies against another Golgi
marker protein
Blocking solution (3% normal goat serum
in PBS-T) and anti-fade mounting solution (9 : 1 glycerol/PBS with 0.1% qphenylenediamine)
Fluorophore conjugated secondary antibodies (Molecular Probes)
Methanol, prechilled at −20 ◦ C
PBS-T (PBS, 0.05% Tween-20)
Phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
Nocodazole (10 mg/ml in DMSO) (SigmaAldrich)
Round glass coverslips, 12 mm (Fisher Scientific)

Equipment
Cell culture facility
Fluorescence imaging system
Image processing software (Photoshop or
equivalent)

Procedure
Plate cells (any mammalian cell line) on
glass coverslips and culture at 37 ◦ C till
∼70% confluent.
1. Make nocodazole 
1 at 10 µg/ml in
culture medium from 10 mg/ml DMSO
stock solution and replace normal
medium with nocodazole medium.
Incubate cells at 37 ◦ C for 5 h.
2. Rinse cells with PBS and immediately transfer coverslips into −20 ◦ C
2
prechilled methanol for 15 min. 
3. Move coverslips to a humid box and
wash cells with PBS-T (at room temperature) for 5 min (three times in total).

Protocol 6.30
(a)

(b)

311

+ Nocodazole

Figure 6.27 Golgi elements and vimentin filaments interact in vivo. MFT-6 cells were untreated
(a) or treated with 10 µg/ml nocodazole for 5 h at 37 ◦ C to disrupt microtubules (b). Cells were
then labelled with polyclonal anti-GM130 and monoclonal anti-vimentin antibodies. Extended Golgi
elements align with vimentin filaments in untreated cells (arrowheads in (a)). In cells with disrupted
microtubules, Golgi elements associate with vimentin filaments (arrowheads in B). Arrow points to
a mass of collapsed vimentin. Reproduced from The Journal of Cell Biology, 2001, 152(5), 877–
893, by copyright permission of the Rockefeller University Press.

312

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

4. Follow immunofluorescence procedure
as described (check procedure part 1/1,
3
Protocol 6.26). 

anti-vimentin antibodies must be used
at high concentrations. In addition,
images may need to be enhanced with
software to desired brightness [6].

Notes

1 Nocodazole (or similar reagents) disrupt microtubules, resulting in the
collapse of the majority of vimentin filaments to a peri-nuclear region. However, a fraction of peripheral vimentin
filaments remains. Immunofluorescence with antibodies against Golgi
proteins allows the visualization of individual Golgi fragments aligned on the
vimentin filaments (Figure 6.27).

2 Alternative fixatives (3% formaldehyde) and permeabilization reagents
(0.07% Triton X-100 in PBS) can be
used.

3 Individual filaments (or filament bundles) have weak fluorescence, and

References
1. Fuchs, E. and Weber, K. (1994) Ann. Rev. Biochem., 63, 345–382.
2. Gao, Y.-S. and Sztul, E. (2001) J. Cell Biol.,
152, 877–893.
3. Taylor, R. S., Jones, S. M., Dahl, R. H., Nordeen, M. H. and Howell, K. E. (1997) Mol. Biol.
Cell, 8, 1911–1931.
4. Gao, Y.-S., Vrielink, A., MacKenzie, R. and
Sztul, E. (2002) Euro. J. Cell Biol., 81,
391–401.
5. Gurland, G. and Gundersen, G. G. (1995) J.
Cell Biol., 131, 1275–1290.
6. Franke, W. W., Grund, C., Kuhn, C., Jackson,
B. W. and Illmensee, K. (1982) Differentiation,
23, 43–59.

PROTOCOL 6.31
Microtubule peroxisome interaction
Meinolf Thiemann and H. Dariush Fahimi
Introduction

Equipment

The microtubular system plays a vital role
for the distribution, translocation and
determination of the shape of cell organelles. Peroxisomes are ubiquitous membrane-bounded organelles with essential
functions in lipid metabolism and detoxification of reactive oxygen species. Their
association to microtubules has been
shown and the motor-dependent transport
of peroxisomes along microtubules demonstrated [1–4]. The molecular mechanisms
of these binding and motility events, however, are far from being understood. Hence
we have developed a semi-quantitative
In vitro peroxisome–microtubule binding
assay for investigating the physicochemical characteristics of this binding process
and to screen for the proteins involved [5].
The peroxisome–microtubule binding
assay presented here could also be
adapted to investigate the interaction of
other membrane-bounded organelles with
microtubules and to identify the proteins
mediating it.

Microcentrifuge
Shaker
Standard equipment for SDS-PAGE, Western blotting and enhanced chemiluminescence
Scanner and software for densitometric
quantitation of immunoreactive protein
bands
Water bath
96-Well microtiterplates (flat bottom microtiterplates with high binding capacity from Costar, Cambridge, MA, USA,
proved to be well suited for the attachment of microtubules)

Reagents
MAP-free tubulin from bovine brain (Tebu,
Frankfurt/Main, Germany)
Taxol (= paclitaxel) was obtained from
Sigma (Taufkirchen, Germany)
(All chemicals should be of analytical
grade and be prepared with high quality
deionized water)

Procedure
The protocol of the microtubule–peroxisome binding assay is summarized in
Figure 6.28.
1. Polymerize microtubules by incubating glycerol stabilized MAP-free tubulin in P/G/T-buffer (35 mM Pipes,
5 mM MgSO4 , 1 mM EGTA, 0.5 mM
EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM GTP,
20 µM taxol, pH 7.4) at 37 ◦ C for
15 min.
2. Perform the binding assay (Figure 6.28)
at a constant temperature of 25 ◦ C in 96well microtiterplates.
3. Coat wells with microtubules by incubating 50 µl of the microtubule

314

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES
Microtubule–peroxisome
binding assay
Binding of peroxisomes to microtubules
immobilized to a microtiterplate
coat wells with microtubule solution
block with casein solution
1 × washing with buffer

1 mM EDTA, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1 mM
6-aminocaproic acid, 5 mM benzamidine, 10 µg/ml leupeptin, 0.2 mM
DTT, pH 7.4) – to each well and incubate for 30 min.
7. Wash three times with 50 µl/well P/
G/T-buffer.

incubation with purified peroxisome solution
3 × washing with buffer
elution of bound proteins with SDS-sample buffer
Detection and quantitation
of peroxisomes bound to microtubules
SDS-PAGE
Western blotting
peroxisome specific primary antibody
secondary antibody (HRP-labelled)
detection of binding by ECL
quantitation by densitometry

Figure 6.28 Schematic summary of the protocol of the microtubule–peroxisome binding assay
which is carried out in microtiter plates. The binding of peroxisomes to microtubules is quantitated
by the detection of a peroxisomal marker protein
in rat liver (e.g. urate oxidase) by Western blotting

solution per well (final concentration
0.25 mg protein/ml) for 45 min. For
controls take 50 µl P/G/T-buffer per
well.
4. Block non-specific binding to the
microtiterplate surface by 45 min
incubation with 0.3 ml/well casein
(2.5 mg protein/ml in P/G/T-buffer).
5. Wash once with 0.3 ml/well P/G/Tbuffer.
6. Isolate purified peroxisomes by differential cell fractionation of rat liver
homogenate according to a protocol described previously [5, 6]. Add
40 µl of the peroxisomal preparation

1 – adjusted to 0.1 mg protein/ml
with homogenization buffer (250 mM
sucrose, 5 mM MOPS, 0.1% ethanol,

8. Elute bound proteins and organelles in
20 µl SDS-sample buffer by pipetting
five times up and down.
9. Perform SDS-PAGE with the samples
by using 10% polyacrylamide gels.
10. Transfer proteins from the gel electrophoretically to a PVDF-membrane.
11. Perform immunocomplexing by using
an antibody to a specific peroxisomal
2
protein, e.g. urate oxidase. 
12. Detect immunocomplexes with a
horseradish peroxidase-labelled secondary antibody, employing enhanced
chemiluminescence.
13. Quantitate the intensity of immunoreactive bands by densitometry.

Examples of data
In vitro binding of peroxisomes to microtubules can be demonstrated by negative staining electron microscopy [7]
(Figure 6.29). Purified rat liver peroxisomes specifically associate to taxolstabilized microtubules reconstituted from
bovine brain tubulin. Binding was observed
at the entire length of microtubules and
only very few unbound peroxisomes were
seen. Although this morphological assay
employs different experimental conditions than the biochemical binding assay
described here, both assay formats point
out the specificity of the In vitro binding
of peroxisomes to microtubules. The biochemical assay was saturable for both,
the concentrations of peroxisomes and

PROTOCOL 6.31
(a)

315

(b)

Figure 6.29 In vitro binding of peroxisomes to microtubules as demonstrated by negative staining
electron microscopy. Peroxisomes (0.1 mg/ml) were incubated with microtubules (0.25 mg/ml) for 1 h
in Eppendorf tubes. After fixation of the peroxisome–microtubule complexes with 0.25% glutaraldehyde for 5 min, a drop of this mixture was placed on a formvar-coated 200-mesh grid for 2 min.
Finally, a washing step was followed by the staining of the preparation with 2% phosphotungstic acid
for 3 min. Negative staining electron microscopy (EM) reveals the specificity of the association of
highly purified rat liver peroxisomes (PO) to taxol-stabilized microtubules from bovine brain (MT).
Bars: 0.25 µm (a), 0.05 µm (b)

microtubules (Figure 6.30). The optimal
assay conditions comprised a tubulin concentration of 0.25 mg/ml and a peroxisome concentration of 0.1 mg/ml. As an
example, an immunoblot incubated with
an antibody to urate oxidase and serving for the quantification of peroxisomes
to microtubules is shown (Figure 6.30(c)).
The binding assay showed excellent reproducibility and high specificity and provided a powerful tool for the evaluation of
binding conditions and the various factors
involved.
Employing this assay, the binding of peroxisomes to microtubules was characterized and a CLIP-like protein was shown to
be involved in the binding process [5].

Notes
This procedure will take approximately
24 h. Store tubulin and peroxisomes at
−80 ◦ C and avoid repeated thawing and
freezing.


1 It is essential that peroxisomes are not
aggregated. To ensure the removal of
peroxisomal aggregates, briefly centrifuge the peroxisomal preparation
(10 s, 2000g) prior to use in the assay.

2 An antibody to urate oxidase [8] was
shown to be an excellent marker for
the binding of peroxisomes to microtubules in this assay. Urate oxidase is
exclusively localized to the crystalline
cores of rat liver peroxisomes, which
are not released from the organelle by
washing procedures. Furthermore, isolated urate oxidase cores do not bind
to microtubules.

References
1. Schrader, M., Burkhardt, J. K., Baumgart, E.,
Lüers, G., Spring, H., Völkl, A. and Fahimi,
H. D. (1996) Eur. J. Cell Biol., 69, 24–35.
2. Rapp, S., Saffrich, R., Anton, M., Jäckle, W.,
Ansorge, W., Gorgas, K. and Just, W. (1996)
J. Cell Sci., 109, 837–849.

316

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Specific binding (%)

(a)

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

Peroxisome concentration (mg/ml)

Specific binding (%)

(b)

120
100
80
60
40
20
0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Tubulin concentration (mg/ml)
(c)

97
66
45
31
22
14
MW (kDa)

0 0.05

0.1 0.25

0.5 0.75

Tubulin Concentration (mg/ml)

Figure 6.30 The binding of peroxisomes to microtubules depends on the concentrations of peroxisomes and tubulin. The In vitro binding assay was performed and binding was analysed as described.
To optimize the protocol of the binding assay, the concentrations of peroxisomes (a) and tubulin (b,c)
were varied. (c) As an example, the immunoblot, generated according to the standard protocol of the
binding assay and incubated with an antibody to urate oxidase, is shown. Data are presented as mean
± SE from six experiments. Reproduced by permission of the European Journal of Biochemistry [5]

3. Wiemer, E. A. C., Wenzel, T., Deerinck, T. J.,
Ellisman, M. H. and Subramani, S. (1997) J.
Cell Biol., 136, 71–80.
4. Schrader, M., King, S. J., Stroh, T. A. and Schroer, T. A. (2000) J. Cell Sci., 113, 3663–
3671.
5. Thiemann, M.,
Schrader, M.,
Völkl, A.,
Baumgart, E. and Fahimi, H. D. (2000) Eur.
J. Biochem., 267, 6264–6275.

6. Völkl, A., Baumgart, E. and Fahimi, H. D.
(1996) In: Subcellular Fractionation – a Practical Approach (J. Graham and D. Rickwood,
eds), pp. 143–167. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.
7. Schrader, M., Thiemann, M. and Fahimi, H. D.
(2003) Micr. Res. Tech., 11, 171–178.
8. Völkl, A., Baumgart, E. and Fahimi, H. D.
(1988) J. Histochem. Cytochem., 36, 329–336.

PROTOCOL 6.32
Detection of cytomatrix proteins by
immunogold embedment-free electron
microscopy
Robert Gniadecki and Barbara Gajkowska
Introduction
The simple view of the cell as the membrane sack containing organelles floating
in the amorphous cytoplasm has over the
last 30 years been replaced by a concept
of a complicated three-dimensional cellular structure comprising spatially separated
yet functionally interconnected compartments. The basic scaffold of most cells
is afforded by the cytoskeleton (comprising actin microfilaments, intermediate filaments and the microtubules) that not
only determines rigidity and motility of
the cells but also provides support for
the organelles.
However, our understanding of cellular
structure is still incomplete. No imaging
technique is alone able to visualize the
intrinsic structure of the cell. Immunofluorescence microscopy with labelled antibodies against various cytoskeletal components turned out to be a very powerful
technique that accounts for much of the
progress that has been made in the understanding of the three-dimensional cell
structure. However, the major drawbacks
are low resolution and the fact that only
known proteins, against which the labelled
probes are available, may be investigated.
Electron microscopy seems to be ideally suited for studying cell ultrastructure.

However, this technique has three major
limitations:
1. The optical properties of the resins
used for embedding are similar to
those of proteins, hence most proteinaceous structures remain unresolved and
the cytoplasm in electron microscopic
images seems to be quite homogeneous.
2. In classic electron microscopy only
some filaments are visualized, and only
those that happen to lie at the surface
of the section.
3. Aldehyde fixation, which is a necessary
step during the preparation of the material, cross-links proteins and lead to the
emergence of artificial structures.
Some of these limitations may be overcome by the use of the embedment-free
electron microscopy (EFEM). It this technique the material is temporarily embedded in the mounting medium for cutting,
but the embedding material is removed
before observation. Although fixation is
still necessary, no resin is present at the
moment of observation in the microscope.
The group of S. Penman should be credited
with the development and popularization
of EFEM [1, 2]. The main use of EFEM

318

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

has been the study of the nuclear matrix.
Penman et al. successfully visualized the
non-chromatin nuclear matrix as a complicated three-dimensional network comprised of 10 nm ‘core’ filaments decorated
with globular ribonucleoprotein structures
and dense bodies [3]. The outline of the
EFEM protocol is as follows:
1. The cells are extracted with non-ionic
detergent that dissolves the membranes
and allows the soluble proteins to
diffuse away.
2. DNA is removed by digestion with
nuclease.
3. The remaining structure (cellular scaffold or cytomatrix) is temporarily embedded in diethylene glycol distearate
(DGD) and sectioned.
4. Before viewing in the electron microscope the DGD is removed so that intact
scaffolds are observed.
A recent EFEM protocol may be found
in Nickerson et al. [4]. In our laboratory we have successfully adopted this
protocol for the study of diverse cell
types such as normal or transformed keratinocytes and cancer cell lines (C6, U373, MG [glioma lines], COLO 205 [colorectal adenocarcinoma], PA-1 [ovarian
cancer cells]) [5–8].
The material processed for EFEM may
also be used for immunostaining with
gold-labelled antibodies. This provides an
elegant combination of the clarity and
resolution of EFEM with the power of
immunocytochemistry. It is important to
underline that only proteins associated with
the cytomatrix will be identified. Soluble
proteins will be lost during the preparation of the scaffolds and remain undetected. We have successfully used single-,
double- and triple immunostaining in combination with EFEM for the study of the
cellular distribution of apoptosis-related

proteins bax, bid, vdac-1 and caspase8 [5, 8].

Reagents
Chemicals

Aminoethylbenzenesulfonyl fluoride (AEBSF, Pefablok SC, Roche Applied Science)
Ammonium sulfate (Sigma)
Bovine serum albumin (Sigma)
Diethylene glycol distearate (Polysciences
Inc., Warrington, PA)
DNase I, RNase free (Roche Applied
Science)
Donkey serum (Sigma)
EGTA (Sigma)
Ethanol (100%)
Glutaraldehyde, EM grade, 50% stock
solution (Sigma)
HMDS (hexamethyldisilazane) (Sigma)
Hydrochloric acid (HCl, 1 M)
Isobutanol (Sigma)
Magnesium chloride (Sigma)
Osmium tetroxide (Sigma)
Paraformaldehyde (Merck, Hohenbrunn,
Germany)
PBS (phosphate-buffered saline, without
calcium and magnesium, pH 7.2) (Sigma)
PIPES (Sigma)
Poly-L-lysine (Sigma)
Propylene oxide (Sigma)
Sodium cacodylate trihydrate, ultra pure
(Sigma)
Sodium chloride (Sigma)
Sodium hydroxide (NaOH), 1 M solution
Sucrose (Sigma)
Triton X-100 (Sigma)
Tween 20 (Sigma)
Vanadyl riboside complex (VRC) (Fluka)
Water, double distilled

PROTOCOL 6.32

Consumables

Carbon-coated copper or nickel grids (can
be coated with poly-L-lysine for increased
adhesiveness)
Embedding capsules BEEM (LKB, USA)

Equipment
Electron microscope (e.g. JEOL 1200 EX
at 80 kV)
Ultramicrotome (e.g. LKB Ultracut from
Reichert, Germany) equipped with diamond knives (glass knives are reported
to work for fine EFEM, but we have
no experience of our own) carbon
evaporator
Laboratory tabletop centrifuge with cooling
pH meter
Forceps
Pasteur and automatic pipettes
Scalpel or razor blades

1. Cell extraction
Reagents

Extraction buffer 1: 10 mM PIPES, pH6.8,
300 mM sucrose, 100 mM NaCl, 3 mM
MgCl2 , 1 mM EGTA,0.5% Triton X-100,
20 mM vanadyl riboside complex (VRC),
1 mM AEBSF
Remarks: PIPES is dissolved first and
pH adjusted with NaOH. Then sucrose,
NaCl, MgCl2 and EGTA are dissolved
sequentially at room temperature (RT)
under constant magnetic stirring. At this
stage the buffer can be sterile-filtrated
and stored for a couple of weeks in a
refrigerator or frozen at −20 ◦ C for up to
3 months. Other components (Triton X100, VRC and AEBSF) are added before
use. Triton X-100 is added v/v with a 1 ml
syringe under constant, slow stirring.

319

Extraction buffer 2: 10 mM PIPES, pH6.8,
250 mM ammonium sulfate, 300 mM sucrose, 3 mM MgCl2 , 1 mM EGTA, 0.5%
Triton X-100, 20 mM VRC, 1 mM AEBSF
Remarks: Prepared as extraction buffer
1 above; in this buffer NaCl is replaced by
ammonium sulfate.
DNA digestion buffer: 10 mM PIPES,
pH6.8, 300 mM sucrose, 50 mM NaCl,
3 mM MgCl2 , 1 mM EGTA, 0.5% Triton
X-100, 20 mM vanadyl riboside complex,
1 mM AEBSF, 200 units/ml RNase free
DNase I.
Remarks: Prepared as extraction buffer
1. DNase I is added before use.
High salt buffer: 10 mM PIPES, pH
6.8, 300 mM sucrose, 2 M NaCl, 3 mM
MgCl2 , 1 mM EGTA, 20 mM VRC, 1 mM
AEBSF
Remarks: PIPES, sucrose, MgCl2 and
EGTA are added and dissolved in this
sequence. pH is adjusted with NaOH. Then
add NaCl to the buffer and dissolve at
room temperature. VRC and AEBSF are
added before use.
Procedure 1

Adherent cells may be extracted in monolayers attached to thick glass coverslips
or grown in chamber slides with a glass
bottom. Alternatively, the cells may be
gently trypsinized or scrapped by the rubber policeman. Suspended cells are washed
by centrifugation at 600 g, 5 min at 4 ◦ C
between steps. Coverslips with attached
cells are moved between different solutions. We got best results with scrapped
or trypsinized cells in suspensions. Since
some loss of material is inevitable due to
multiple centrifugations, start with a large
amount of cells (>5 million). Most steps
should be performed at 4 ◦ C. Precool all
the buffers. After the last extraction step
we are left with cellular scaffolds ready for
temporary embedding and sectioning.

320

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

1. Wash the cells with PBS, twice at 4 ◦ C.
2. Extract in 2 ml extraction buffer 1 at
4 ◦ C for 5 min with occasional agitation. At this step the membranes are
opened by Triton X-100 and soluble
proteins diffuse from the cell to the
outside.
3. Extract in 2 ml extraction buffer 2 at
4 ◦ C for 5 min with occasional agitation. Ammonium sulphate in this
buffer will extract some of the histones
(mainly histone 1) and many cytoplasmic proteins [4].
4. Incubate in the DNA digestion buffer
for 1 h at 32 ◦ C. Stir gently once every
7–10 min. At this step DNA is digested
and removed from the nuclei. According to Nickerson et al. [4] the completeness of DNA removal should be
monitored in pilot experiments by e.g.
assessment of [3 H]thymidine release.
This is probably necessary in the experiments where ultimate control is needed
during the preservation of the structure
of nuclear matrix. We found that satisfactory results are obtained for a wide
range of different cells with standard
conditions.
5. Extract in the high salt buffer at 4 ◦ C for
5 min. High salt concentration removes
the histones and most of the high mobility group proteins from the nucleus and
stabilizes the cellular scaffolding.

2. Preparation for electron
microscopy
Reagents

Buffered glutaraldehyde: 2.5% glutaraldehyde in extraction buffer 1
Remarks: Dissolve glutaraldehyde from
the stock solution in extraction buffer 1,
shortly before use. Keep in refrigerator at
4 ◦ C. Fixative older than 6 h should be
discarded.

Sodium cacodylate buffer: 0.1 M sodium
cacodylate, pH 7.2
Remarks: Prepare stock 0.2 M solution
of sodium cacodylate in distilled water and
adjust pH with 0.2 M HCl. The solution is
stable for several months when stored at
4 ◦ C. Before use dilute 1 : 1 (vol/vol) with
distilled water.
Buffered osmium tetroxide: 1% osmium
tetroxide in cacodylate buffer
Remarks: Mix osmium tetroxide stock
solution with 0.2 M sodium cacodylate
stock solution and dilute with distilled
water to bring the concentration of sodium
cacodylate to 0.1 M. The solution is stable
for several months at 4 ◦ C.
Procedure 2

1. Fixation. We fix routinely in 2.5%
buffered glutaraldehyde at 4 ◦ C for 40
min. Remember that cell pellet should
ideally be approximately 1 mm3 for further embedding.
2. Wash the pellet or cells on the coverslip with sodium cacodylate buffer for
5 min, 4 ◦ C.
3. Post-fix in buffered osmium tetroxide
for 30 min at 4 ◦ C.
4. Wash in cacodylate buffer for 30 min.
5. Dehydrate the material by transfer
through the ethanol series: 50, 70, 80,
90, 96% two changes for 5 min each.
End with three changes of dehydrated
100% ethanol for 5 min each. At this
step the material may be left overnight
at 4 ◦ C. After transfer through 80%
ethanol the pellets are hard enough to
be transferred to BEEM capsules.
6. Transfer the cells to a 1 : 1 (v/v)
mixture of ethanol : isobutanol for
5 min at room temperature, and then
to pure isobutanol, twice for 5 min
each time. Place the samples in the
oven at 60 ◦ C and allow the solvents

PROTOCOL 6.32

to evaporate (15 min). The aim is to
remove the rest of ethanol, which is
not miscible with DGD.
7. Prewarm a mixture of 1 : 1 (v/v) DGD
: isobutanol in the oven at 60 ◦ C and
pour over the cells. Leave the samples
in the oven until butanol evaporates
(approximately 30 min) and infiltrate
the cells with molten DGD (60 ◦ C)
twice, 60 min each.
8. Place the samples at room temperature
to solidify. For cells on coverslips,
peel the coverslip from DGD; the
cells will remain embedded in DGD
as a monolayer. For samples in the
capsules, cut away the capsule and
trim the block to a surface of 1–2 mm.
9. Cut with glass or diamond knives
at angle of 10◦ on the microtome.
Thickness between 0.1 and 1 µm can
be obtained, but we had best results
with 0.3 µm sections. The interference
colour of the sections is the same as
for Epon sections.
10. Collect the sections on the carboncoated copper grinds that have additionally been coated with poly-Llysine.
11. Remove DGD by immersing the grids
for 1 h in toluene at room temperature.
12. Transfer the grids to a 1 : 1 (v/v) solution of ethanol : toluene for 5 min, and
then to three changes of 100% ethanol
(each 10 min). At this step the sections
may be processed for immunogold
staining, as described in Procedure
3 below. If immunocytochemistry is
not required, immerse the grids for
5 min in a 1 : 1 (v/v) mixture ethanol
: HMDS followed by three changes of
HMDS, 10 min each. Air-dry.
13. The sections may optionally be carboncoated to increase the robustness of the
samples.

321

3. Staining with antibodies
Reagents

Buffered
paraformaldehyde/glutaraldehyde: 3.7% paraformaldehyde and 0.1%
glutaraldehyde in extraction buffer 1
Comment: Prepared freshly, stored at 4 ◦ C
for up to 3 h.
PTA buffer (PBS-Tween-albumin): 0.05%
(v/v) Tween 20, 0.1% (w/v) bovine
serum albumin in PBS
Comments: Place a vessel with PBS on a
magnetic stirrer and dissolve the required
amount of Tween 20. Switch the stirrer
off, sprinkle albumin pulver on the fluid
surface, switch the stirrer on and stir
slowly until albumin is dissolved (about
1 h). Sterile filtrate. PTA buffer can be
stored at 4 ◦ C for a week or frozen for
several months.
Glutaraldehyde cacodylate buffer: 2.5% glutaraldehyde dissolved in 0.1 M sodium
cacodylate buffer, pH 7.2
Buffered osmium tetroxide: prepared as for
section 2, above
Antibodies

Primary mouse, rabbit and goat antibodies have been used. An antibody that
worked for the post-embedding immunogold electron microscopy is also likely to
work for EFEM. We used the following
secondary, gold-labelled antibodies: donkey anti-rabbit (4 nm gold), donkey antigoat (12 nm), donkey anti-mouse (20 and
30 nm) (Jackson ImmunoResearch, West
Grove, PA). We dilute antibodies in PTA
buffer or in PBS. PTA buffer gives lower
background staining.
Procedure 3

We have developed the following postembedding protocol, where the sections

322

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

are stained after DGD embedding. An
alternative pre-embedding protocol can be
found in ref. 4. Post-embedding staining
gives results with a very low background,
but some epitopes may be masked during
prior embedding steps.
1. Cell extraction: performed as above in
Procedure 1 (steps 1–5).
2. Fixation. Pure glutaraldehyde is a heavily cross-linking agent and may mask
some epitopes. If problems are encountered we had good results after fixing
with buffered paraformaldehyde/glutaraldehyde for 3 h at 4 ◦ C. This solution
should be prepared freshly from the EMgrade reagents. Osmium post-fixation
(steps 7–9, Procedure 2) is omitted.
3. Embedding in DGD, sectioning, removal of DGD: performed as above
in section 2, steps 10–17.
4. Rehydrate the material by immersing
in a series of alcohols: 100, 96, 90,
80, 70, 50, 30%, 2 × 5 min at room
temperature (RT).
5. Rinse the grids with the material by
floating them on PBS for 10 min followed by PTA buffer 10 min, RT.
All incubation/washing steps are performed by placing the grids on a large
drop of fluid placed on Parafilm or
similar hydrophobic membrane, specimen side down.
6. Block with 5% normal donkey serum
in PTA buffer for 10 min, RT.
7. Incubate with the first antibody. Depending on the type of antibody, incubation times from 2 h to overnight are
appropriate. For short times incubation
at 37 ◦ C rather than at 4 ◦ C gives better results. All antibody dilutions are
made in PTA buffer.
8. Rinse in PTA buffer three times, 5 min
each, RT.

9. If double or triple staining is performed incubate with additional primary antibodies.
10. Rinse in PTA buffer three times,
5 min each at RT, followed by additional blocking with 5% normal donkey serum in PTA buffer for 10 min.
11. Incubate with gold-labelled secondary
donkey antibodies diluted in PTA.
Usually 1–2 h at 37 ◦ C would suffice.
12. Rinse in PBS, 3 × 10 min, RT.
13. Rinse in sodium cacodylate buffer,
three times, 5 min, RT.
14. Fixed in glutaraldehyde cacodylate
buffer for 1 h at 37 ◦ C.
15. Post-fix in buffered osmium tetroxide
for 30 min followed by a rinse for
30 min in sodium cacodylate buffer
at RT.
16. Dehydrate in ethanol 50–100% as
described above (Procedure 2, step 5).
17. Transfer to the mixture 1 : 1 (v/v)
100% ethanol : HMDS for 10 min
followed by three changes of HMDS,
10 min each. Air-dry.
18. The grids containing the dried samples
can be lightly carbon coated in a
Kinlay carbon evaporator and stored
in a dessicator.

Results
Images of cell scaffolds after cell extraction and EFEM (Procedures 1 and 2)
should reveal a continuous meshwork of
filaments in the cytoplasmic and nuclear
areas (Figure 6.31). The thickness and
arrangement of filaments depend on cell
type and state of differentiation. For
example in C6 glioma the cell line
cytomatrix comprises 10–15 nm branched
fibrils, 5 nm microfilaments and short

PROTOCOL 6.32

323

(a)

(b)

Figure 6.31 EFEM of extracted human keratinocyte showing cytomatrix and nuclear matrix.
(a) Low magnifications with a meshwork of filaments in the cytoplasmic field (C), nuclear lamina
(L) and the coarse nuclear matrix (N). (b) High magnification showing filaments of different diameter
in the cytomatrix. Arrows: ultrathin 1 nm filaments

324

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES
(a)

(b)

Figure 6.32 Post-embedding immunogold cytochemistry on extracted COLO 20 cells. (a) Anti-Bax
staining during apoptosis showing concentration of Bax at the nuclear lamin and in the nucleus.
(b) Triple immunogold labelling (anti-Bax: 4 nm gold particles, anti-Bid: 12 nm gold, anti-VDAC-1:
20 nm gold) of the nuclear matrix of COLO 25 cell during apoptosis. Note clusters of gold particles
of different sizes (arrows)

PROTOCOL 6.32

(40–200 nm) very thin (1–3 nm) fibrils [6]. A similar structure of the cytomatrix was seen in proliferating human keratinocytes, but during cell differentiation
the 5 and 1 nm filaments disappeared and
were replaced by a tight meshwork of
15 nm fibrils [7]. The nuclear matrix consists of a meshwork of 10–30 nm filaments
attached to a compact nuclear lamina.
Ultrathin 1 nm filaments are also present
in the nuclear matrix. The globular portion of the nuclear matrix corresponds to
ribonucleoprotein.
Examples of post-embedding immunogold labelling of extracted matrices are
shown in Figure 6.32. Details of antibody
concentration and incubation tomes may
be found in our recent publications [5, 8].
Labelling with up to three antibodies
is feasible.

References
1. Capco, D. G., Krochmalnic, G. and Penman, S.
(1984) A new method of preparing embedment-free sections for transmission electron
microscopy: applications to the cytoskeletal
framework and other three-dimensional networks. J. Cell Biol., 98, 1878–1885.
2. Penman, S. (1995) Rethinking cell structure.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 92, 5251–5257.

325

3. Fey, E. G., Krochmalnic, G. and Penman S.
(1986) The nonchromatin substructures of
the nucleus: the ribonucleoprotein (RNP)containing and RNP-depleted matrices analyzed by sequential fractionation and resinless
section electron microscopy. J. Cell Biol., 102,
1654–1665.
4. Nickerson, J. A., Krochmalnic, G. and Penman, S. (1998) Isolation and visualization of
the nuclear matrix, the nonchromatin structure
of the nucleus. In: Cell Biology: A Laboratory
Handbook (J. E. Celis, ed.), 2nd edn, vol. 2,
pp. 194–192. Academic Press.
5. Gajkowska, B., Motyl, T., Olszewska-Ba̧darczuk, H., Gniadecki, R. and Koronkiewicz, M.
(2000a) Structural association of Bax with
nuclear matrix and cytomatrix revealed by
embedment-free immunogold electron microscopy. Cell Biol. Int., 24, 649–656.
6. Gajkowska, B., Cholewinski, M. and Gniadecki, R. (2000b) Structure of cytomatrix and
nuclear matrix revealed by embedment-free
electron microscopy. Acta Neurobiol. Exp., 60,
147–158.
7. Gniadecki, R., Olszewska, H. and Gajkowska, B. (2001) Changes in the ultrastructure of
cytoskeleton and nuclear matrix during HaCaT
keratinocyte differentiation. Exp. Dermatol.,
10, 71–79.
8. Gajkowska, B. and Wojewódzka, U. (2002)
A novel immunoelectron embedment free
electron microscopy reveals association of
apoptosis-regulating proteins with subcellular
structures. Histochem. J., 34, 441–446.

PROTOCOL 6.33
Tubulin assembly induced by taxol and other
microtubule assembly promoters
Susan L. Bane
Introduction
Substances that affect microtubule assembly and dynamics have important therapeutic applications, particularly in cancer
chemotherapy. Taxol was the first example
of an effector molecule of microtubule
dynamics that promotes rather than inhibits
in vitro microtubule polymerization. The
success of Taxol as an anticancer agent
has sparked a tremendous interest in the
discovery of other molecules that promote
microtubule assembly [1].
Microtubule assembly promoters (MTAPs) generally are screened by assessing the ability of the molecule to promote microtubule assembly in vitro. Activity is most commonly assessed as an I50
value, which is the concentration of MTAP
required to promote tubulin to assemble to 50% of its maximum. This is a
useful and easily obtainable value; however, some care should be taken in its
1
interpretation. 
Three procedures follow:
Procedure 1 . Tubulin assembly induced
by Taxol. This is the basic procedure
for measuring tubulin polymerization by
assembly-promoting molecules such as
Taxol. It can also be used to prepare Taxolmicrotubules for other studies.
Procedure 2. Potency measurements
of MTAPs using absorption spectroscopy.

The basic procedure for Taxol assembly
is applied to potency measurements of
new substances. Absorption spectroscopy
is convenient when a small number of
molecules are to be screened.
Procedure 3. Potency measurements of
MTAPs using fluorescence spectroscopy.
Procedures for measuring potency are
performed in a 96-well plate [2]. This
procedure is well suited to screening a
larger number of molecules.

Reagents
Purified tubulin, free of microtubule-asso2 
3
ciated proteins 
PMEG buffer: 0.1 M PIPES, 1 mM MgSO4 ,
2 mM EGTA, 0.1 mM GTP, pH 6.9. The
buffer must be kept cold (4 ◦ C) to prevent
GTP hydrolysis. GTP-containing buffers
4
are discarded after 2 weeks 
Taxol, which is available from several
commercial sources
Sephadex G-50 in PMEG buffer
Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), reagent grade
or better
MTAPs to be tested (for Procedures 2
and 3)
4 , 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (for
Procedure 3)

PROTOCOL 6.33

Equipment
Gel filtration column and fraction collector
Procedures 1 and 2: Absorption spectrophotometer with thermostatted cell holder
(Multicell transporter desirable)
Quartz cells for spectrophotometer. A
0.4 × 1.0 cm cell requires about 0.5 ml
solution for each polymerization in a
typical instrument
Procedure 3: Plate reader capable of
monitoring emission at 450 nm (excitation
at 360 nm).
96-well plates

Procedures
Procedure 1 Taxol-induced tubulin
assembly

1. Prepare a stock solution of Taxol of
approximately 1 mM in DMSO.
2. Equilibrate tubulin in cold PMEG buffer
5
using Sephadex G-50. 
3. Set up absorption spectrophotometer to
measure absorption at 350 nm for 15 min
at a cuvette temperature of 37 ◦ C.
4. Add buffer followed by tubulin to the
cuvette to yield a tubulin concentration
of 10 µM in a total volume of 0.5 ml.
Equilibrate solution to 37 ◦ C and begin
measuring absorption at 350 nm.
5. Add an aliquot of the Taxol solution
to yield a final Taxol concentration of
10 µM (and a DMSO concentration
6 ), mix rapidly and
of ≤3% vol/vol 
gently, taking care not to introduce
bubbles into the cuvette.
6. Collect data until a plateau is reached.
Procedure 2 Potency of MTAPs using an
absorption spectrometer

1. Prepare 1 mM stock solution of Taxol
in DMSO and stock solution(s) of the
7
MTAP(s). 

327

2. Prepare tubulin and absorption spectrometer as above. The rest of this
protocol assumes that the absorption
instrument is capable of measuring six
cuvettes simultaneously.
3. Add PMEG buffer followed by tubulin
to absorption cell to yield a tubulin concentration of 10 µM in a total volume
of 0.5 ml. Equilibrate the solutions to
37 ◦ C and begin measuring absorption
at 350 nm.
4. To the first cuvette add an aliquot of
the Taxol solution to yield a final Taxol
concentration of 10 µM. To the other
five cuvettes, add aliquots of the MTAP
to yield the chosen final concentration
6 Mix each cuvette rapidly
of MTAP. 
and gently, taking care not to introduce
bubbles into the solution.
5. Continue measuring the absorption of
the solution with time until a steady
state is reached in the slowest sample.
6. Calculate the relative extent of assembly by subtracting the absorption value
before addition of Taxol or MTAP from
the absorption value of the plateau for
each sample.
7. Determine the fraction assembled in
each sample by dividing the change in
absorption for the Taxol sample into
the change of absorption of the other
samples.
8. Plot the fraction assembled versus
MTAP concentration and determine
the I50 .
Procedure 3 Potency of MTAPs using a
multi-well plate and a fluorescence plate
reader

1. Prepare 1 mM stock solution of Taxol
in DMSO and stock solution(s) of the
7
MTAP(s) in DMSO. 
2. Prepare a 1 mM stock solution of
8
DAPI in water. 

328

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

3. Equilibrate tubulin in cold PMEG
buffer using Sephadex G-50. 
5
4. Prepare the tubulin-DAPI solution for
pipetting into the plate. The final concentration of DAPI and tubulin in each
well will be 10 and 5 µM, respec9 Mix DAPI and buffer first,
tively. 
then add tubulin and mix gently. Add
194 µl of this solution to each well.
5. Add the MTAP in DMSO (6 µl) to a
produce a final volume of 200 µl. Prepare duplicates of each MTAP concentration. Quickly mix the solutions in
the wells using a multi-channel pipettor, taking care to avoid introduction
of bubbles into the wells.
6. Also prepare duplicates of two types
of controls: a ‘no assembly’ control,
which contains 5 µM tubulin, 10 µM
DAPI, 6 µl of DMSO but no MTAP,
and a ‘complete assembly’ control,
which contains 5 µM tubulin, 10 µM
DAPI and 10 µM Taxol.

7. Initiate the plate reader (excitation =
10 ) and
360 nm, emission = 450 nm 
collect data until a plateau is reached
11
in the wells. 
8. Subtract the average fluorescence value
for the ‘no assembly’ wells from the
average of the two fluorescence values
of each plateau.
9. Divide the average fluorescence value
for the ‘complete assembly’ control
into the average fluorescence value for
each of the MTAP concentrations to
determine the fraction assembled.
10. Plot fraction assembled versus concentration of MTAP and determine the
I50 value.

Examples of data
Figure 6.33 shows an example of Procedure 2 in which tubulin assembly is
induced by increasing concentrations of
baccatin III, an MTAP. The arrow indicates the point at which the baseline

0.4

A350

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
0

200

400

600
Time (s)

800

1000

1200

Figure 6.33 Tubulin assembly monitored on an absorption spectrometer according to Procedure 2.
Assembly was initiated after a baseline was collected for about 75 s (arrow). The absorption value for
the baseline is subtracted from the absorption value of the plateau (arrow) to evaluate the extent of
assembly. In this illustration, assembly of 10 µM tubulin was induced by baccatin III at concentrations
of 6 µM (solid curve), 3 µM (dashed curve) and 1.5 µM (dotted curve). A control containing no
baccatin III is shown in the dot–dash curve. The extent of assembly of the Taxol control is not shown
in this illustration

Fluorescence

PROTOCOL 6.33
A

B

D

E

329

C

Time (s)

Figure 6.34 Tubulin assembly in a 96-well plate monitored by fluorescence according to Procedure
3. Fluorescence was collected over a period of 100 min at a temperature of 32 ◦ C. The x and y scales
of each panel are equal. Panel A is the ‘no assembly’ control, containing 5 µM tubulin without MTAP.
The concentration of MTAP in panels B–E was 0.5, 2.0, 4.0 and 5.0 µM, respectively. The ‘complete
assembly’ control and duplicates of each well were also run (data not shown)
1.2

Fraction polymerized

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0

Figure 6.35

1

2

3
4
[MTAP] (µM)

5

6

7

The I50 for the MTAP tested in Figure 6.36 is determined graphically to be 2.3 µM

was taken, and the second arrow indicates where the absorption reading for the
plateau was taken.
Figure 6.34 shows an example of Procedure 3 in which tubulin assembly is
induced by increasing concentrations of a
Taxol analogue.
Figure 6.35 shows a plot of the fraction
of tubulin assembled as a function of
MTAP concentration and the I50 value.

Notes

1 Assembly promotion
of both the affinity
for the receptor site
critical concentration

is a function
of the MTAP
(Ka ) and the
of tubulin in

the presence of saturating concentrations of the MTAP (Ccrit ). A structural alteration of Taxol can affect
its Ka , Ccrit or both parameters. For
more detailed discussions, see refs 3
and 4.


2 If only a few measurements are anticipated, the protein can be purchased
from Cytoskeleton, Inc. If many measurements are to be done, it is
more cost effective to purify the protein from mammalian brain, described
in ref. 5.

3 These assays can also be performed
using microtubule protein, which is
tubulin plus microtubule-associated

330

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

proteins (MAPs). MAPs lower the
critical concentration of tubulin.
Therefore, if microtubule protein is
used, a lower protein concentration
may be necessary to prevent polymerization of the ‘no assembly’ controls.


4 It is convenient to prepare stock solutions of the individual components:
0.4 M PIPES, pH 6.9, prepared from
the free acid and 5 M NaOH; 100 mM
EGTA, pH 6.9, prepared from the free
acid and 1 M NaOH; 50 mM MgSO4 ,
and 50 mM GTP. PIPES stock is
stored at 4 ◦ C, GTP stock is stored at
−20 ◦ C or below, MgSO4 and EGTA
stocks are stored at 25 ◦ C.

5 If a low-speed centrifuge is available,
tubulin can be quickly equilibrated
into PMEG buffer by the method of
Penefsky [6], in which 1 ml syringes
are used instead of a single column.

6 It is known that DMSO induces
tubulin to assemble at concentrations
≥8% vol/vol [7]. We have found that
DMSO at a concentration of ≤3%
does not affect tubulin polymerization
under these assay conditions.

7 We find it convenient to make serial
dilutions of the stock solutions so that
an equal volume of DMSO is added
to each well.

8 This solution may be frozen in small
aliquots for storage at −20 ◦ C. The

DAPI solutions are not subjected to
a second freeze–thaw cycle.


9 We use a lower tubulin concentration
in the 96-well plates than in the
absorption spectrometer to decrease
the mass of tubulin consumed in each
experiment.

10 Appropriate cutoff filters can be used
if the plate reader lacks monochrometers.

11 A plate reader equipped with a temperature-controlling unit is ideal. In the
absence of such an accessory it is
important to maintain a constant temperature in the 96-well plate. Lower
temperatures will decrease the rates of
the assembly reactions.

References
1. Altman, K.-H. (2001) Curr. Opin. Cell Biol.,
5, 424–431.
2. Barron, D. M., Chatterjee, S. K., Ravindra, R.,
Roof, R., Baloglu, E., Kingston, D. G. I. and
Bane, S. (2003) Anal. Biochem., 315, 49–56.
3. Chatterjee, S. K., Barron, D. M., Vos, S. and
Bane, S. (2001) Biochemistry, 40, 6964–6970.
4. Andreu, J. M. and Barasoain, I. (2001) Biochemistry, 40, 11 975–11 984.
5. Williams, R. C. Jr and Lee, J. C. (1982) Methods Enzymol., 85, 376–385.
6. Penefsky, H. S. (1979) Methods Enzymol., 56,
527–530.
7. Robinson, J. and Engelborghs, Y. (1982) J.
Biol. Chem., 257, 5367–5371.

PROTOCOL 6.34
Vimentin production, purification, assembly
and study by EPR
John F. Hess, John C. Voss and Paul G. FitzGerald
Introduction
The hallmark of all intermediate filament
(IF) proteins is the central rod domain, a
region long predicted to form an alpha helical coiled coil. Although full-length IF proteins have not been crystallized, the alpha
helical coiled nature of subdomains within
the central rod has been confirmed by crystallization of vimentin fragments [1, 2] and
EPR spectroscopy [3]. We use the following methods to produce, purify, spin label
and then assemble filaments for EPR studies of vimentin structure and assembly.
The process of spin labelling a protein
requires that a single cysteine be substituted at the position where the spin label
is required. Therefore, we have removed
the single endogenous cysteine present in
human vimentin and substituted cysteines
where required. All of our constructs contain a serine at position 328, the original
location of the endogenous cysteine. Thus,
vimentin cys342 contains a cysteine at position 342 and a serine at position 328.

Procedures
A.

Production of vimentin in E. coli

Expression of vimentin in E. coli is performed using a pET7 expression plasmid generously provided by Roy Quinlan
(Durham University, UK). This construct

is introduced into any of several E. coli
BL21 (DE3) strains for IPTG induction of
vimentin expression followed by isolation
and purification of IBs (inclusion bodies).

Reagents and equipment
For bacterial growth:
37 ◦ C Shaking incubator for liquid culture
37 ◦ C Incubator for bacterial plates
Bacterial culture media including antibiotics
IPTG (isopropyl-B-D-galactopyranoside)
For preparation of bacterial lysates and gel
electrophoresis:
Microcentrifuge
SDS gels and apparatus for electrophoresis
Protein standards
Centrifuge and rotors

Procedure
General plasmid transformation and bacterial growth protocols can be found in references such as Molecular Cloning [4]. Protocols related to bacterial induction using
IPTG can be obtained from companies
such as Novagen, Invitrogen, Stratagene
and others.
1. Transform competent E. coli BL21
(DE3) (Novagen, Invitrogen or other

332

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

suppliers), with plasmid DNA and plate
on LB plates containing 100 µg of
ampicillin (amp)/ml.
2. Pick three or four colonies and grow in
2 ml of LB-amp until slightly cloudy
(OD 600 ∼0.3–0.4, usually ∼4 h).
Then 1 ml of each culture is removed
and transferred to a fresh tube and 1 µl
of 1 M IPTG is added. The original
tube, with 1 ml remaining, is retained
for use as an uninduced control. The
IPTG induced culture is returned to
a shaking incubator for 4 h. Following induction, 500 µl of both induced
and uninduced bacteria are harvested by
low-speed centrifugation (5000 rpm for
2 min) and the supernatants discarded.
Then 100 µl of TE (10 mM Tris pH 8,
1 mM EDTA) is added and the bacteria resuspended by vigorous vortexing.
Then 35 µl of 4× SDS-PAGE gel loading dye is added and the solution gently mixed; 15 µl of this bacterial lysate
is sufficient to run on a typical SDSPAGE minigel. If the solution is too
viscous to pipette, a 1 ml syringe fitted with a 25-gauge needle can be used
to shear the bacterial genomic DNA.
Coomassie blue staining and destaining of the gel will reveal which colony
(or colonies) provided the best expression. From the original uninduced culture, the best expressing colony should
be streaked out onto a fresh LB-amp
plate.

LB-amp supplemented with 10 ml of
20% glucose. When the culture reaches
an A600 of 0.8, IPTG is added to
0.5 mM. Induction is allowed to proceed for 6 h, and the bacteria harvested
by centrifugation in a swinging bucket
rotor at 4000 rpm for 15 min. The use
of a swinging bucket rotor produces a
thin pellet of bacteria on the bottom of
the 250 ml bottle, instead of a thick
pellet in the corner of a fixed angle
rotor. This pellet geometry aids resuspension of the bacteria; complete and
thorough resuspension is essential for a
clean inclusion body preparation. Following centrifugation, the bacterial pellet is frozen overnight.
B. Isolation and purification of
inclusion bodies (IBs) [3, 5]

Reagents and equipment
Centrifuge and rotors (for harvesting bacterial cultures and washing of IBs, e.g.
Sorvall RC5C, HS4 rotor, SS34 rotor)
Lysozyme
DNase I
RNase A

Procedure

3. Day 2: select a single isolated colony
and grow in 11 ml of LB-amp. This
culture is grown for 6–8 h, until very
cloudy, and two glycerol stock tubes are
prepared by mixing 500 µl aliquots of
bacteria with an equal volume of sterile
50% glycerol and stored at −80 ◦ C. The
remainder of the culture (∼10 ml) is
stored at 4 ◦ C overnight.

1. Thaw bacterial pellets in centrifuge
bottles by the addition of a GET buffer
(50 mM glucose, 25 mM Tris pH 8,
10 mM EDTA) containing 10 mg/ml
egg white lysozyme (Sigma L-6876),
10 ml per centrifuge bottle (20 ml per
500 ml culture). The bottle is vigorously vortexed to resuspend the pellet
and create a homogeneous suspension. The cell suspension is transferred to a disposable 50 ml screwcap tube using a Pasteur pipette. Any
remaining clumps are broken up by
rapid pipetting.

4. Day 3: use the entire 10 ml culture from
the refrigerator to inoculate 500 ml of

2. Incubate the bacterial suspension in
a 37 ◦ C water bath for ∼15–20 min.

PROTOCOL 6.34

During this time, the suspension
should change from a homogeneous
brown/grey/beige colour into a more
clumped suspension. This indicates
completion of the lysozyme digestion
and beginning of bacterial lysis.
3. Produce complete lysis by the addition
of an equal volume of 20 mM Tris
pH 7.5, 0.2 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA
1% deoxycholic acid, 1%NP-40. The
bacterial solution and the lysis buffer
should be gently rocked back and forth
several times over several minutes
to mix the solutions; the solution
should rapidly turn viscous (more of
a gelatinous blob than a suspension).
This indicates lysis and release of
bacterial genomic DNA.
4. Add magnesium chloride (1 M stock),
DNase I (Sigma D-5025, stock solution 10 mg/ml) and RNase A (Sigma
R4875), 10 mg/ml stock solution)
to final concentrations of 10 mM
(MgCl2 ) and 10 µg/ml (RNase and
DNase). The bacterial lysate is again
mixed by rocking back and forth, then
incubated at 37 ◦ C. Over the course
of 15–30 min, digestion of the bacterial DNA by DNase I will convert
the solution from a viscous gel into
a watery yellowish solution with an
off-white precipitate at the bottom of
the tube. Mixing of the tube will form
a homogeneous solution, but the IBs
will again sediment to the bottom.
5. When digestion is complete, as evidenced by a watery, non-viscous consistency,
transfer
the
solution
(∼20 ml) to a round bottom centrifuge
tube and centrifuge in an SS34 rotor at
6500 rpm (10 000g) for 10 min. IBs
form a large white/tan coloured pellet; the supernatant is discarded. (The
pellet should be firm, and the supernatant can be poured off without danger of losing the pellet.) Each tube,

333

corresponding to 250 ml of original
culture, is sequentially washed with
10 ml each of no salt, low salt, high
salt, and no salt buffers.
6. Add 10 ml of 0.5% TritonX-100 (TX100), 1 mM EDTA to the tube and
resuspend the IBs by pipetting. IBs
are then pelleted by centrifugation as
before.
7. Add 10 ml of a low salt solution
(10 mM Tris pH 8, 5 mM EDTA,
0.15 KCl, 0.5% TX-100) to the pellet
and resuspend the pellet by pipetting.
Careful resuspension and disruption
of clumps are essential to prepare
inclusions free of major contaminants.
Collect IBs by centrifugation.
8. Wash IBs with 10 ml of a high salt
solution (10 mM Tris pH 8, 5 mM
EDTA, 1.5 M KCl, 0.5% TX-100) and
collect by centrifugation.
9. Wash IBs with 10 ml 0.5% TX-100,
1 mM EDTA and collect by centrifugation.
10. Resuspend each tube of IBs in 4 ml
(8 ml total volume for 500 ml culture) of 20 mM Tris pH 8, 1 mM
EDTA, 8 M urea. Pipette the solution up and down; the IBs should dissolve and yield a slightly yellow solution that is not viscous. If viscous,
the DNase digestion was incomplete.
Small brown clumps with a translucent halo around them are clumps of
bacteria that were not resuspended.
C.

Purification and preparation of spin
labelled vimentin

Reagents and equipment
FPLC, e.g. Pharmacia
Source S column
Spin label compound (O-87500, (1-oxyl2,2,5,5,-tetramethyl-3-pyrroline-3-

334

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

methyl) methanethiosulfonate [MTSL],
Toronto Research Chemicals, Toronto,
Canada)
Superose column
TCEP (tris-(2-carboxylethyl) phosphine,
Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR)

Procedure
1. Dissolve IBs (from 500 ml of bacterial
culture) in 8 ml of 8 M urea (20 mM
Tris pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 8 M urea) and
filter through a 0.2 micron filter (Pall
Serum Acrodisc, Fisher Scientific).
2. Chromatograph 4 ml of inclusion body
solution on a Hi Load 16/60 Superdex
200 column. The column is run with
20% buffer B, giving conditions of
20 mM Tris, pH 8, 1 mM EDTA, 0.2 M
NaCl. Electrophorese column fractions
on an SDS-PAG and visualize the
proteins by Coomassie blue staining.
Pool peak fractions.
3. Desalt the pooled vimentin peak by
chromatography over a High-Prep26/10
desalting column.
4. Concentrate the desalted vimentin by
chromatography over a Source 15 S
column. The peak, typically 2.0 ml, is
used for spin labelling.
5. Add TCEP (100 mM stock in H2 O)
to a final concentration of 100 µM
and incubate at room temperature for
30 min.
6. Spin label the reduced vimentin by
addition of spin label to a final concentration of 500 µM; continue incubation
for 1 h.
7. After spin labelling, add 8 ml of buffer
A (8 M urea, 20 mM tris, 1 mM EDTA,
pH 8.0) and chromatograph the spin
labelled protein over the Source 15S
as before. Collect the purified peak and
store at −80 ◦ C.

Figure 6.36 Representative spin-labelled vimentin samples. Samples of Source S fractions 21
and 22 of spin-labelled vimentin mutants cys342 ,
cys345 , cys346 and cys349 are shown following
electrophoresis on SDS-PAGE and staining with
Coomassie Blue. In each pair of lanes, fraction
21 is first, followed by fraction 22; Lanes 1,
2: vimentin cys342 ; lanes 3,4, vimentin cys345 ;
lanes 5,6, vimentin cys346 ; lanes 7,8, vimentin
cys349 . Markers in lane M are Benchmark protein standards from Invitrogen. Vimentin migrates
between the 50 and 60 kD bands

Figure 6.36 shows the results of the
above purification/labelling scheme, for
four separate vimentin mutants.
D.

Assembly of intermediate filaments

Equipment
Dialysis tubing and clips, e.g. Spectra/Por
6 regenerated cellulose, 10 000 molecular
weight cut-off dialysis tubing (Fisher Scientific)

Procedure
1. Assemble purified vimentin in 8 M urea
into filaments by dialysis against buffers
without urea. Single-step dialysis can
be performed using 20 mM Tris pH 7.5
and either 160 mM KCl or NaCl [6, 7].
Dialysis is performed at room temperature, overnight. For EPR studies, protein concentrations >1 mg/ml are used.
For observation of filaments by electron microscopy, protein concentrations

PROTOCOL 6.34

335

8 M urea

4 M urea

Figure 6.37 Intermediate filaments assembled
from spin-labelled vimentin 342C. Spin-labelled
vimentin was assembled by dialysis against
20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 160 mM NaCl, overnight followed by negative staining and visualization by
EM

of 0.2–0.5 mg/ml are used. Figure 6.37
shows an example of filaments assembled from vimentin cys342 .
2. If EPR spectra are to be recorded at
multiple steps during vimentin assembly, dialysis can be performed in a stepwise fashion [8]. Starting conditions are
20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 8 M
urea (buffer A + 8 M urea). Vimentin
dimers can be produced by dialysis
against buffer A + 4 M urea. Vimentin
tetramers can be produced by dialysis
against 5 mM Tris pH 8 [9]. Filaments
can be assembled from any of these
intermediate steps by dialysis against
assembly buffer, 20 mM Tris pH 7.5,
160 mM NaCl. Perform dialysis for
6–8 h, followed by overnight dialysis,
for filament formation.

EPR
EPR measurements can be carried out in
a JEOL X-band spectrometer fitted with
a loop-gap resonator (Molecular Specialties, Inc., Milwaukee, WI), or equivalent [10, 11]. An aliquot of purified, spinlabelled protein is placed in a sealed quartz
capillary (0.84 mm OD, Ruska Instrument

IF

Figure 6.38 Normalized EPR spectra from
spin-labelled vimentin cys342 . Spectra were collected from monomers (8 M urea), dimers (4 M
urea) and filaments (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 160 mM
NaCl)

Corp., Houston, TX) and inserted into
the resonator. Spectra of samples at room
temperature (20–22 ◦ C) were obtained by
a single 60 s scan over 100 G at a
microwave power of 2 mW, a receiver
gain of 250–400 and a modulation amplitude optimized to the natural line width
of the individual spectrum. For intact
filaments, spin label concentration is typically in the range of 50–70 µM. Intermediate filament samples tend to aggregate upon further concentration, so instrument sensitivity should be optimized to
obtain good signal to noise, especially for
specimens displaying broad line widths.
However, protofilaments of IF oligomers
formed in low ionic strength, can be concentrated using centrifugal devices providing excellent signal to noise ratio with even
less sensitive instrumentation. For spectra
obtained at −100 ◦ C, the microwave power
is reduced (100 µW) to avoid saturation.
A representative example of EPR data is
shown in Figure 6.38.

336

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a UC
Davis Health System Research Grant
(JFH), a US Army Medical Research
Acquisition Activity (grant number
DAMD17-02-1-0664, JFH), National Institutes of Health Grant R01EY08747 (PGF)
and core grant P30EY-12576 (JFH and
PGF) and The March of Dimes Birth
Defect Foundation (JV).

References
1. Strelkov, S., Herrmann, H., Parry, D., Steinert, P. and Aebi, U. (2000) J. Invest. Dermatol., 114, 779.
2. Strelkov, S. V., Herrmann, H., Geisler, N.,
Wedig, T., Zimbelmann, R., Aebi, U. and
Burkhard, P. (2002) EMBO (European Molecular Biology Organization) J., 21,
1255–1266.

3. Hess, J. F., Voss, J. C. and FitzGerald, P. G.
(2002) J. Biol. Chem., 277, 35 516–35 522.
4. Sambrook, J. and Russell, D. W. (2001) Molecular Cloning: a Laboratory Manual, 3rd
edn (J. Sambrook, ed.), Cold Spring Harbor
Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
5. Nagai, K. and Thøgersen, H. C. (1987) Method. Enzymol., 153, 461–481.
6. Herrmann, H., Hofmann, I. and Franke, W.
W. (1992) J. Mol. Biol., 223, 637–650.
7. Eckelt, A., Herrmann, H. and Franke, W. W.
(1992) Euro. J. Cell Biol., 58, 319–330.
8. Carter, J. M., Hutcheson, A. M. and Quinlan, R. A. (1995) Exp. Eye Res., 60, 181–192.
9. Rogers, K. R., Herrmann, H. and Franke, W.
W. (1996) J. Struct. Biol., 117, 55–69.
10. Froncisz, W. and Hyde, J. S. (1982) J. Magn.
Reson., 47, 515–521.
11. Hubbell, W. L., Froncisz, W. and Hyde, J. S.
(1987) Rev. Sci. Instrum., 58, 1879–1886.

PROTOCOL 6.35
Neurofilament assembly
Shin-ichi Hisanaga and Takahiro Sasaki
Introduction
Neurofilament (NF) is the neuron-specific
intermediate filament (IF) [1, 2]. NF is the
most abundant cytoskeleton in axon, essential for radial growth of axons. NF is composed of three subunits, NF-L (61 kDa),
NF-M (95 kDa) and NF-H (110 kDa). Like
other IF proteins, each subunit consists
of three domains; the N-terminal head,
central α-helical rod and C-terminal tail
domain. The head domain is thought to be
the region regulating the filament assembly–disassembly by phosphorylation. The
rod domain is involved in the filament
formation via coiled-coil interaction. The
tail domain, which of NF-M and NF-H
are highly phosphorylated and much longer
than NF-L and other IF proteins, extrudes
from the filament core and interacts with
each other and with other cellular components [3, 4]. Therefore, NF-L is the basic
subunit for filament formation, and NF-M
and NF-H are suggested to be incorporated
at the surface of filaments.
The assembly of NF has been extensively studied, but how these subunits are
arranged in NF has not been discovered
yet. Furthermore, abnormal metabolism of
NF proteins has been reported recently
with several neurodegenerative diseases.
Accumulation of NF in the cell body
and proximal axons of motor neurons is
a well-known pathology of amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS) [5]. The deletion
and insertional mutations of the NF-H tail

domain are discovered in sporadic ALS
patients and are suggested to be a risk
factor. Several point mutations in the NF-L
gene are recently reported to be associated
with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT),
the most common form of hereditary motor
and sensory neuropathy [6, 7]. NF-L with
CMT mutants (P8R and Q333P) is suggested to be an inability to form filaments
properly and disturbs axonal transport in
neurons [8, 9]. The point mutation of NFM is also found in familial Parkinson’s disease [10]. It will be important to determine
the effects of these mutations on filament
assembly.
The NF assembly has usually been
assessed in vitro with purified proteins and
in cultured cells by transfection. The NF-L
purified in a denaturing solution containing 6 ∼ 8 M urea can assemble into long
10 nm filaments upon dialysis against a
physiological solution (i.e. 0.15 M NaCl
and several mM MgCl2 at pH around 7)
at 37 ◦ C. NF-M and NF-H need NF-L
to form 10 nm filaments, although they
themselves form small oligomeric aggregates. The in vitro reassembly system is
used to examine the assembly conditions
and processes, and capable of investigating
the detailed filament structures by electron
microscopy. It is also possible to examine
disassembly of filaments by phosphorylation with several protein kinases including
PKA, PKC, CaMKII and Rho kinase [11].
The expression of NF proteins in SW-13

338

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

cl.2/Vim− cells which lack the cytoplasmic
IF proteins is also often used to estimate
the filament assembly in cellular conditions. This assay can be performed without
purification of NF proteins. This method
revealed that rodent NF proteins are obligate heteropolymers; NF-L required coexpression of either or both NF-M and NF-H
for filament formation [12, 13]. We will
describe here the assembly system methods in vitro with NF proteins purified from
mammalian spinal cords and from E. coliexpressed NF-L and in SW-13 cl.2/Vim−
cells with transfection of cDNAs encoding
NF protein.

Reagents
A. For assembly in vitro

PEM buffer (100 mM Pipes, pH 6.8,
1 mM EGTA, 2 mM MgCl2 , 1 mM
1
DTT, 0.4 mM Pefabloc SC (Merck) 
and 10 µg/ml leupeptin)
PEMU buffer (PEM buffer containing 6 M
urea)

Equipment
A. For assembly in vitro

Polytron homogenizer for spinal cords 
2
or sonicator for E. coli
DEAE cellulose (DE52, Whatman) column
and Mono Q column (Amersham Biosciences)
3 (Millipore)
Centricon-10 
Centrifuge
Materials for preparation of negatively
stained EM specimens
Transmission electron microscope
B. For assembly in SW-13 cl.2/Vim− cells

Facilities for cell culturing
Antibody to NF proteins
Materials for preparation of immunofluorescent staining
Fluorescence microscope or laser scanning
microscope

Procedure

PEMN buffer (PEM buffer containing
0.15 M NaCl)

I. NF assembly in vitro

Bovine or porcine spinal cords

A. Preparation of crude NF proteins

Rat or mouse NF-L cDNA cloned into an
E. coli-expression vector

(a) NF proteins from spinal cords
1. Bring bovine or porcine spinal cords
from a local slaughterhouse to the lab
4
on ice as quickly as possible. 

B. For assembly in SW-13 cl.2/Vim− cells

cDNAs of NF subunits cloned into human
cytomegalovirus promoter- or rous sarcoma virus promoter-driven expression
vectors
Transfection reagent, Fugene 6 (Roche) or
Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen)
All standard laboratory reagents should
be of high purity and good quality
deionized water used

2. Remove meninges from the spinal cords
and measure the weight.
3. Homogenize the spinal cords in an
equal volume (w/v) of PEM buffer
(100 mM Pipes, pH 6.8, 1 mM EGTA,
2 mM MgCl2 , 1 mM DTT, 0.4 mM
Pefabloc SC (Merck) and 10 µg/ml
leupeptin) with a polytron homogenizer.
4. Centrifuge the homogenate at 10 000g
for 15 min at 4 ◦ C.

PROTOCOL 6.35

5. Take the supernatant and recentrifuge it
at 100 000g for 60 min at 4 ◦ C.
6. Discard the supernatant and dissolve the
pellet in PEM buffer containing 6 M
urea (PEMU).

339

3. Elute the NF proteins with 5 column
volumes of buffer with a linear gradient
7
of NaCl from 0 to 0. 25 M. 

7. Centrifuge the suspension at 100 000g
for 30 min at 4 ◦ C.

4. Collect the NF-L- or NF-M-rich fractions and apply it to a Mono Q
anion exchanger column equibrated
with PEMU.

8. Remove the supernatant as the crude NF
proteins.

5. Wash the column with 5 column volumes of PEMU.

(b) NF-L from E. coli 
5
The expression of NF-L protein in E. coli
is performed by a standard protocol using a
T7 promoter-driven system. E. coli strain
‘BL21(DE3) pLysS’ carrying pET23-rat
NF-L is induced to express NF-L protein
by 0.5 mM IPTG for 3 h at 37 ◦ C.
1. Collect E. coli by centrifugation at
8 000g and wash once with 0.85%
NaCl.
2. Suspend cells with 5 ml of PEM buffer
per 100 ml of culture.
3. Sonicate the suspension to disrupt cells
with cooling.
4. Centrifugate the homogenate
100 000g for 30 min at 4 ◦ C.

at

5. Dissolve the pellet with 5 ml of PEMU
per 100 ml of culture. 
6
6. Stand for 1 h at room temperature.
7. Centrifugate the suspension at 100 000g
for 30 min at 4 ◦ C.
8. Recover the supernatant as the crude
NF-L preparation.

B. Purification of NF proteins
1. Apply the crude NF proteins or crude
NF-L to a DEAE-cellulose column
equibrated with PEMU.
2. Wash the column with 3 ∼ 5 column
volumes of PEMU.

6. Elute the NF proteins with 10 column
volumes of PEMU with a linear gradient of NaCl from 0 to 0.5 M.
7. Collect NF-L and NF-M separately,
and concentrate to 2 ∼ 3 mg/ml by
Cetricon-10.

C. NF assembly
The reconstitution of NF is performed
by dialysis of the NF protein solution
(2 ∼ 3 mg/ml) against the PEM buffer
containing 0.15 M NaCl (PEMN) at 37 ◦ C
8 For the assembly
for more than 3 h. 
of filaments composed of NF-L/M or NFL/H heteropolymers, their ratio should be
2 : 1 for both NF-L/NF-M and NF-L/NFH. Assembly of filaments can be checked
by pelleting them by centrifugation at
100 000g for 30 min, followed by SDSPAGE. For EM observation, dilute the
reassembled filaments to 0.1 mg/ml and
process them for negative staining.
II. NF assembly in SW-13/cl.2 vim− cells

SW-13/cl.2 vim− cells, established by Dr
R Evert (Univ. of Colorado Health Sciences Center, CO), were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium with
10% fetal bovine serum at 37 ◦ C in
5% CO2 . SW-13/cl.2 vim− cells can be
transfected with calcium phosphate precipitation or lipofection-based reagents,
although the latter method is easier. We

340

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

successfully transfected plasmids using
Fugene 6 (Roche) or Lipofectamine 2000
(Invitrogen) according to the manufacture’s instructions. The human cytomegalovirus promoter or rous sarcoma virus
promoter can be used to express the
NF proteins in the cells. Expressed NF
is visualized by the general immunofluorescence technique. Alternatively, selffluorescence of enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP) fused to the NF protein
is also available. EGFP-linked to the Nterminal end, but not C-terminal end, of
NF subunits can assemble into filaments.
Observation of NFs can be performed by
a standard fluorescence microscope, but
observation by a laser scanning microscope
reveals more detailed structures.
Examples of representative data are
shown in Figures 6.39 and 6.40.

H
M

L

Notes

1 We use Pefabloc SC as a Serineprotease inhibitor in place of PMSF,
because Pefabloc SC is water-soluble
and is not inactivated in aqualous
solutions.
(a)

1

2

3

4

Figure 6.39 SDS-PAGE of NF proteins purified
from bovine spinal cords and from E. coli. Lanes
1–3 are NF-L, NF-M and NF-H from bovine
spinal cords, respectively and lane 4 is NF-L from
E. coli
(b)

10 µm
Figure 6.40 (a) A negative staining electron micrograph of NFs reassembled from porcine NF-L and
(b) a laser scanning fluorescence micrograph of rat NF-L and EGFP-tagged rat NFH co-expressed in
SW-13 cl.2/Vim− cells

PROTOCOL 6.35


2 A glass–Teflon homogenizer or juicer
mixer can be used, although the spinal
cords are more finely homogenized
with a polytron.

3 Filter device for ultrafiltration.

4 Rat or mouse spinal cords can be used
for preparation of NF. Rat or mouse
spinal cords are easily ejected from
an upper backbone by injecting water
into the lower part of the backbone.
However, the separation of NF-M and
NF-L by column chromatographies is
difficult in comparison with porcine
or bovine NF. If you want to use rat
or mouse NF-L, we recommend to
express it in E. coli as described in
section II).

5 Preparation of NF-M and NF-H from
E. coli is not recommended, although
purification of NF-H can be done. Not
only is their expression low, but also
a lot of truncated forms are generated
particularly for NF-M.

6 NF-L is obtained as a inclusion body
but is solubilized by 6 ∼ 8 M urea.

7 NF-H is eluted earlier than NF-L and
NF-M as a single band on the gel of
SDS-PAGE, but NF-L and NF-M are
eluted with a overlap in the order of
NF-M and NF-L.

8 NF-L at lower concentrations (0.1
mg/ml) can assemble into filaments
but higher concentrations are better to
obtain longer filaments. The extended
dialysis up to 24 h results in longer
filaments.

341

References
1. Pant, H. C. and Veeranna (1995) Biochem.
Cell Biol., 73, 575–592.
2. Julien, J. P. and Mushynski, W. E. (1998)
Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol., 61, 1–23.
3. Sasaki, T., Taoka, M., Ishiguro, K.,
Uchida, A., Saito, T., Isobe, T. and
Hisanaga, S. (2002) J. Biol. Chem., 277,
36 032–36 039.
4. Julien, J. P. and Mushynski, W. E. (1983) J.
Biol. Chem., 258, 4019–4025.
5. Carpenter, S. (1968) Neurology, 18, 841–851.
6. Mersiyanova, I. V., Perepelov, A. V.,
Polyakov, A. V., Sitnikov, V. F., Dadali,
E. L., Oparin, R. B., Petrin, A. N. and
Evgrafov, O. V. (2000) Am. J. Hum. Genet.,
67, 37–46.
7. De Jonghe, P., Mersivanova, I., Nelis, E.,
Del Favero, J., Martin, J. J., Van Broeckhoven, C., Evgrafov, O. and Timmerman, V.
(2001) Ann. Neurol., 49, 245–249.
8. Perez-Olle, R., Leung, C. L. and Liem, R. K.
(2002) J. Cell Sci., 115, 4937–4946.
9. Brownlees, J., Ackerley, S., Grierson, A. J.,
Jacobsen, N. J. O., Shea, K., Anderton,
B. H., Leigh, P. N., Shaw, C. E. and Miller,
C. C. J. (2002) Hum. Mol. Gen., 11, 2837–
2844.
10. Lavedan, C., Buchholtz, S., Nussbaum, R. L.,
Albin, R. L. and Polymeropoulos, M. H.
(2002) Neurosci. Lett., 322, 57–61.
11. Hisanaga, S., Gonda, Y., Inagaki, M., Ikai, A.
and Hirokawa, N. (1990) Cell Regul., 1,
237–248.
12. Ching, G. Y. and Liem, R. K. (1993) J. Cell
Biol., 122, 1323–1335.
13. Lee, M. K., Xu, Z., Wong, P. C. and Cleveland, D. W. (1993) J. Cell Biol., 122, 1337–
1350.

PROTOCOL 6.36
α-Synuclein fibril formation induced by
tubulin
Kenji Uéda and Shin-ichi Hisanaga
Introduction

Reagents

Human α-synuclein was originally identified as the precursor protein of non-βamyloid β component (NAC) in an amyloid-enriched fraction from Alzheimer’s
disease brains [1]. Later, three missense
mutations in the α-synuclein gene were
discovered in certain pedigrees with autosomal-dominant familial Parkinson’s disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Increasing evidence suggests that
α-synuclein is a common pathogenic
molecule in several neurodegenerative diseases, collectively known as synucleinopathies. α-Synuclein is a soluble neuronal protein of unknown function, but
is the major filamentous component of
pathological inclusions in those diseased
brains. α-Synuclein has the property of
forming fibrils by itself in vitro, and mutations of α-synuclein accelerate the fibril formation [2]. Furthermore, several factors are known to accelerate fibril formation in vitro. It is essential to understand
the mechanism for filament formation in
neurodegenerative diseases. Recently, it
was demonstrated that tubulin seeds αsynuclein fibril formation under physiological conditions [3]. Here, the procedures
for preparing proteins and fibril formation,
and the detection of fibrils are described.

Express human α-synuclein in Escherichia
coli BL21(DE3)pLysS using an expression
vector with isopropyl-1-thio-β-D-galactopyranoside (IPTG) and purified by HPLC
methods [3, 4]. Briefly, a soluble fraction of E. coli expressing α-synuclein
was fractionated by HPLC column chromatographies of anion exchange (DEAE
5PW, TOSO, Tokyo, Japan), hydrophobic (Phenyl TOYOPEARL, TOSO), and
reversed phase (TSK-gel phenyl 5PW,
TOSO) columns sequentially. From 1 l cell
culture, 80 ∼ 100 mg of α-synuclein is
obtained with a purity of more than 98%.

1 Purified α-synuclein can be lyophilized
and stored at −80 ◦ C. Microtubule proteins
can be isolated from rat or porcine brains
by two cycles of a temperature-dependent
assembly and disassembly according to
Shelanski et al. [5]; see also Protocol 6.34.
Purify tubulin from the microtubule proteins by phosphocellulose (Whatman P11)
column chromatography [6] and store at
−80 ◦ C. All standard laboratory reagents
should be of high purity and good quality.
Milli Q water should be used.

Equipment
Eppendorf or other laboratory tubes

PROTOCOL 6.36
(a)

343

(b)
α – syn + tub
controls

0.4

A

400 nn

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

24

48
72
Time (h)

96

Figure 6.41 Fibril formation of α-synuclein in the presence of tubulin: (a) Fibril formation of
α-synuclein monitored by quasi-elastic light scattering. α-Synuclein (300 µM) in 25 µl of PBS was
incubated at 37 ◦ C with 1 µM of tubulin, and 1 µl of the reaction mixture was taken and measured
its scattering at 400 nm at various times. The fibrils began to form after 6 h of incubation, and this
formation steadily increased and reached a plateau in 3 days. An open square represents four kinds of
controls that were completely flat. Controls: (1) 300 µM α-synuclein; (2) 1 µM tubulin; (3) 300 µM
α-synuclein+1 µM BSA; (4) 300 µM BSA + 1 µM tubulin. The value represents the average of three
determinations. (b) A negative staining electron micrograph of representative α-synuclein fibrils. A
number of long, 10-nm-wide filaments are formed. Bar = 100 nm

37 ◦ C water bath
Materials for preparation of negatively
stained EM specimens (see Protocol
2.4 ) Microcentrifuge
Spectrophotometer equipped with a ultramicro amount sample cell (we use
a Hitachi Gene Spec III, which has
enabled ultra-micro volume quantitative
analysis, using as little as 1 µl)

4. Monitor fibril formation by light scattering at OD 400 nm using 1 µl of the
reaction mixture with a Gene Spec III
3 
4 
5
spectrophotometer. 
5. Prepare EM specimens negatively
stained with 2% uranyl acetate.
6. Assess the fibril formation on specimen
grids by an EM.

Transmission electron microscope

An example of fibril formation by αsynuclein is shown in Figure 6.41.

Procedure

Notes

1. Thaw α-synuclein and tubulin stored at
−80 ◦ C quickly in a water bath and
2
keep them on ice. 
2. Add ice-cold sterilized PBS, pH 7.4 to
make 300 µM solution of α-synuclein
with 1 µM of tubulin in 25 µl.
3. Incubate at 37 ◦ C without agitation for
24 h (or longer, as required). Fibrils
begin to form after 6 h of incubation.


1 Purified recombinant α-synuclein is
unstructured, heat-stable, highly soluble, and exists as a monomer in an
aqueous solution.

2 Tubulin is an unstable protein, losing
its polymerization activity upon keeping it on ice for long time. Tubulin
should be stored in aliquots to avoid
repeated freezing/thawing and thawed
freshly on each experimental day.

344

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES


3 Take 1 µl aliquots from the incubation
mixture into an ultra-micro sample
cell without agitation at the time of
monitoring.

4 α-Synuclein can undergo self-aggregation under certain conditions, such
as increasing time lag, high temperature, high concentration and low pH.

5 Light scattering intensity indicates the
total mass of fibrils formed.

2.
3.

4.

5.
6.

References
1. Uéda, K., Fukushima, H., Masliah, E., Xia, Y.,
Iwai, A., Yoshimoto, M., Otero, D. A. C.,

Kondo, J., Ihara, Y. and Saitoh, T. (1993) Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 90, 11 282–11 286.
Ma, Q. L., Chan, P., Yoshii, M. and Uéda, K.
(2003) J. Alzheimer Dis., 5, 139–148
Alim, M. A., Hossain, M. S., Arima, K., Takeda, K., Izumiyama, Y., Nakamura, M., Kaji, H.,
Shinoda, T., Hisanaga, S. and Uéda, K. (2002)
J. Biol. Chem., 277, 2112–2117.
Hossain, S., Alim, A., Takeda, K., Kaji, H.,
Shinoda, T. and Uéda, K. (2001) J. Alzheimer
Dis., 3, 577–584.
Shelanski, M. L., Gaskin, F. and Cantor, C. R.
(1973) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 70, 765–768.
Weingarten, M. D., Lockwood, A. H., Hwo,
S. Y. and Kirschner, M. W. (1975) Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. USA, 72, 1858–1862.

PROTOCOL 6.37
Amyloid-β fibril formation in vitro
J. Robin Harris
Introduction
Fibrillogenesis of the amyloid-β peptide (Aβ) and inhibition of fibrillogenesis
is of considerable interest for biomedical scientists and clinicians concerned
with the development and prevention of
Alzheimer’s disease. The Aβ peptide, proteolytically cleaved in vivo from the soluble amyloid precursor protein, exists as a
range of peptide length, between 39 and 44
amino acids. The 42 amino acid peptide
(Aβ1−42 ) is believed to be the predominant amyloid peptide incorporated in fibril
form within Alzheimer senile plaques [1].
Although biophysical (e.g. spectroscopy
and atomic force microscopy), and biochemical studies (e.g. thioflavin-T fluorescence, Congo red binding) have been used
to assess Aβ fibrillogenesis [2], TEM is
the most rapid and direct procedure, and
it enables comment to be made on the
progression of different oligomerization,
protofibril and fibril states, and the interaction of fibrils with other proteins and
physiological reagents such as cholesterol
and sphingomyelin [3].

Reagents
Synthetic amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide (1–42)
(human, mouse or rat sequence, and synthetic equivalents of Aβ mutants), is
available from most biochemical suppliers, often as the trifluoroacetate salt.
Store at −20 ◦ C, or below.

Chemicals that potentiate (e.g. cholesterol,
ganglioside GM1, metal ions) or inhibit
(e.g. aspirin, nicotine, vitamin E) fibrillogenesis can also be incorporated
within this system, as required.
All standard laboratory reagents should
be of high purity and good quality
1
deionized water used. 

Equipment
Incubator (37 ◦ C), with shaker
Microcentrifuge or other laboratory tubes
Microcentrifuge
Materials for preparation of negatively
stained EM specimens (see Protocol 2.4 )
Spectrometer/fluorescence spectrometer (if
biochemical quantitation of fibrillogenesis is required)
Access to a transmission electron microscope (TEM)

Procedure
1. Warm the lyophilized Aβ peptide to
room temperature before opening.
2. Add ice-cold deionized water (or buffer
at defined pH) to produce a ∼0.2 mM/
∼1 mg/ml solution of Aβ peptide. Keep
on ice.
3. Disperse and solubilize the peptide by
repeated gentle pipetting for ∼2–5 min.
Remove any insoluble aggregates by
2
centrifugation, if necessary. 

346

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

(a)

(b)

Figure 6.42 Example of human Aβ1−42 peptide following 24 h incubation at 37 ◦ C in the absence
(a) and presence (b) of cholesterol microcrystals. Note that in (a) there is a background spread of
oligomeric Aβ particles, alongside short and longer A fibrils. In (b) all the oligomeric particles have
polymerized to generate single and clustered fibrils which also bind to the cholesterol microcrystals. Negatively stained with 2% uranyl acetate. The scale bars indicate 200 nm (JRH, previously
unpublished data)

4. Aliquot the Aβ solution into several
tubes containing an equal volume con3 
4
taining differing additives. 
5. Incubate at 37 ◦ C with constant oscillation for 24 h (or longer, as required).
6. Prepare EM specimens negatively
stained with 2% uranyl acetate (or other
suitable negative stain [4].
7. Assess the formation of protofibrils and
helical fibrils by studying specimen
grids in a TEM.
8. Aβ fibril formation can also be assessed
by light microscopy/spectroscopy to
determine Congo red binding or by
thioflavin-T fluorescence, both of which
indicate alpha-helix to beta-sheet conversion [2].
A representative example of Aβ1−42
fibrillogenesis is shown in Figure 6.42.

Notes
This procedure will take approximately
24 h.


1 Use HPLC grade, deoxygenated water.
Metal ion contamination (e.g. Cu, Zn,
Fe, Al) should be avoided.

2 This will necessitate determination
of the protein concentration of the
supernatant.

3 That is, water/buffer alone, plus and
appropriate concentration of a compound that may potentiate (cholesterol,
sphingomyelin, gangliosides, multivalent metal ions) or inhibit Aβ fibrillogenesis (e.g. vitamin E, Aβ fragments,
apolipoprotein E4, catalase, aspirin,
nicotine, Congo red and other drugs)
[3, 5].

4 In view of the potentially hazardous
nature of amyloid peptides and the

PROTOCOL 6.37

various additives or drugs used in this
protocol, if injested, appropriate care
should be taken throughout.

References
1. Rochenstein, E., Mallory, M., Mante, M.,
Sisk, A. and Masloaja, E. (2001) J. Neurosci.
Res., 66, 573–582.

347

2. Nybo, M., Svegag, S.-E. and Nielsen, E. H.
(1999) Scan. J. Immunol., 49, 219–223.
3. Harris, J. R. (2002) Micron, 33, 609–626.
4. Harris, J. R. and Scheffler, D. (2002) Micron,
33, 461–480.
5. Ono, K., Hasegawa, K., Yamada, M. and
Naiki, H. (2002) Biol. Psychiatry, 52, 880–886.

PROTOCOL 6.38
Soluble Aβ1 – 42 peptide induces tau
hyperphosphorylation in vitro
Terrence Town and Jun Tan
Introduction
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) has two key
pathologies: the presence of neurofibrillary
tangles (NFTs) and deposition of amyloidβ peptide (Aβ) as senile plaque. NFTs are
predominately comprised of hyperphosphorylated tau protein, assembled primarily in the paired helical filament (PHF)
conformation [1, 2]. While the mechanistic
link between tau hyperphosphorylation and
NFTs is not well understood, it is generally thought that increased phosphorylation
promotes PHFs, resulting in disruption of
the physiological role of tau in stabilizing
neuronal microtubules that are necessary
for axoplasmic flow [3]. Tau appears to be
hyperphosphorylated at specific epitopes
(particularly in the proline-rich region that
contains several serine/threonine-proline
motifs) in AD brain [2].
One key question concerning tau hyperphosphorylation is whether or not it is promoted by Aβ. It is now generally accepted
that Aβ directly promotes increased levels
of intracellular Ca2+ in neurons, thereby
causing neuronal injury and apoptosis [4].
Recent evidence has established the signalling cascade that promotes neuronal
cyclin-dependent kinase 5 (Cdk5) activation induced by p25, with the first event
being increased intracellular Ca2+ levels, which then promotes calpain activation, which, in turn, goes on to directly

cleave p35 to p25 [5]. Excess p25 then
complexes with Cdk5, thereby boosting
its activity, an event that is associated
with tau hyperphosphorylation at ADspecific phosphoepitopes and, not surprisingly, neurotoxicity [5, 6]. Further, as studies of human biopsies and aged canine and
primate brains have consistently shown
that dystrophic neurites precede deposition of Aβ in the formation of neuritic
plaques [7–10], the putative role of soluble forms of Aβ peptide per se in promotion of tau phosphorylation is of interest. We have recently demonstrated that,
in p35-overexpressing neuron-like cells,
soluble Aβ is a potent activator of the
Cdk5/p25 pathway, leading AD-like tau
phosphorylation in vitro [11].

Reagents
1. The p35-overexpressing N2a cell line
is required for these experiments and
is available from our laboratory upon
request. These cells are grown in
Eagle’s minimum essential media supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine and
Earle’s balanced salt solution adjusted
to contain 1.5 g/l sodium bicarbonate, 0.1 mM non-essential amino acids,
1.0 mM sodium pyruvate, 10% fetal
bovine serum and 400 µg/ml of G418,
and are induced to differentiate into
neuron-like cells by serum withdrawal

PROTOCOL 6.38

and the addition of 0.3 mM dibutyryl
cAMP for 48 h.
2. To examine phospho-tau and total tau
levels, the following anti-tau antibodies
are needed: AT8 (Innogenetics, Norcrosis, GA), AT270 (Innogenetics), pS199
(BioSource International, Inc. Camarillo, CA), and pS396 (BioSource International, Inc.) against phosphorylated
forms of tau, and C-17 (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) against
total tau protein.
3. Synthetic human Aβ1 – 42 peptide is
available from QCB Biosource International (Camarillo, CA) and other suppliers.
4. To perform Western immunoblotting,
the following reagents are needed in
addition to the above-mentioned primary antibodies: buffers [cell lysis
buffer containing phosphatase and protease inhibitors supplied as 10× from
NEB, Beverly, MA; Tris-buffered saline
(TBS), Tris/glycine/SDS buffer, laemmli sample buffer, and blocking and
antibody dilution buffer consisting of
TBS with 5% w/v non-fat dry milk
and 0.05% Tween-20, obtained from
Bio-Rad]; 10% ready gels (Bio-Rad);
Hybond PVDF membranes (Bio-Rad);
appropriate secondary antibodies conjugated with horseradish peroxidase
(HRP) and luminol reagent (Santa Cruz
Biotechnology).
5. To perform immunocytochemistry, a
cell permeabilizing solution of 0.05%
v/v Triton X-100 diluted in complete
medium described above is needed,
and a phosphate-buffered saline (PBS)
rinse solution, a fixing solution of
4% w/v paraformaldehyde in PBS,
serum-free blocking solution (Dako,
Carpinteria, CA), and the LSAB +
immunochemistry kit (Dako, Carpinteria, CA) are needed.

349

Equipment
Immunoblot Apparatus
Fluor-S MultiImager with Quantity One
software (Bio-Rad), for densitometric
analysis of protein bands
Freezer −80 ◦ C
Inverted light microscope, for tissue culture observation
Light microscope, preferably with a digitizing camera system
Microcentrifuge tubes
Microcentrifuge, 4 ◦ C
Protein gel electrophoresis system
Tissue culture CO2 incubators, for growing
cell cultures
Spectrophotometer

Procedure
Preparation of Aβ1 – 42 peptide

Add Sigma water to human Aβ1 – 42 peptide to a concentration of 250 µM immediately before all experiments. This stock
solution can then be diluted to 1, 3
or 5 µM in cell culture media for tau
phosphorylation experiments. Based on
our recent data [11], more than 95% of
the Aβ1 – 42 employed in this experimental paradigm (including all doses studied,
under both cell-free and cell-present conditions) remains in soluble form throughout
the experiments.
Cell culture conditions

1. Plate p35-overexpressing N2a cells at
5 × 105 cells/well in six-well tissue culture plates (for Western immunoblotting analysis of phospho-tau), or plate
on glass coverslip inserts in six-well
tissue culture plates (for immunocytochemistry of phospho-tau) in complete
media described above.
2. To differentiate these cells, subject
p35-overexpressing N2a cells to serum

350

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES
(b)

Co
nt
ro
l
1
m
ic
3 roM
m
ic Ab
r
5 oM eta
m
ic Ab
ro
M eta
A
Co
be
ta
nt
ro
l
1
m
ic
3 roM
m
ic Ab
r
5 oM eta
m
ic Ab
ro
e
M ta
A
be
ta

(a)

-phospho-tau

-total tau
N2a/p35 cells

N2a/mock

phospho-tau/total tau ratio

1

Control
Abeta1-42 (1 microM)
Abeta1-42 (3 microM)
Abeta1-42 (5 microM)

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
N2a/p35 cells

N2a/mock

Figure 6.43 Treatment of p35-overexpressing N2a cells with Aβ1 – 42 results in increased tau phosphorylation by Western blot. p35 or mock-transfected N2a cells were differentiated and treated with
a dose range of Aβ1 – 42 (1, 3 or 5 µM Aβ) or went untreated (control) for 24 h. After incubation,
phospho-tau epitopes were detected by Western blot and were normalized to total tau protein (as
detected by anti-tau antibody C-17). (a) membranes were probed with AT8 (above) or C-17 (below),
and representative blots illustrate an Aβ1 – 42 dose–response relationship only in p35-transfected N2a
cells. (b) densitometric analysis (ratio of phospho-tau to total tau signal ±1 SEM, n = 3 for each
condition presented) for pooled results from (A) reveals significant treatment effects of Aβ1 – 42 dose
on p35-transfected N2a cells (P < 0.001) but not on mock-transfected cells (P > 0.05)

withdrawal and give 0.3 mM dibutyryl
cAMP for 48 h.
3. These cells then remain untreated (as a
control), or are treated with a dose range
of Aβ1 – 42 (1, 3 or 5 µM) for 24 h.
Western immunoblotting analysis of tau
hyperphosphorylation

1. Preparation of cell lysate:
(a) Wash treated N2a cells twice in
the six-well plate with ice-cold PBS
and drain off the PBS.
(b) Add ice-cold lysis buffer (containing 20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM
NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA,
1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mM sodium
pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerolphosphate, 1 mM Na3 VO4 , 1 µg/ml
leupetin and 1 mM PMSF) at a
volume of 0.1 ml lysis buffer per
1 × 106 cells.
(c) Scrape these cells off the plate with
a plastic cell scraper and transfer the
lysate into a microcentrifuge tube.

Gently rock the suspension on a
rocker in the cold room for 15 min
to lyse the cells.
(d) Centrifuge the lysate at 14 000g in
a pre-cooled centrifuge (4 ◦ C) for
15 min. Immediately transfer the
supernatant to a fresh centrifuge
tube.
(e) Quantify the total protein content
of supernatants for each sample
using the Bio-Rad protein assay
kit and aliquot the sample into
several tubes and keep these tubes
at −80 ◦ C.
2. Western immunoblotting:
(a) Perform SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) on
cell lysates (50 µg of total protein
of each sample) and transfer electrophoretically to Hybond PVDF
membranes.
(b) Wash the Hybond PVDF membrane
twice with dH2 O and mark the
transferred side of membrane with
a pencil.

PROTOCOL 6.38

351

50 µm

Figure 6.44 Increased tau phosphorylation in situ following treatment of p35-transfected N2a cells
with Aβ1 – 42 . p35 or mock-transfected N2a cells were differentiated and incubated with Aβ1 – 42 (3 µM)
for 24 h. Tau phosphorylation was then detected using the AT270 antibody, as indicated by the brown
reaction. Bright field (upper panels) and phase contrast (lower panels) micrographs showing phospho-tau in p35-transfected N2a cells in the absence (right panels) or presence (left panels) of treatment
with 3 µM of Aβ1 – 42

(c) Block the membrane in freshly prepared TBS containing 5% non-fat
dry milk for 2 h at room temperature with agitation.

(g) Wash the membrane five times for
5 min each with dH2 O.

(d) Apply either anti-phospho-tau
(AT8, 1 : 1000; AT270, 1 : 1000;
pS199, 1 : 1500; pS396, 1 : 1500) or
anti-total tau (C-17, 1 : 100) antibody diluted in fresh TBS containing 5% non-fat dry milk to the
membrane and incubate for 2 h at
room temperature with agitation.

(i) Densitometric analysis is performed
for the blots using the Fluor-S MultiImager with Quantity One software, and data are represented as
a ratio of phospho-tau to total tau
signal (see Figure 6.43).

(h) Perform detection of proteins using
the luminol reagent.

Immunocytochemistry

(e) Wash the membrane three times for
5 min each with dH2 O.
(f) Incubate the membrane in the appropriate second antibody conjugated with HRP for 1 h at room
temperature with agitation.

1. Culture N2a cells at 5 × 105 cells/well
on glass coverslips in six-well tissue culture plates and differentiate as
described above. Twenty-four hours
after treatment with a dose range
of Aβ1 – 42 as described above, fix

352

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

these cultured cells with ice-cold 4%
paraformaldehyde in PBS (0.1 M, pH
7.4) for 10 min at 4 ◦ C, and then permeabilize in 0.05% Triton X-100 diluted in
complete medium.
2. After three rinses with ice-cold PBS,
treat these cultured cells with endogenous peroxidase quenching (0.3% H2
O2 ) and pre-block with serum-free protein blocking solution prior to primary
antibody incubation.
3. Apply an anti-phospho-tau mouse monoclonal antibody (AT270, 1 : 100 dilution) to these cells overnight at 4 ◦ C.
4. Perform immunocytochemistry using
the LSAB + kit (utilizing an HRPconjugated diaminobenzidine chromogen system).
5. Record morphology and phospho-tau
immunoreactivity in these cells by
brightfield microscopic examination,
using a light microscope (see Figure 6.44).

References
1. Grundke-Iqbal, I., Iqbal, K., Tung, Y. C.,
Quinlan, M., Wisniewski, H. M. and Binder,
L. I. (1986) Abnormal phosphorylation of
the microtubule-associated protein tau (tau) in
Alzheimer cytoskeletal pathology. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. USA, 83, 4913–4917.
2. Friedhoff, P., von Bergen, M., Mandelkow,
E. M. and Mandelkow, E. (2000) Structure
of tau protein and assembly into paired
helical filaments. Biochem. Biophys. Acta,
1502, 122–132.
3. Drubin, D. G. and Kirschner, M. W. (1986)
Tau protein function in living cells. J Cell
Biol., 103, 2739–2746.

4. Mattson, M. P., Cheng, B., Davis, D., Bryant, K., Lieberburg, I. and Rydel, R. E.
(1992) β-amyloid peptides destabilize calcium homeostasis and render human cortical
neurons vulnerable to excitotoxicity. J. Neurosci., 12, 376–389.
5. Lee, M. S., Kwon, Y. T., Li, M., Peng, J.,
Friedlander, R. M. and Tsai, L. H. (2000)
Neurotoxicity induces cleavage of p35 to p25
by calpain. Nature, 405, 360–364.
6. Patrick, G. N., Zukerburg, L., Nikolic, M.,
de la Monte, S., Dikkes, P. and Tsai, L. H.
(1999) Conversion of p35 to p25 deregulates
Cdk5 activity and promotes neurodegeneration. Nature, 402, 615–622.
7. Terry, R. D. and Wisniewski, H. M. (1970)
The ultrastructure of the neurofibrillary tangle and the senile plaque. In: CIBA Foundational Symposium on Alzheimer’s Disease and
Related Conditions (G. E. W. Wolstenholme
and M. O’Connor, eds), pp. 145–168. J&H
Churchill, London.
8. Wisniewski, H. M., Johnson, A. B., Raine,
C. S., Kay, W. J. and Terry, R. D. (1970)
Senile plaques and cerebral amyloidosis in
aged dogs. A histochemical and ultrastructural study. Lab. Invest., 23, 287–296.
9. Wisniewski, H. M., Ghetti, B. and Terry, R.
D. (1973) Neuritic (senile) plaques and filamentous changes in aged rhesus monkeys. J.
Neuropath. Exp. Neurol., 32, 566–584.
10. Martin, L. J., Pardo, C. A., Cork, L. C. and
Price, D. L. (1994) Synaptic pathology and
glial responses to neuronal injury precede
the formation of senile plaques and amyloid
deposits in the aging cerebral cortex. Am. J.
Pathol., 145, 1358–1381.
11. Town, T., Zolton, J., Shaffner, R., Schnell, B.,
Crescentini, R., Wu, Y., Zeng, J., Delle
Donne, A., Obregon, D., Tan, J. and Mullan, M. (2002) p35/Cdk5 pathway mediates
soluble amyloid-β-peptide-induced tau phosphorylation in vitro. J. Neurosci. Res., 69,
362–372.

PROTOCOL 6.39
Anti-sense peptides
Nathaniel G. N. Milton
Introduction
Anti-sense peptide sequences are derived
from the complementary strand of DNA
encoding a given protein, read in the same
open reading frame. The complementary
strand DNA for each individual amino acid
can be read in either the forward 3 -5 or
reverse 5 -3 direction, adding degeneracy to
the potential anti-sense peptide sequences.
For a given peptide sequence it is possible to derive two anti-sense peptides from
the DNA sequence. These sequences can
then be used for synthesis of binding peptides and for screening databases for proteins with sequence similarity, which may
act as binding proteins. Studies have shown
that such anti-sense peptides bind with high
affinity to the given protein and that they
can also have sequence similarity to protein
binding domains including receptor binding
sites [1, 2]. Anti-sense peptide sequences
can also be derived directly from the amino
acid sequence of a protein, via reverse translation to produce a complementary DNA sequence. However, due to the degeneracy of
the genetic code, there is typically more than
one anti-sense sequence for any one protein
sequence. The binding interactions between
sense and anti-sense encoded peptides are
mediated via hydropathic interactions [1].
Hydropathy profiles can also be used to derive anti-sense binding peptides [3].
The availability of vast protein and
nucleotide sequence databases can be used
both to derive anti-sense peptides and for

sequence comparisons to identify potential protein–protein interactions. The simplicity of the anti-sense peptide sequence
derivation plus availability of powerful
sequence comparison programs to screen
these databases makes this technique a
cheap and rapid method for identification of potential protein–protein interactions, which can then form the basis
for experimental studies. The use of this
technique has been applied to identify
novel Alzheimer’s amyloid-ß peptide (Aß)
binding proteins [4–6] and to characterize
binding domains within known Aß binding proteins [7]. Such techniques are applicable to any protein or peptide and the
resultant anti-sense sequences or protein
binding domains can also be used in a similar manner to antibodies.

Reagents
Synthetic anti-sense peptides can be custom synthesized commercially or produced
in-house. Biotin labelling of proteins can
be carried out using commercially available kits [7]. Antibodies to target proteins
can be obtained commercially or raised in
house. Standard laboratory reagents should
be of high purity and good quality deionized water used.

Equipment
Computer (PC or Macintosh) with access
to Internet and Microsoft Word

354

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

ELISA plate reader with filters for absorbance at 405 and 450 nm
ELISA plate washer
Eppendorf or other laboratory tubes
Microtiter plates – NUNC Polysorb or
Maxisorb for binding assays

3. Make a duplicate file of the coding sequence and convert each nucleotide triplicate to a 5 to 3 anti-sense amino acid
based on Table 6.2 using Find and Replace. Where the anti-sense amino acid
is a stop codon, replace the DNA triplet
with X. Save the resultant 5 to 3 antisense peptide text file.

Procedures

4. Make a duplicate file of the coding sequence and convert each nucleotide triplicate to a 3 to 5 anti-sense amino acid
based on Table 6.2 using Find and Replace. Where the anti-sense amino acid
is a stop codon, replace the DNA triplet
with X. Save the resultant 3 to 5 antisense peptide text file.

A. Derivation of anti-sense peptide
sequences

The following method makes use of the
Genbank nucleotide database available on
the National Centre for Biotechnology Information website (http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/Entrez).
1. Access http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
Entrez website and perform a nucleotide
sequence search for the protein being
investigated. Copy the DNA sequence
and paste into a Microsoft Word document. Delete all non-coding sections
of DNA sequence to leave the coding sequence of interest. The resultant
DNA sequence, typically starting with
atg, should be converted to FASTA format by deletion of all spaces and numbers – use Microsoft Word Find and
Replace options in the Edit toolbar.
Alternatively a FASTA format DNA
coding sequence can be imported from
another source.
2. Convert the FASTA format sequence
into a ‘coding sequence’ by insertion
of spaces every three digits. This can
be done using Find and Replace in
Microsoft Word. In the Find What
section, select ‘Any Letter’ three times.
In the Replace With section select,
‘Find What Text’ followed by a single
space. The resultant ‘coding sequence’
should be in the format ‘atg gtc cag’.
Save resultant ‘coding sequence’ text
file.

B. Comparison of anti-sense peptide
sequences with known proteins

The following methods make use of the
BLAST program for sequence comparison
with protein databases [8] available on the
National Centre for Biotechnology Information website (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/BLAST). Alternative sequence databases and comparison programs are available or can be obtained commercially.
Protein binding can occur in both parallel and anti-parallel orientations. The
BLAST search is restricted to comparisons of sequences in a parallel manner since it compares N to C terminally
entered sequences. To overcome this problem it is possible to enter anti-sense peptide
sequences in the C to N terminus orientation and perform BLAST searches. Therefore, four potential anti-sense sequence
comparisons can be carried out.
1. Access the BLAST program on the Internet at http//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
BLAST.
2. Select Protein BLAST.
3. Then select Search for short nearly
exact matches. This search uses a
PAM30 matrix with Gap Costs of

PROTOCOL 6.39

Table 6.2 Identification of an alternative anti-sense amino acid that would
recognize the respective sense amino acid

Amino
acid

Coding
DNA
(5 -3 )

Anti-sense
DNA
(3 -5 )

Anti-sense
5 -3
direction

Amino acid
3 -5
direction

Ala (A)

GCA
GCC
GCG
GCT
AGA
AGG
CGA
CGC
CGG
CGT
AAC
AAT
GAC
GAT
TGC
TGT
GAA
GAG
CAA
CAG
GGA
GGC
GGG
GGT
CAC
CAT
ATA
ATC
ATT
CTA
CTC
CTG
CTT
TTA
TTG
AAA
AAG
ATG
TTC
TTT
CCA
CCC
CCG
CCT

CGT
CGG
CGC
CGA
TCT
TCC
GCT
GCG
GCC
GCA
TTG
TTA
CTG
CTA
ACG
ACA
CTT
CTC
GTT
GTC
CCT
CCG
CCC
CCA
GTG
GTA
TAT
TAG
TAA
GAT
GAG
GAC
GAA
AAT
AAC
TTT
TTC
TAC
AAG
AAA
GGT
GGG
GGC
GGA

Cys (C)
Gly (G)
Arg (R)
Ser (S)
Ser (S)
Pro (P)
Ser (S)
Ala (A)
Pro (P)
Thr (T)
Val (V)
Ile (I)
Val (V)
Ile (I)
Ala (A)
Thr (T)
Phe (F)
Leu (L)
Leu (L)
Leu (L)
Ser (S)
Ala (A)
Pro (P)
Thr (T)
Val (V)
Met (M)
Tyr (Y)
Asp (D)
Asn (N)
Stop (X)
Glu (E)
Gln (Q)
Lys (K)
Stop (X)
Gln (Q)
Phe (F)
Leu (L)
His (H)
Glu (E)
Lys (K)
Trp (W)
Gly (G)
Arg (R)
Arg (R)

Arg (R)
Arg (R)
Arg (R)
Arg (R)
Ser (S)
Ser (S)
Ala (A)
Ala (A)
Ala (A)
Ala (A)
Leu (L)
Leu (L)
Leu (L)
Leu (L)
Thr (T)
Thr (T)
Leu (L)
Leu (L)
Val (V)
Val (V)
Pro (P)
Pro (P)
Pro (P)
Pro (P)
Val (V)
Val (V)
Tyr (Y)
Stop (X)
Stop (X)
Asp (D)
Glu (E)
Asp (D)
Glu (E)
Asn (N)
Asn (N)
Phe (F)
Phe (F)
Tyr (Y)
Lys (K)
Lys (K)
Gly (G)
Gly (G)
Gly (G)
Gly (G)

Arg (R)

Asn (N)
Asp (D)
Cys (C)
Glu (E)
Gln (Q)
Gly (G)

His (H)
Ile (I)

Leu (L)

Lys (K)
Met (M)
Phe (F)
Pro (P)

(continued overleaf )

355

356

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Table 6.2

(continued )

Amino
acid

Coding
DNA
(5 -3 )

Anti-sense
DNA
(3 -5 )

Anti-sense
5 -3
direction

Amino acid
3 -5
direction

Ser (S)

TCA
TCC
TCG
TCT
AGC
AGT
ACA
ACC
ACG
ACT
TGG
TAC
TAT
GTA
GTC
GTG
GTT

AGT
AGG
AGC
AGA
TCG
TCA
TGT
TGG
TGC
TGA
ACC
ATG
ATA
CAT
CAG
CAC
CAA

Stop (X)
Gly (G)
Arg (R)
Arg (R)
Ala (A)
Thr (T)
Cys (C)
Gly (G)
Arg (R)
Ser (S)
Pro (P)
Val (V)
Ile (I)
Tyr (Y)
Asp (D)
His (H)
Asn (N)

Ser (S)
Arg (R)
Ser (S)
Arg (R)
Ser (S)
Ser (S)
Cys (C)
Trp (W)
Cys (C)
Stop (X)
Thr (T)
Met (M)
Ile (I)
His (H)
Gln (Q)
His (H)
Gln (Q)

Thr (T)

Trp (W)
Tyr (Y)
Val (V)

9 for Existence and 1 for Extension. The Expect is set to 20 000.
A Standard protein–protein BLAST
[blastp] which uses the BLOSUM62
matrix with Gap Costs of 11 for Existence and 1 for Extension can also be
used. For a Standard protein–protein
BLAST [blastp] the Expect (statistical significance threshold for reporting
matches against database sequences)
can be reset to 100 or greater to
account for the use of short peptide
sequences in the search and increase
the number of hits.

6. The sequence information obtained
within a BLAST search can be printed,
copied and stored as required.

4. Alignments of peptides of <5 amino
acids are considered non-significant under these conditions.

9. If a specific protein is known to bind
the target protein a Pairwise BLAST
with selection of BLAST 2 sequences
can be performed. Select BLAST 2
sequences and the blastp (protein)
comparison. Either the BLOSUM62
matrix with Gap Costs of 11 for
Existence and 1 for Extension or the
PAM30 matrix with Gap Costs of 9 for
Existence and 1 for Extension can be
selected.

5. Sequences containing significant gaps
(>10%) should also not be used since
hydropathic binding interactions require a direct alignment between each
sense protein residue and its complementary anti-sense peptide or binding
domain residue.

7. Using the options section it is possible
to limit searches to sequences from
different databases and select the
species to be searched.
8. Within the BLAST search results
access to the aligned sequences is also
available and from this information
about proteins interacting with the
target protein can be obtained.

PROTOCOL 6.39

10. The Expect (statistical significance
threshold for reporting matches against
database sequences) should be reset to
100 or greater to account for the use of
short peptide sequences in the search
and increase the number of hits.
11. Enter the anti-sense peptide sequence
as sequence 1 and the interacting protein sequence as sequence 2. The interacting protein sequence identification
either as a protein accession number
or GI number can be entered rather
than the full FASTA format protein
sequence.

Choice of anti-sense peptide for synthesis

Anti-sense peptides can be synthesized
based on the sequences obtained in
Procedure A above. A good discussion
of the choice of anti-sense peptide
to synthesize is included in Bost and
Blalock [1]. Regions of binding proteins
identified in Procedure B can also be
synthesized. Shorter anti-sense peptides
will show less specificity, in general a
10-amino-acid peptide will be sufficient.
The results from the comparison of antisense sequences with known proteins will
help in determining the peptide to be
synthesized and should help in deciding
whether to use the 3 to 5 or 5 to 3
anti-sense peptide sequences. Information
on structural features of a protein is
particularly useful and a simple computer
program to predict protein secondary
characteristics is available [9]. If the
sequence of interest contains an X, i.e.
the non-coding DNA strand encodes a
stop codon, then an alternative amino
acid must be substituted. From Table
6.2 an alternative anti-sense amino acid
that would recognize the respective sense
amino acid can be identified. Where there
is a choice then information from the
BLAST comparisons may be of use and

357

an amino acid substitution could use a
residue found in a protein with sequence
similarity. The use of N or C terminal
Cys residues to allow chemical linkage
to carrier proteins, agarose or biotin
labels should be considered. N-terminal
acetylation and C terminal amidation can
also be considered [1].
C. Direct binding of anti-sense peptides to
target proteins

For this assay either a biotin labelled form
of the target protein or an antibody specific
for the target protein is required.
1. A 500 ml solution of carbonate buffer
containing 15 mM Na2 CO3 , 35 mM
NaHCO3 , 0.01% NaN3 (w/v) pH 9.6
should be prepared (can be stored for
<14 days at 4 ◦ C).
2. Anti-sense peptides (1 µg/ml) should
be prepared in carbonate buffer (10 ml/
plate).
3. To each of the inner 60 wells
on a NUNC Polysorb or Maxisorb
96-well ELISA plate add 100 µl
of anti-sense peptide solution or
carbonate buffer (for control nonspecific binding determination). Cover
plates with plate sealer (NUNC).
Incubate plates at 4 ◦ C overnight.
4. Remove plate sealer and wash plates
three times with carbonate buffer
(200 µl/well).
5. Prepare a 0.2% casein solution in
carbonate buffer (20 ml/plate) and add
200 µl/well to each well. Incubate
plates at room temperature for 1 h.
6. Prepare a 1 l solution of assay buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.01%
NaN3 (w/v), 0.1% BSA (Cohns
Fraction V) (w/v), 0.1% Triton X-100
(v/v) pH 7.5.

358

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

7. Wash plates three times with assay
buffer (200 µl/well).
8. Prepare a 5× stock solution of target
protein (either biotin labelled or unlabelled as available) in assay buffer for
addition to plates in the presence of
competing anti-sense peptides or test
compounds. Prepare competing antisense peptides and test compounds in
assay buffer in polypropylene tubes at
5× required test concentration.
9. Prepare tubes containing target protein
plus competing anti-sense peptides or
test compounds and add 100 µl/well
to coated ELISA plates. Incubate overnight at 4 ◦ C.
10. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well assay buffer.
11. For biotin labelled target proteins
prepare alkaline phosphatase polymerstreptavidin conjugate (1 : 1000 dilution of stock solution) in assay buffer.
Add 100 µl/well to ELISA plates and
incubate at 37 ◦ C for 2 hs. Go to step
15.
12. For unlabelled target proteins prepare
antibody at an appropriate dilution in
assay buffer. Add 100 µl/well to ELISA
plates and incubate at 37 ◦ C for 2 h.
13. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well assay buffer.
14. Add 100 µl/well appropriate antiIgG-alkaline phosphatase conjugate
(1 : 2000 dilution of neat conjugate in
assay buffer) and incubate for 2 h at
room temperature.
15. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well assay buffer.
16. Prepare substrate containing 2.7 mM
p-nitrophenylphosphate, 10 mM diethanolamine, 0.5 mM MgCl2 pH
9.8. Add 100 µl/well and allow

sufficient colour development. Colour
development can be stopped by
addition of 50 µl/well 3 M NaOH if
required.
17. Read absorbance at 405 nm using an
ELISA plate reader.

References
1. Bost, K. L. and Blalock, J. E. (1989) Preparation and use of complementary peptides. Methods Enzymol., 168, 16–28.
2. Heal, J. R., Roberts, G. W., Raynes, J. G.,
Bhakoo, A. and Miller, A. D. (2002) Specific
interactions between sense and complementary
peptides: the basis for the proteomic code.
ChemBioChem., 3, 136–151.
3. Villain, M., Jackson, P. L., Manion, M. K.,
Dong, W. J., Su, Z., Fassina, G., Johnson,
T. M,. Sakai, T. T., Krishna, N. R. and Blalock, J. E. (2000) De novo design of peptides
targeted to the EF hands of calmodulin. J. Biol.
Chem., 275, 2676–2685.
4. Milton, N. G. N. (2001) Phosphorylation of
amyloid-ß at the serine 26 residue by human
cdc2 kinase. NeuroReport, 12, 3839–3844.
5. Heal, J. R., Roberts, G. W., Christie, G. and
Miller, A. D. (2002) Inhibition of ß-amyloid
aggregation and neurotoxicity by complementary (antisense) peptides. ChemBioChem 3,
86–92.
6. Milton, N. G. N. (2002) Peptides for use in
the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Patent
Publication, WO 02/36614 A2.
7. Milton, N. G. N., Mayor, N. P. and Rawlinson, J. (2001) Identification of amyloid-ß binding sites using an antisense peptide approach.
NeuroReport, 12, 2561–2566.
8. Altschul, S. F., Madden T. L., Alejandro A.
Schaeffer, A. A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Miller, W. and Lipman D. J. (1997) Gapped
BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation
of protein database search programs. Nucleic
Acids Res., 25, 3389–3402.
9. Krchnak, V., Mach, O. and Maly, A. (1989)
Computer prediction of B-cell determinants
from protein amino acid sequences based on
incidence of beta turns. Methods Enzymol.,
178, 586–611.

PROTOCOL 6.40
Interactions between amyloid-ß and enzymes
Nathaniel G. N. Milton
Introduction
The neurotoxicity of the amyloid-ß peptide
(Aß) is thought to be of major importance
in the pathology of Alzheimer’s disease [1]
and compounds that prevent Aß neurotoxicity have therapeutic potential. The
Aß peptide also interacts with a range of
enzymes including catalase [2] and cyclindependent kinase-1 (CDK-1) [3]. Catalase
enzyme activity is inhibited by Aß [2] and
CDK-1 activity enhanced [3] allowing the
use of these enzymes in functional bioassays to identify compounds that prevent
actions of Aß. The binding characteristics of these enzymes [4, 5] can be used to
identify compounds that interact with different regions of Aß and provide a method
for rapid screening to identify Aß binding compounds. Microtiter plate binding
and functional enzyme activity assays are
rapid methods for identifying compounds
that interact with Aß prior to screening
for ability to influence Aß neurotoxicity.
Compounds identified using these methods can be further screened for effects on
Aß fibrillogenesis (see Protocol 6.38), Aß
phosphorylation (see Protocol 6.42) or Aß
neurotoxicity (see Protocol 6.42).

Reagents
Synthetic Aß peptides (commercially
available)
N-terminal Biotin labelled Aß 1–40 and
Aß 25–35 (commercially available)

Biotinylated H1 peptide (PKTPKKAKKL)
available from Promega
Control peptides should be unrelated to Aß
or scrambled sequence variants of Aß.
The reverse Aß 40-1 peptide interacts
with the catalase Aß binding domain
(Human catalase residues 400–409) and
should not be used in binding assays
or catalase inhibition assays. Purified
or recombinant enzyme preparations are
readily available commercially.
Anti-phosphoserine and phosphothreonine
antibodies, secondary antibody alkaline
phosphatase and HRP conjugates and
TMB substrate systems are all commercially available. For enzyme activity
assays preparations with known activity are required and should be stored at
−70 ◦ C; 30% hydrogen peroxide solutions are readily available.
The [γ32 P]-ATP with a specific activity
of 3000 Ci/mmol 10 µCi/µl is commercially available and fresh batches should
be obtained just prior to carrying out
Procedure D (see below).
A liquid scintillation cocktail for nonaqueous samples is required; the choice
should be appropriate for the laboratory disposal regulations and ß-counter
available. All other standard laboratory
reagents should be of high purity and
good quality deionized water used.

360

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Equipment

6. Repeat steps 4 and 5 two further times.

β-Counter
ELISA plate reader with filters for absorbance at 405 and 450 nm
ELISA plate washer
Eppendorf or other laboratory tubes
Freezer, −70 ◦ C
Glass tubes
Incubator, 37 ◦ C
Microtiter plates – NUNC Polysorb or
Maxisorb for binding assays
Microcentrifuge
Nitrogen gas supply
Scintillation tubes
Sonicator

7. For storage resuspend peptide in hexafluoroisopropanol, aliquot into polypropylene tubes, remove hexafluoroisopropanol under a stream of nitrogen and
store tubes at −70 ◦ C.

Procedures
A. Preparation of unaggregated Aß

For Aß binding and enzyme activity bioassays monomeric unaggregated Aß peptide
is required and the peptide should be prepared as follows. This method can be used
for all Aß forms, including N-terminally
biotinylated derivatives, and should also be
used for appropriate control peptides.
1. Lyophilized Aß peptide should be resuspended in neat HPLC grade trifluoroacetic acid to produce a 1 mg/ml
solution in a glass tube.
2. Sonicate the resuspended peptide for
15 min at 24 ◦ C and if not completely dissolved add further trifluoroacetic acid.
3. Remove trifluoroacetic acid under a
stream of nitrogen.
4. Resuspend peptide in hexafluoroisopropanol.
5. Remove hexafluoroisopropanol under a
stream of nitrogen.

8. Resuspend dried down peptide in appropriate buffer prior to use in binding and
enzyme activity assays.
B. Binding of Aß to catalase and CDK-1

For Aß binding assays purified or recombinant enzyme preparations can be used. All
Aß peptides should be prepared as above.
1. A 500 ml solution of carbonate buffer
containing 15 mM Na2 CO3 , 35 mM
NaHCO3 , 0.01% NaN3 (w/v), pH 9.6
should be prepared (can be stored for
<14 days at 4 ◦ C).
2. Catalase or CDK-1 (1 µg/ml) should
be prepared in carbonate buffer (10 ml/
plate).
3. To each of the inner 60 wells on
a NUNC Polysorb or Maxisorb 96well ELISA plate add 100 µl of
enzyme solution or carbonate buffer
(for control non-specific binding determination). Cover plates with plate
sealer (NUNC). Incubate plates at
4 ◦ C overnight.
4. Remove plate sealer and wash plates
three times with carbonate buffer
(200 µl/well).
5. Prepare a 0.2% casein solution in
carbonate buffer (20 ml/plate) and add
200 µl/well to each well. Incubate
plates at room temperature for 1 h.
6. Prepare a 1 l solution of assay buffer
containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.01%
NaN3 (w/v), 0.1% BSA (Cohns Fraction V) (w/v), 0.1% Triton X-100
(v/v), pH 7.5.

PROTOCOL 6.40

7. Wash plates three times with assay
buffer (200 µl/well).
8. Prepare a 1 nM solution of biotinylated Aß peptide in assay buffer. This
is a 5× stock for addition to plates
in the presence of test compound
and competing unlabelled Aß peptides. Prepare unlabelled Aß peptides
and test compounds in assay buffer
in polypropylene tubes at 5× required
test concentration.
9. Prepare tubes containing biotinylated
Aß, competing peptides and test compounds and assay buffer to give a
final 1× solution. Add 100 µl/well to
coated ELISA plates and incubate at
37 ◦ C for 4 h.
10. Wash plates three times with assay
buffer (200 µl/well).
11. Prepare alkaline phosphatase polymerstreptavidin conjugate (dilute stock
solution to 0.5 µg/ml) in assay buffer.
Add 100 µl/well to ELISA plates and
incubate at 37 ◦ C for 2 h.
12. Wash plates three times with assay
buffer (200 µl/well).
13. Prepare substrate containing 2.7 mM
p-nitrophenylphosphate, 10 mM diethanolamine, 0.5 mM MgCl2 , pH 9.8.
Add 100 µl/well and allow sufficient
colour development. Colour development can be stopped by addition of
50 µl/well 3 M NaOH if required.
14. Read absorbance at 405 nm using an
ELISA plate reader.
C. Inhibition of catalase activity bioassay
for Aß

Catalase EC 1.11.1.6 from human erythrocytes has been used for the development
of this bioassay for Aß [2]. Purified catalase from other sources and immunoprecipitated catalase can also be used. If catalase

361

from another source is used an Aß binding assay (Procedure B) should be carried
out initially to confirm the presence of an
Aß binding domain. It is essential to use
monomeric Aß preparations as described
above since aggregated material shows a
reduced ability to inhibit catalase activity [2]. Many compounds and buffer components can influence catalase activity and
all assays should include controls to ensure
that only a direct action on Aß induced
catalase inhibition is being observed. The
catalase inhibitor 3-amino-triazole is a useful control material that acts via a similar
mechanism to Aß [2, 6].
1. Prepare a 32.4 mM solution of ammonium molybdate (20 g/500 ml) and
mix on a heated stirrer until a clear
solution is obtained. This solution is
stable for <14 days and can be stored
at room temperature.
2. Freshly prepare a 100 mM phosphate
buffer containing 88 mM Na2 HPO4 ,
12 mM NaH2 PO4 , pH 7.4.
3. Prepare a 5% marvel solution in phosphate buffer (20 ml/plate) and add
200 µl/well to each well of a 96-well
microtiter plate. Incubate at 37 ◦ C for
1 h.
4. Wash plates three times with phosphate buffer (200 µl/well).
5. Prepare a 100 U/ml solution of catalase in phosphate buffer in a polypropylene tube. In 1.5 ml microcentrifuge
tubes prepare dilutions of this top
standard to give solutions of 50, 25,
12.5, 6.25, 3.13 and 1.56 U/ml. Also
prepare a 50 U/ml solution for incubation with Aß and test compounds.
6. Prepare Aß peptides (10 µM stock)
and test compounds in phosphate
buffer.
7. Add Aß and test compounds to buffer
to give a final Aß concentration of

362

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

4 µM in 1.5 ml microcentrifuge tubes.
Add 10 µl of each test solution or
10 µl phosphate buffer for controls
and standards to wells of a 96-well
microtiter plate.
8. Add 10 µl of 50 U/ml catalase solution to each test well and 10 µl of
standards to appropriate wells. Add
30 µl phosphate buffer to each well
and incubate at 37 ◦ C for 1 h.
9. Prepare substrate solution containing
15 µl (6.5 µmol) H2 O2 in phosphate
buffer.
10. Add 50 µl/well substrate to each well
of the microtiter plate using a multichannel pipette, wait 60 s and then
add 100 µl/well 32.4 mM solution of
ammonium molybdate. It is essential
that the timing of the additions to each
well is consistent so that the enzyme
is exposed to H2 O2 for the same time
(60 s) in all wells.

1 mM EGTA, 2 mM DTT, 40 mM ßglycerophosphate, 20 mM p-nitrophenylphosphate, 0.1 mM sodium vanadate, 50 µM ATP, pH 7.4.
2. Biotinylated H1 peptide (PKTPKKAKKL) is used as substrate at a final
concentration of 25 µM. Prepare a
stock of 125 µM peptide in Tris assay
buffer.
3. Test compounds and Aß peptides
should be prepared in Tris assay buffer
at 5× final concentration.
4. Prepare a 5× stock of [γ32 P]-ATP
(with a specific activity of 3000 Ci/
mmol) in Tris assay buffer.
5. Prepare a 200 U/ml solution of CDK1/Cyclin-B1 in Tris assay buffer.

11. Read absorbance at 405 nm using an
ELISA plate reader.

6. In 1.5 ml polypropylene tubes add
5 µl substrate, 5 µl test compounds,
5 µl [γ32 P]-ATP and 5 µl Aß or
control peptide. Mix well and then
add 5 µ1/tube of CDK-1/Cyclin-B1
solution. Incubate for 10 min at 30 ◦ C
in a shaking water bath.

12. Calculate enzyme activity in each test
well from the standard curve.

7. Prepare a 7.5 M guanidine HCl solution.

D. Activation of CDK-1 bioassay for
amyloid-ß

8. At the end of the incubation time
add 12.5 µl guanidine HCl solution to
each tube to terminate the reaction.

CDK-1 activity is dependent on its phosphorylation state and requires the presence
of a cyclin component [3, 4]. Recombinant
CDK-1/Cyclin-B1 preparations which are
biologically active are available. Alternatively active CDK-1 can be immunoprecipitated from cell lysates. An ELISA-based
protocol for determination of CDK-1 phosphorylation of either Histone H1 or CSH
103 peptide substrates can be used for
comparison.
1. Prepare a Tris assay buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl2 ,

9. Spot a 15 µl aliquot of each sample onto a SAM2 streptavidin membrane (Promega, UK) to isolate the
biotinylated substrate.
10. Wash the membrane four times in 2
M NaCl.
11. Wash the membrane four times in 2 M
NaCl containing 1% (v/v) H3 PO4 .
12. Wash the membrane twice in deionized H2 O.
13. Cut out spots from membrane and
place in scintillation tubes.

PROTOCOL 6.40

14. Add an appropriate liquid scintillation
cocktail suitable for non-aqueous samples and measure the radioactivity of
[γ32 P] incorporated into the biotinylated substrate.
15. The enzyme activity of each sample
should be determined from a standard
curve.
E. ELISA-based activation of CDK-1
bioassay for amyloid-ß

1. For ELISA-based assay use carbonate buffer (Procedure B, step 1, above)
to prepare 1 µg/ml solutions of either
Histone H1 or CSH 103 peptide substrates. Coat and block ELISA plates
as described in Procedure B, steps
3–5 (above).
2. Prepare an assay buffer containing
50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl2 ,
1 mM EGTA, 2 mM DTT, 40 mM ßglycerophosphate, 20 mM p-nitrophenylphosphate, 0.1 mM sodium vanadate, pH 7.4.
3. Prepare 250 µM ATP in assay buffer.
4. Test compounds and Aß peptides
should be prepared in assay buffer at
5× final concentration.
5. Prepare a 200 U/ml solution of CDK1/Cyclin-B1 in assay buffer.
6. To each well of a substrate coated
ELISA plate add 20 µl ATP, 20 µl
test compounds and 20 µl Aß peptides
and 20 µl assay buffer and then add
20 µ1/well of CDK-1/Cyclin-B1 solution. Incubate for 60 min at 30 ◦ C.
7. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well 50 mM Tris-HCl containing 0.1%
Triton X-100, pH 7.5.

363

8. Add 100 µl/well anti-phosphoserine
or anti-phosphothreonine antiserum
(1 : 2500 dilution of neat antibody) and
incubate for 2 h at room temperature.
9. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well 50 mM Tris-HCl containing 0.1%
Triton X-100, pH 7.5.
10. Add 100 µl/well anti-rabbit IgG-HRP
conjugate (1 : 2000 dilution of neat
conjugate) and incubate for 2 h at
room temperature.
11. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well 50 mM Tris-HCl containing 0.1%
Triton X-100, pH 7.5.
12. Add 100 µl/well TMB substrate. After
sufficient colour development add
50 µl/well 1 M phosphoric acid and
measure absorbance at 450 nm using
an ELISA plate reader.

References
1. Selkoe, D. J. (1999) Translating cell biology
into therapeutic advances in Alzheimer’s disease, Nature, 399 (Suppl.), A23–A31.
2. Milton, N. G. N. (1999) Amyloid-ß binds catalase with high affinity and inhibits hydrogen peroxide breakdown. Biochem. J., 344,
293–296.
3. Milton, N. G. N. (2002) The amyloid-ß peptide binds to cyclin B1 and increases human
cyclin-dependent kinase-1 activity. Neurosci.
Lett., 322, 131–133.
4. Milton, N. G. N. (2001) Phosphorylation of
amyloid-ß at the serine 26 residue by human
cdc2 kinase. NeuroReport, 12, 3839–3844.
5. Milton, N. G. N., Mayor, N. P. and Rawlinson, J. (2001) Identification of amyloid-ß binding sites using an antisense peptide approach.
NeuroReport, 12, 2561–2566.
6. Milton, N. G. N. (2001) Inhibition of catalase
activity with 3-amino-triazole enhances the
cytotoxicity of the Alzheimer’s amyloid-ß
peptide. NeuroToxicology, 22, 767–774.

PROTOCOL 6.41
Amyloid-ß phosphorylation
Nathaniel G. N. Milton
Introduction

Equipment

Phosphorylation of the amyloid-ß peptide
(Aß) is thought to be of major importance
in the neurotoxicity of the Aß peptide [1].
The cyclin-dependent kinase-1 (CDK-1)
enzyme is able to phosphorylate the Aß
peptide at the serine 26 residue. Inhibition of CDK-1 and related kinases can
prevent both neurotoxicity and phosphorylation of Aß [1, 2]. Mutation of the serine
26 residue to an alanine prevents Aß neurotoxicity, suggesting that the phosphorylated form may represent the neurotoxic
intermediate. Observations that the phosphorylated forms of Aß show markedly
increased cytotoxicity [2] further support
this view. The presence of phosphorylated
Aß in extracts from differentiated human
teratocarcinoma cell line, Ntera 2/cl-D1
neurons (NT-2N) and Alzheimer’s brain
suggests that this form of Aß may be a
legitimate target for therapeutic intervention. These results also suggest that measurement of phosphorylated Aß could have
diagnostic potential as well as a use in
screening for therapeutic compounds.

As described in Protocol 6.40. Cell culture
facilities are required, including a sterile
hood and 37 ◦ C CO2 incubator

Reagents
Synthetic phosphorylated Aß peptides can
be commercially synthesized as custom
peptides. All Aß peptides should be prepared as described in Protocol 6.41, Procedure A. Full details of all other reagents
required are detailed in Protocol 6.41.

Procedures
A. Culture of human NT-2N cells for
neurotoxicity and phosphorylation of
amyloid-ß

Human teratocarcinoma cell line, Ntera
2/cl-D1 (NT2), can be obtained from the
American Type Culture Collection (ATCC,
Rockville, MD, USA). Differentiation into
neuronal (NT2N) cells should be carried
out as follows:
1. NT2 cells are maintained in Dulbecco’s
modified high glucose Eagle’s medium
(DMEM), supplemented with 5% fetal
bovine serum and 1% antibiotic mixture
comprising penicillin–streptomycin–
amphotericin, in a humidified atmosphere at 37 ◦ C with 10% CO2 . Cells
should be split 1 : 3 twice a week.
2. For differentiation 1 × 106 cells should
be plated in a 75 cm2 culture flask in
DMEM, supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum, 1% antibiotic mixture
comprising penicillin–streptomycin–
amphotericin and 10 µM all trans
retinoic acid (10 mM stock retinoic
acid in DMSO should be diluted into

PROTOCOL 6.41

365

media just prior to use). Media should
be changed three times a week and
cells maintained in retinoic acid for
5 weeks.

10. After 2 weeks treat cells with trypsin
for 2 min, mechanically dislodge cells
by gently striking flasks and remove
cell suspension.

3. Cells should be replated at a 1 : 6
split ratio in DMEM supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1%
antibiotic mixture comprising penicillin–streptomycin–amphotericin.

11. Replate the cell suspension using culture plates pretreated with poly-Dlysine and Matrigel matrix. For neurotoxicity experiments 5 × 103 cells/
100 µl culture medium should be
plated in 96-well tissue culture plates.
For Aß phosphorylation determination
5 × 104 cells/1 ml culture medium
should be plated in 24-well tissue culture plates.

4. Change medium three times over a 1
week period.
5. After 1 week add medium further supplemented with the mitotic inhibitors
cytosine arabinoside (1 µM), fluorodeoxyuridine (10 µM) and uridine
(10 µM) to inhibit the division of nonneuronal cells.
6. Culture for 2 weeks in DMEM supplemented with mitotic inhibitors with
three medium changes/week.
7. Prepare a 1 mg/ml stock solution of
poly-D-lysine in sterile water. Sterilize using a 0.2 µm syringe filter (can be stored in aliquots at
−20 ◦ C). Dilute stock solution 1 : 100
in sterile distilled water and add
diluted poly-D-lysine solution into culture dishes (for 96-well tissue culture plates add 125 µl/well; for 24well culture plates add 1.25 ml/well).
After 3 h remove poly-D-lysine solution and allow dishes to air-dry in a
sterile cabinet.
8. Matrigel matrix should be thawed at
4 ◦ C overnight and diluted 1 : 25 in
cold DMEM. Add Matrigel dropwise
(for 96-well tissue culture plates add
1 drop/well; for 24-well culture plates
add 5 drops/well) and spread evenly
over surface. Allow to air-dry in a
sterile cabinet. Store plates until use
(stable for 2 months).
9. Repeat application of Matrigel on day
of use.

12. Cells should be cultured in DMEM,
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum and 1% antibiotic mixture comprising
penicillin–streptomycin–
amphotericin for a further 2 weeks prior
to experimentation. Medium should be
changed twice a week.
13. On day of experimentation test compounds can be added in fresh medium
and neurotoxicity or Aß phosphorylation determined after an appropriate
incubation period.
14. The neurotoxicity of phosphorylated
Aß can be measured using MTT
reduction or trypan blue dye exclusion
as indicators of cell viability. For
MTT reduction prepare a 5 mg/ml
solution of MTT in DMEM, sonicate
briefly and sterilize using a 0.2 µm
syringe filter (can be stored in aliquots
at −20 ◦ C). After incubation of cells
with test compounds add MTT to a
final concentration of 0.4 mg/ml to
each well and incubate cells for a
further 6 h. Prepare cell lysis buffer,
sufficient for 100 µl/well, containing
20% sodium dodecyl sulfate and 50%
N,N-dimethylformamide pH 4.7. After
incubation with MTT add cell lysis
buffer (100 µl/well) and leave plate
at 37 ◦ C overnight. Read absorbance

366

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

at 570 nm. For trypan blue exclusion
after incubation of cells with test
compounds dislodge cells from wells
and add an equal volume of 0.4%
trypan blue. Count the numbers of
viable (non-stained) and dead cells
using a haemacytometer.
B. Extraction of phosphorylated
amyloid-ß from cells

The following procedure should be used to
extract Aß peptides from cells:
1. Prepare a 100 ml extraction buffer containing 0.2% DEA, 50 mM NaCl and
0.1 mM sodium vanadate. Remove culture medium from cells in 24-well culture plates and add 0.5 ml extraction
buffer to each well. Disrupt cells by
scraping and repeated pippetting.
2. Transfer disrupted cell suspension to a
1.5 ml polypropylene microcentrifuge
tube, sonicate for 15 min and then
centrifuge for 10 min at 13 000 rpm to
remove cell debris.
3. Transfer supernatant to a 1.5 ml polypropylene microcentrifuge tube and
add to an equal volume of 1 M Tris
containing 0.2% Triton X-100 pH 8.0.
Add 100 µl of anti-Aß 15–30 antiserum (1 : 5000 dilution of neat antiserum), mix and incubate at 4 ◦ C overnight.
4. After incubation add 100 µl of proteinA agarose and incubate for 2 h at room
temperature.
5. Centrifuge for 10 min at 13 000 rpm
to pellet protein-A agarose. Remove
supernatant and resuspend protein-A
agarose in 1 ml 50 mM Tris containing 0.1% Triton X-100, pH 7.5.
6. Repeat step 5 twice.
7. Prepare elution buffer containing 20%
acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.

8. Remove supernatant and resuspend
protein-A agarose in 0.5 ml elution
buffer, mix for 10 min. Centrifuge for
10 min at 13 000 rpm to pellet proteinA agarose. Transfer supernatant to
a glass tube and resuspend proteinA agarose in 0.5 ml elution buffer.
Repeat this step twice and pool the
supernatants.
9. Prepare a Sep-Pak C18 column on a
10 ml syringe. Pass 5 ml methanol followed by 5 ml 0.5 M acetic acid over
the column. Pass 5 ml 20% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid over
the column and add the sample. Wash
the column with 10 ml 20% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid followed by 10 ml deionized water. Elute
bound peptides with 2 ml 70% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid.
10. Purified peptides should be dried down
under a stream of nitrogen, resuspended in 1 ml of trifluoroethanol and
dried down under a stream of nitrogen.
Dried down extracts can be stored at
−70 ◦ C prior to assay.
C. Immunoassay measurement of
phosphorylated amyloid-ß

1. A 500 ml solution of carbonate buffer
containing 15 mM Na2 CO3 , 35 mM
NaHCO3 , 0.01% NaN3 (w/v), pH 9.6
should be prepared (can be stored for
< 14 days at 4 ◦ C).
2. Rabbit anti-phosphoserine antibody
(1 : 1000 dilution of neat antibody)
should be prepared in carbonate buffer
(10 ml/plate).
3. To each of the inner 60 wells on
a NUNC Polysorb or Maxisorb 96well ELISA plate add 100 µl of
anti-phosphoserine antibody solution
or carbonate buffer (for control nonspecific binding determination). Cover

PROTOCOL 6.41

plates with plate sealer (NUNC). Incubate plates at 4 ◦ C overnight.
4. Remove plate sealer and wash plates
three times with carbonate buffer
(200 µl/well).
5. Prepare a 5% marvel solution in carbonate buffer (20 ml/plate) and add
200 µl/well to each well. Incubate
plates at room temperature for 1 h.
6. Prepare 500 ml of assay buffer–50 mM
Tris-HCl containing 0.1% BSA (Cohn
Fraction V), 0.1% Triton X-100, pH 7.5.
7. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well assay buffer.
8. Prepare synthetic phosphorylated Aß
peptide standards (0–10 nM) and samples in assay buffer, add 100 µl/well
to anti-phosphoserine coated plates,
seal plates with plate sealer and incubate at 4 ◦ C overnight.
9. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well assay buffer.
10. Add 100 µl/well mouse anti-Aß monoclonal antibody 6F3D (1 : 3000 dilution of neat antibody in assay buffer)
and incubate for 2 h at room temperature.
11. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well assay buffer.
12. Add 100 µl/well anti-mouse IgG-HRP
conjugate (1 : 2000 dilution of neat
conjugate in assay buffer) and incubate
for 2 h at room temperature.
13. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well assay buffer.
14. Add 100 µl/well TMB substrate (KPL).
After sufficient colour development add
50 µl/well 1 M phosphoric acid and
measure absorbance at 450 nm using an
ELISA plate reader.

367

D. Phosphorylation of amyloid-ß by CDK-1

CDK-1 activity can be measured as
described in Protocol 6.41, Procedure
D, using biotinylated Aß 1–42, Aß
1–40 or Aß 25–35 in place of the
biotinylated H1 peptide substrate. The
following immunoassay method has the
advantage of not using a radioactive label:
1. A 500 ml solution of carbonate buffer
containing 15 mM Na2 CO3 , 35 mM
NaHCO3 , 0.01% NaN3 (w/v), pH 9.6
should be prepared (can be stored for
< 14 days at 4 ◦ C).
2. Streptavadin (1 µg/ml) should be prepared in carbonate buffer (10 ml/plate).
3. To each of the inner 60 wells on
a NUNC Polysorb or Maxisorb 96well ELISA plate add 100 µl of streptavidin solution or carbonate buffer
(for control non-specific binding determination). Cover plates with plate
sealer (NUNC). Incubate plates at
4 ◦ C overnight.
4. Remove plate sealer and wash plates
three times with carbonate buffer
(200 µl/well).
5. Prepare a 0.2% casein solution in
carbonate buffer (20 ml/plate) and add
200 µl/well to each well. Incubate
plates at room temperature for 1 h.
6. Prepare 500 ml 50 mM Tris-HCl containing 0.1% Triton X-100, pH 7.5.
7. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well 50 mM Tris-HCl containing 0.1%
Triton X-100, pH 7.5.
8. Prepare an assay buffer containing
50 mM Tris-HCl, 10 mM MgCl2 ,
1 mM EGTA, 2 mM DTT, 40 mM
ß-glycerophosphate, 20 mM p-nitrophenylphosphate, 0.1 mM sodium
vanadate, pH 7.4.
9. Prepare 250 µM ATP in assay buffer.

368

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

10. Biotinylated Aß peptides are used as
substrates at a final concentration of
25 µM. Prepare a stock of 125 µM
peptide in Tris assay buffer.
11. Test compounds should be prepared in
assay buffer at 5 × final concentration.
12. Prepare a 200 U/ml solution of CDK1/Cyclin-B1 in assay buffer.
13. In 1.5 ml polypropylene tubes mix
5 µl substrate, 5 µl ATP, 5 µl test
compounds and 5 µl assay buffer and
then add 5 µ1/tube of CDK-1/CyclinB1 solution. Incubate for 30 min at
30 ◦ C in a shaking water bath.
14. Add 200 µl 50 mM Tris-HCl containing 0.1% Triton X-100, pH 7.5 to each
sample. Pipette 100 µl of each sample
into duplicate wells of a streptavidin
coated ELISA plate. Incubate for 4 h
at 4 ◦ C.
15. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well 50 mM Tris-HCl containing 0.1%
Triton X-100, pH 7.5.
16. Add 100 µl/well anti-phosphoserine
antiserum (1 : 2500 dilution of neat

antibody) and incubate for 2 h at room
temperature.
17. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well 50 mM Tris-HCl containing 0.1%
Triton X-100, pH 7.5.
18. Add 100 µl/well anti-rabbit IgG-HRP
conjugate (1 : 2000 dilution of neat
conjugate) and incubate for 2 h at
room temperature.
19. Wash plates three times with 200 µl/
well 50 mM Tris-HCl containing 0.1%
Triton X-100, pH 7.5.
20. Add 100 µl/well TMB substrate (KPL).
After sufficient colour development add
50 µl/well 1 M phosphoric acid and
measure absorbance at 450 nm using an
ELISA plate reader.

References
1. Milton, N. G. N. (2001) Phosphorylation of
amyloid-ß at the serine 26 residue by human
cdc2 kinase. NeuroReport, 12, 3839–3844.
2. Milton, N. G. N. (2002) Peptides for use in
the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Patent
Publication, WO 02/36614 A2.

PROTOCOL 6.42
Smitin–myosin II coassembly arrays in vitro
Richard Chi and Thomas C. S. Keller III
Introduction
Smitin is a large smooth muscle protein that colocalizes with smooth muscle
myosin II filaments in vivo and associates with reconstituted smooth muscle
myosin II filaments in vitro [1]. Although
the unusually high molecular weight and
molecular morphology of the long, fibrous
smitin molecules resemble those properties
of striated muscle titin, an understanding of
the molecular relationship between smitin
and titin awaits determination of smitin
protein or gene sequence.
Smitin can be isolated from a variety of smooth muscle tissues including
avian gizzard, which provides an excellent source of the protein. Published protocols designed for the purification of smooth
muscle myosin II routinely yield preparations of myosin II contaminated with
significant amounts of smitin, not readily
detected with SDS-PAGE protocols commonly used to analyse such preparations.
Likewise, the following protocol, which is
designed to maximize isolation of smitin,
yields smitin preparations contaminated
with significant amounts of myosin II but
little or no other proteins. This preparation
is useful for investigating the properties of
smitin–myosin II coassembly in vitro [1].
In physiological ionic strength conditions, myosin in the smitin–myosin preparations self-assembles into long, sidepolar
filaments similar to those found in the contractile apparatus of smooth muscle cells

in vivo. In the presence of smitin, these
myosin II filaments aggregate into irregular arrays. In low ionic strength conditions,
smooth muscle myosin self-assembles into
small bipolar myosin II filaments, which
in the presence of smitin align end to end
and side by side into highly regimented
arrays. The organization of these coassembly arrays resembles that of the coassembly
arrays formed by cellular titin and myosin
II In vitro and may represent the organization of smitin and smooth muscle myosin
II in the stress fibre-like structures in proliferative, motile smooth muscle cells.

Reagents
Buffer A: 50 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2 ,
1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 0.5 mM
1 0.002 mM
DTT, 0.2 mM PMSF, 
leupeptin, 10 mM imidazole-Cl (pH 7.0)
Buffer B: 0.6 M KCl, 4 mM ATP, 2 mM
MgCl2 , 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA,
0.5 mM DTT, 0.2 mM PMSF, 0.002 mM
leupeptin, 10 mM imidazole-Cl (pH 7.0)
Buffer C: 0.2 M KCl, 1 mM EGTA,
0.5 mM EDTA, 0.2 mM DTT, 10 mM
imidazole-Cl (pH 7.5)
Buffer D: 0.6 M KCl, 0.2 mM DTT,
10 mM imidazole-Cl (pH 6.9) (used
also with inclusion of 0.4 M potassium
phosphate)
Buffer E: 50 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2 ,
5 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM EGTA, 0.2 mM
DTT, 10 mM imidazole-Cl (pH 7.0)

370

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

Buffer F: 150 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2 ,
5 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM EGTA, 0.2 mM
DTT, 10 mM imidazole-Cl (pH 7.0)

Equipment
Waring Blender
Preparative Superspeed Refrigerated Centrifuge with large capacity rotor (e.g.
GSA fixed-angle rotor and 250 ml centrifuge bottles or equivalent)
Sephacryl S-1000 Superfine Matrix column (2.5 × 90 cm)
Hydroxylapatite Matrix column (2.5 ×
13.5 cm)
Fraction collector

Procedure
Three fresh adult chicken gizzards will
provide 20 g of smooth muscle tissue, the
optimal amount of smooth muscle for this
2
protocol. 
1. Remove and discard the gizzard surface fat tissue. Dissect the smooth
muscle tissue off the tough gizzard
lining. Dice the smooth muscle tissue
into pieces smaller than 1 cm2 with a
sharp scalpel or razor blade.
2. Mix the gizzard tissue with buffer A
(50 ml/g of starting smooth muscle
tissue) in a blender and homogenize
with three bursts of 10 s each at
maximum speed.
3. Pellet the tissue by centrifugation at
5000g for 15 min.
4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 twice.
5. Resuspend the pellet with buffer B
(2 ml/g of starting smooth muscle
tissue) and stir gently for 30 min in
an ice bath.

6. Pellet the tissue by centrifugation at
15 000g for 30 min.
7. Decant the extract supernatant. Load
20 ml of the extract onto a Sephacryl
S-1000 column (2.5 × 90 cm) equilibrated and eluted with degassed
3 Smitin and myosin coebuffer C. 
lute near the void volume of the column (∼240–280 ml).
8. Assay column fractions for smitin by
4 Pool the peak smitin
SDS-PAGE. 
fractions, minimizing actin contamination.
9. To remove contaminating actin, αactinin, and other proteins, apply
pooled smitin–myosin II fractions
to a hydroxyapatite column (2.5 ×
13.5 cm) equilibrated with buffer D
and eluted with a gradient of 0.0–
0.4 M potassium phosphate in buffer
D. Purified fractions containing smitin
and myosin typically elute in fractions
between 0.23 and 0.26 M phosphate.
10. Smitin and myosin in preparations
containing both proteins coassemble
when dialysed into low ionic
strength (buffer E) or physiological
ionic strength (buffer F) conditions
5
lacking ATP for 6–48 h. 
11. Smitin–myosin coassemblies can be
pelleted by centrifugation at 10 000g
for 5 min.

Notes
The protein purification steps of this procedure require approximately 2 working days
to complete. Prolonged preparation time
results in high actin contamination and
irreversible smitin/myosin aggregation. All
steps should be performed at 4 ◦ C.


1 PMSF is hazardous; handle with care.
Make a stable 0.2 M PMSF stock

PROTOCOL 6.42

solution in ethanol. Minimize precipitation of PMSF on dilution into aqueous solution, by slowly expelling the
aliquot of PMSF stock solution from
a pipette tip submersed in vigorously
stirring buffer solution. PMSF has a
half-life as short as 30 min in some
aqueous solutions; add to the buffer
solution immediately before use.


2 Chill the gizzards on ice as soon as
possible after acquisition. Keep the
smooth muscle tissue cold throughout the initial steps of the protocol to
minimize actin contamination of the
purified smitin–myosin II preparation.
For optimal purity of smitin–myosin
II preparations, use the gizzards within
2 h of sacrifice. Cleaned and diced
gizzard smooth muscle that has been
rapidly frozen in liquid N2 and stored
at −20 ◦ C until use also provides a
suitable source of smitin for purification.

3 Use of Sephacryl S-500 instead of S1000 yields similar results. Minimize
actin filament contamination of the
smitin–myosin II Sephacryl S-1000
fractions by loading the column with
a 50 ml front of 0.6 M KI (made in
buffer C) immediately ahead of the
protein load. For convenience, this
column can be run overnight.

4 SDS-PAGE: To maximize protein concentration in gel samples of the column
fractions, make gel samples using 8 ×
or10 × Laemmli sample buffer. Heating the samples to 90 ◦ C for 3 min minimizes the amount of myosin heavy
chain trapped in the smitin band on

371

the gel. Overheating can cause loss
of full-length smitin from the sample.
Samples can be analysed in large or
mini gel formats. Using an acrylamide
stock with a 75 : 1 ratio of acrylamide
to bis-acrylamide to form the running
and stacking gels enhances migration
of smitin into the gel. Proteins with
polypeptide molecular weights ranging
from greater than 3 MDa to 15 kDa,
including smitin, myosin heavy and
light chains, and actin, can be fractionated in lanes on a 4–20% acrylamide
gradient running gel with a 3% stacking gel. Allowing the gel to run for an
additional 25–33% of the time it takes
the dye front to reach the bottom of the
gel increases migration of smitin into
the gel and increases fractionation resolution of the proteins in the sample.


5 Prepare dialysis tubing according to
the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Select the dimensions of the tubing to maximize the surface to volume ratio of the bag. The rate of
coassembly formation is inversely
related to the protein concentration
of the sample. At high protein concentration, smitin–myosin coassembly aggregates may be visible in the
dialysis bag as white flocculent material in less than 6 h.

References
1. Kim, K. and Keller, T. C. (2002) Smitin, a
novel smooth muscle titin-like protein, interacts with myosin filaments in vivo and in vitro,
J. Cell Biol., 156, 101–112.

PROTOCOL 6.43
Assembly/disassembly of myosin filaments in
the presence of EF-hand calcium-binding
protein S100A4 in vitro
Marina Kriajevska, Igor Bronstein and Eugene Lukanidin
Reagents
pQE30 expression vector (QIAGEN),
enzymes for RT-PCR and cloning, E.
coli M15 competent cells (QIAGEN),
IPTG (1 M in H2 O), 50% slurry of NiNTA resin (QIAGEN), buffer A (6 M
GuHCl, 0.1 M Na-phosphate, 0.01 M TrisHCl pH 8.0), buffer B (8 M urea, 0.1 M
Na-phosphate, 0.01 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0),
buffer C (8 M urea, 0.1 M Na-phosphate,
0.01 M Tris-HCl pH 6.3), 1 M imidazole,
5 M NaCl, 1 M DTT, glycerol, 1 M MES
pH 6.2, acetic acid glacial, 0.5 M EDTA,
1 M CaCl2 , Protein assay reagent (Pierce),
Ezblue gel staining reagent (Sigma)

Procedures
A. Isolation of the recombinant
C-terminal fragment of the heavy chain of
non-muscle myosin IIA

3. Perform IPTG induction (1 mM) of
culture for 5 h. Harvest cells by centrifugation at 3000g for 20 min.
4. Store cell pellet at −80 ◦ C or process immediately purification of the
myosin fragment in denaturing conditions according to the QIAGEN recommendations.
5. Briefly, resuspend pellet in buffer A
(5 ml/g wet weight) and stir cells at
room temperature until lysis of cells
is completed.
6. Centrifuge the lysate at 20 000g for
20 min and mix supernatant with 4 ml
of 50% slurry of Ni-NTA resin, which
was previously equilibrated in buffer A.
7. After 1 h of stirring at room temperature (RT), apply resin to the column
and wash consequently with buffers A,
B and C until the A280 of the flowthrough is lower than 0.01 at each step.

1. Clone cDNA corresponding to the Cterminal fragment of the heavy chain
of non-muscle myosin IIA in BamHI
site of pQE30 bacterial expression
1 and use it for the transforvector 
mation of E. coli M15 cells.

8. Perform refolding of the myosin fragment with the 30 ml of the linear
6 M–1 M urea gradient in 0.5 M NaCl,
20% glycerol, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4.

2. Prepare overnight culture and use it for
the preparation of large-scale culture
(0.5 l) according to the QIAGEN protocol.

9. Elute protein in 0.5 ml fractions using
5 ml of the elution buffer (1 M urea,
0.5 M NaCl, 10% glycerol, 10 mM
Tris pH 7.4, 250 mM imidazole).

PROTOCOL 6.43

10. Combine pick fractions and dialyse
against 0.6 M NaCl, 10 mM MES pH
6.2, 1 mM DTT.
11. Centrifuge sample after dialysis for
10 min at 20 000g. Aliquot sample,
freeze in liquid N2 and store at
−80 ◦ C.

373

10. Aliquot the protein, freeze in liquid N2
and store at −80 ◦ C. 
3
11. Measure the concentration of the protein by using the Protein assay reagent
(Pierce).

C. Preparation of myosin filaments
B. Isolation of recombinant S100A4

1. Clone cDNA of S100A4 in the pQE30
expression vector (QIAGEN) in
BamHI site (2) and use for the transformation of E. coli M15 cells.
2. Prepare 1 l of bacterial culture as
described for the myosin preparation.
3. Resuspend cell pellet in the sonication buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5,
200 mM NaCl) at 4 volumes per gram
of wet weight.
4. After three times freezing (liquid N2 )
and thawing (RT), sonicate cell lysate
on ice three times for 20 s following
centrifugation for 20 min at 20 000g.
5. Mix supernatant with 6 ml of 50%
slurry of Ni-NTA resin equilibrated by
the sonication buffer.
6. Raise NaCl concentration in the mixture up to 1 M and rotate for 1 h at
+4 ◦ C.
7. Load resin into the column and wash
at +4 ◦ C with 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5
until the A280 of the flow-through is
less than 0.01.
8. Elute the S100A4 with buffer containing 1 M NaCl, 100 mM acetic acid pH
4.0.
9. Dialyse sample against access of the
buffer containing 10 mM MES pH
6.2, 50 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA,
1 mM DTT overnight at +4 ◦ C and
centrifuge at 20 000g for 10 min.

1. Prepare 100 µl solution of myosin
(10 µg of the protein, final concentration 0.1 mg/ml) in 0.6 M NaCl,
10 mM MES pH 6.2, 1 mM DTT,
1 mM CaCl2 at RT.
2. Dialyse for 5 h at RT against 200 ml of
the buffer containing 10 mM MES pH
6.2, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM CaCl2 , 50 mM
NaCl. Myosin filaments are formed
during dialysis.
3. Precipitate filaments by centrifugation
for 10 min at 20 000g and save pellet
for the next step.

D. S100A4 stimulates disassembly of
preformed myosin filaments

1. Add 50 µl of the S100A4 (1 mg/ml)
in low ionic strength buffer (10 mM
MES pH 6.2, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM CaCl2 ,
50 mM NaCl) or 50 µl of high ionic
strength buffer (10 mM MES pH 6.2,
1 mM DTT, 1 mM CaCl2 , 600 mM
NaCl) without S100A4 to the myosin
pellet (10 µg).
2. Incubate tubes at RT for 1 h with gentle
agitation.
3. Centrifuge 10 min at 20 000g and analyse supernatants by running the 15%
SDS-PAGE. Almost 80% of the Cterminal fragment becomes soluble in
the presence of S100A4, while the high
ionic strength buffer is able to solubilize
40% of the precipitated myosin fragment.

374

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

E. S100A4 prevents aggregation of
myosin filaments in the presence of
calcium

1. Prepare 100 µl mixture of myosin
(10 µg with final concentration 0.1
mg/ml) and S100A4 (50 µg) in a buffer
(0.6 M NaCl, 10 mM MES pH 6.2,
1 mM DTT) containing 1 mM CaCl2 or
5 mM EDTA.
2. Dialyse proteins for 5 h at RT against
200 ml of buffer, 10 mM MES pH 6.2,
1 mM DTT, 1 mM CaCl2 or 5 mM
EDTA and different NaCl concentrations, 50, 100, 200, 300 and 400 mM.
3. Centrifuge samples for 10 min at
20 000g.
4. Analyse supernatant in the presence of
the myosin fragment by running a 15%
SDS-PAGE and staining with Ezblue
4
gel staining reagent (Sigma). 

Notes

1 Synthesis of the cDNA corresponding
to the C-terminal 202 aa fragment of
the heavy chain of the human nonmuscle myosin IIA: prepare total RNA
from human platelets and perform RT-

PCR using specific myosin primers,
forward primer, CGGGATCCCAGAT
CAACGCCGAC (+5303 to +5317),
and reverse primer, CGGGATCCGG
CTTATTCGGCAGG (+5894 to
+5908).


2 Synthesis of the human S100A4
cDNA: prepare total RNA from
human platelets and perform RTPCR with specific S100A4 primers,
forward primer, CGGGATCCATGGC
GTGCCCTCTG (+65 to +79) and
reverse primer, CGGGATCCGAG
TTTTCATTTCTTCCTGGG (+356 to
+376).

3 Fresh prepared S100A4 keep at
−80 ◦ C in order to prevent aggregation of the protein.

4 In the presence of S100A4 and calcium, the myosin fragment remains in
a soluble form in low ionic buffer.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from
the Danish Cancer Society, Dansk
Kræftforsknings Fond, Novo Nordisk
Fonden and Yorkshire Cancer Research.

PROTOCOL 6.44
Collagen fibril assembly in vitro
David F. Holmes and Karl E. Kadler
Introduction
It has long been known that native-like collagen fibrils can be produced in vitro by
self-assembly by incubation of extracted
and purified type I collagen molecules in
warm, neutral solution conditions [1, 2].
The individual fibrils have a polarized
arrangement of molecules with an axial
D-periodicity of 67 nm and are of nearuniform diameter. Collagen fibrils are stabilized in tissue by the formation of intermolecular cross-links involving specific
lysine/hydroxylysine residues and aldimine
derivatives of these. Collagen is commonly
extracted from young tissues (typically
calf skin or rat tail tendon) using acetic
acid solution [3] which breaks these intermolecular cross-links. Alternatively collagen can be released by pepsin treatment
which cleaves the telopeptides (terminal
non-triple-helical domains) where crosslink sites are located. Fibril assembly is,
however, critically dependent on the intactness of the telopeptides [2, 4]. Partial loss
can lead to a changed morphology and loss
of polarity. Extensive loss can completely
inhibit fibril formation [4].
The fibrils in the final reconstituted gel of
type I collagen have a fairly broad diameter distribution, compared with those in tissue, and this is dependent on the solution
conditions at pH 7.4 (temperature and ionic
strength, as well as ion type). Optimal conditions for the formation of compact, uniformdiameter, native-like fibrils have generally

involved a temperature of 34 ◦ C or less and
a phosphate buffer [5, 6].
Different assembly pathways have been
observed in the reconstitution of collagen
fibrils [5, 7]. The transfer route used to
raise pH, temperature and ionic strength
from the initial conditions (cold, acid
solution) to the reconstitution conditions
(warm, neutral solution) has been found to
be a major determinant of the assembly
pathway [5]. Warming before neutralization (‘warm start initiation’) leads to abundant short ‘early fibrils’ with tapered tips.
Similar ‘early fibrils’ are also observed
during collagen fibril assembly in tissue [8]. In contrast, neutralization followed by warming (‘neutral start initiation’) leads to the early accumulation of
filaments [5, 7].
The procedure described here is based
on a set of ‘optimal’ reconstitution conditions: 200 µg/ml collagen, I 0.2, pH
7.4 phosphate buffer and a temperature
of 34 ◦ C. These conditions are established using the ‘warm start’ initiation
(Figure 6.45(a)). The kinetics of assembly can be monitored by turbidimetry
(Figure 6.45(b)) and the assembly products
can be studied by transmission electron
microscopy (Figure 6.45(c)).

Reagents
Extracted and purified type I collagen is
available from biochemical suppliers.

1 
2

376

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES
(a)

Reconstitution
conditions

Warm acid
solution

Temperature (°C)

34

cold
start
4

0.4

Turbidity

warm
start

(b)

0.3
0.2
0.1

Storage
solution

Cold neutral
solution

3.4

7.4

0.0

Lag
period
0

pH

20
40
60
Incubation time (min)

80

(c)

(d)

Figure 6.45 Reconstitution of type I collagen fibrils at 34 ◦ C, I 0.2, pH 7.4. (a) Different initiation
routes are possible in changing from cold acid to warm neutral conditions and this can affect both
the assembly pathway and kinetics of fibril formation. (b) Typical turbidimetric curve (obtained at
313 nm) after ‘warm start’ initiation with I 0.2, pH 7.4 phosphate buffer at 34 ◦ C. The turbidity
is proportional to the extent of fibril assembly. (c) Typical ‘early fibril’ with tapered tips, found
throughout the lag and early growth phases of reconstitution (scale bar = 300 nm). (d) Typical final
gel of D-periodic fibrils (D = 65 nm in the dried and negatively stained preparation) with no fibril
tips apparent (scale bar = 300 nm)

Suitable acetic-acid-soluble type I collagen can alternatively be extracted and
purified by well-established procedures [3]
with modifications to ensure minimal loss
of the telopeptides [4]. Laboratory reagents
should be of high purity.

Equipment
Temperature-controlled water bath
Spectrophotometer with temperature-controlled cell holder
Transmission electron microscope

PROTOCOL 6.44
(a)

overlap gap
C
C
C

N

N

N

N

C
C

(b)

377

N

D = 67 nm
(234 residues)

Figure 6.46 Axial structure of type I collagen fibril. (a) Schematic diagram to show the axial arrangement of collagen molecules in the fibrils. Short non-triple domains (‘telopeptides’) are located at
the ends of the long triple helical (300 nm) domain. (b) Characteristic negative stain pattern (using
1% sodium phosphotungstate, pH 7) of native-type D-periodic collagen fibril reconstituted from
acetic-acid-soluble type I collagen. This is shown at the same magnification and aligned with the
schematic axial structure in (a). The gap/overlap structure of the fibril and the fine stain excluding
telopeptide regions at the gap/overlap junctions are apparent

Procedure
1. Start with a collagen solution in 10 mM
acetic acid solution (using dialysis if
necessary) at 4 ◦ C.
2. Dilute 
3 the collagen to ∼400 µg/ml
with 10 mM acetic acid solution and
keep at 4 ◦ C.
3. Warm equal volumes of collagen solution and double strength phosphate
buffer (124 mM Na2 HPO4 , 29.2 mM
KH2 PO4 ) separately to 34 ◦ C for about
5 min. This yields final solution conditions of I 0.2, pH 7.4.
4. Mix the two volumes (acid collagen
solution and double strength buffer) to
start fibril reconstitution and incubate at
4
34 ◦ C for several hours. 
5. A uniform, cloudy gel will form. This
can be pulled from the tube with
forceps.
6. Prepare TEM specimens by wiping a
small portion of gel over a carbonfilmed grid, washing with several drops
of water and negatively staining with
1–2% sodium phosphotungstate, pH

7.0 (or other suitable stain, e.g. 1–2%
uranyl acetate).
7. Examine the grid sample by TEM.
The fibrils should be compact with
a polarized, D-periodic stain pattern
and uniform diameter along individual
fibrils (Figures 6.45(d) and 6.46). Fibril
diameters are typically in the range
30–90 nm.

Notes

1 Suppliers include BD Biosciences,
USA and Elastin Products Company,
USA.

2 The fibril reconstitution procedure
described here is appropriate for acetic-acid-extracted collagen rather than
pepsin-extracted.

3 Collagen concentration can be determined by a direct colorimetric assay
(‘Sircol’ kit available from Biocolor
Ltd, Northern Ireland).

4 The kinetics of assembly can be simply monitored by turbidimetry measurements using a spectrophotometer

378

IN VITRO TECHNIQUES

and recording the absorbance with
time (see Figure 6.46(b)).

References
1. Gross, J. and Kirk, D. (1958) J. Biol. Chem.,
233, 355–360.
2. Kadler, K. E., Holmes, D. F., Trotter, J. A. and
Chapman J. A. (1996) Biochem. J., 316, 1–11.
3. Jackson, D. S. and Cleary, E. G. (1967) Methods Biochem. Anal., 15, 25–76.
4. Capaldi, M. J. and Chapman, J. A. (1982) Biopolymers, 21, 2291–2313.

5. Holmes, D. F., Capaldi, M. J. and Chapman,
J. A. (1986) Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 8,
161–166.
6. Williams, B. R., Gelman, R. A., Poppke, D. C.
and Piez, K. A. (1978) J. Biol. Chem., 253,
6578–6585.
7. Gelman, R. A., Willaims, B. R. and Piez, K. A.
(1979) J. Biol. Chem., 254, 180–186.
8. Birk, D. E., Hahn, R. A., Linsenmeyer, C. Y.
and Zycband, E. I. (1996) Matrix Biol., 15,
111–118.

7
Selected Reference Data for Cell
and Molecular Biology
David Rickwood
Chemical safety information
ABTS

May be harmful by inhalation, ingestion or skin absorption. Causes
eye and skin irritation and irritating to mucous membrane and
upper respiratory tract

Acetic acid

Harmful if swallowed, inhaled or absorbed through skin. Material
extremely destructive of tissues of mucous membranes, upper
respiratory tract, eyes and skin. Inhalation may be fatal

Acetone

Highly flammable. Use in well-ventilated area away from sources of
ignition

Acridine orange

Harmful: possible risk of irreversible effects through inhalation, in
contact with skin and if swallowed

Aminoethylbenzenesulfonyl
fluoride (AEBSF)

Irritant to eyes, respiratory system and skin

8-aminonaphthalene-1, 3,
6-trisulfonic acid
(ANTS)

Irritant to eyes, respiratory system and skin

Aminopterin:

Can be fatal if inhaled, swallowed or absorbed through skin.
Teratogen

Bacto-tryptone

Irritant. Avoid contact with eyes and skin

Barbital

Harmful if swallowed. Causes irritation. May cause allergic skin
reaction. Effects of overexposure include sedation, hypnosis and
coma depending on amount ingested

Bleach

All cleaning solutions are potentially dangerous. Avoid contact with
skin. Keep only small quantities on the open bench, within the
confines of a spillage tray
(continued overleaf )

Cell Biology Protocols. Edited by J. Robin Harris, John Graham, David Rickwood
 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-84758-1

380

SELECTED REFERENCE DATA FOR CELL AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

Borate buffer

May be harmful by inhalation, ingestion and skin absorption. Causes
irritation. Vapour causes irritation to eyes, mucous membranes and
upper respiratory tract

Boric acid H3 BO3

Harmful by inhalation, in contact with skin and if swallowed.
Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin. Possible teratogen.
Reproductive hazard

Bradford Reagent

Causes burns, toxic by inhalation and if swallowed. Avoid contact
with skin. In case of contact with eyes, rinse immediately with
plenty of water and seek medical advice

5-bromo-2 -deoxyuridine
(BrdU)

Experimental teratogen. May be harmful if swallowed, inhaled or
absorbed through the skin

Calcein AM

May be harmful if inhaled, swallowed or absorbed through the skin.
Toxicology not fully investigated

CaCl2

Toxic; irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin

Carbenicillin

Harmful

Cedarwood oil

Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin

Chloramine T

May be harmful by inhalation, ingestion and skin absorption. Causes
eye and skin irritation. Causes irritation to mucous membranes and
upper respiratory tract

Chloroform

Chloroform should be handled with care, and disposed of by means
appropriate for organic solvents

Chloros

Irritating to eyes and respiratory system. Contact with acid liberates
toxic chlorine gas

Chromic acid

Sulfuric acid is highly corrosive, and the making of chromic acid is a
very hazardous procedure. Chromates are potential carcinogens.
Protective clothing, including heavy-duty rubber gloves, must be
worn while making chromic acid, and the operation carried out in
a sink inside a fume cupboard. Make only small quantities

Cisplatin

Very toxic if inhaled, swallowed, or absorbed through the skin. Many
platinum compounds are sensitizers, so even low exposure may be
harmful if taking place repeatedly or over an extended period.
Experimental carcinogen, teratogen. IARC probable human
carcinogen. May cause reproductive damage. Human mutagenic
data. May cause severe allergic reaction, which may get worse
with continuing exposure

Citric acid

May be harmful by inhalation, ingestion or skin absorption. Causes
eye and skin irritation and irritating to mucous membrane and
upper respiratory tract

Colcemid

Toxic by inhalation, and if swallowed, and contact with skin.
Possible risk of irreversible effects

Cryogen/liquid nitrogen

The handling and storage of liquid nitrogen must be performed
strictly within laboratory safety regulations. The wearing of
protective glasses should be obligatory and protective gloves when
carrying any polystyrene container filled with liquid nitrogen

CHEMICAL SAFETY INFORMATION

381

CuSO4

Harmful if swallowed. Irritating to eyes and skin. Do not breathe dust

CuSO4 .5H2 O

Harmful if swallowed. Irritating to eyes and skin. Eye contact:
irrigate thoroughly with water for at least 10 min. If discomfort
persists obtain medical attention. Inhalation: remove from
exposure, rest and keep warm. In severe cases obtain medical
attention. Skin contact: wash off skin with water. Remove
contaminated clothing and wash before reuse. In severe cases,
obtain medical attention. Ingestion: wash out mouth thoroughly
with water and give plenty of water to drink. Obtain medical
attention

Cycloheximide

Very toxic if swallowed, inhaled or absorbed through the skin

Cyclosporin A

Potent immunosuppressant; may cause irritation to eyes, skin,
mucous membranes. Harmful if swallowed. May cause irritation to
the eyes, respiratory system and skin

Cytochalasin B

Very toxic by inhalation, in contact with skin and if swallowed

Diaminobenzidine
tetrahydrochloride DAB

Carcinogenic

Diethanolamine

Harmful if swallowed, inhaled or absorbed through skin. Extremely
destructive of tissues of mucous membranes, upper respiratory
tract, eyes and skin. Inhalation may be fatal

Diethyl ether (ether)

Extremely flammable: flash point −45 ◦ C. Use in well-ventilated area
away from sources of ignition. Forms explosive peroxides on
prolonged storage or on exposure to light. Store only the minimum
quantity necessary and always use a grade containing a stabilizer
unless contrary to the chemistry employed in a particular protocol.
Harmful by inhalation, in contact with skin and if swallowed

Digitonin

Harmful

Dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO)

Harmful if swallowed. Irritating to eyes and skin. Readily absorbed
through skin. Avoid breathing vapour. Wear protective clothing.
May degrade under storage: keep only the minimum quantity
necessary, under nitrogen if possible

DPX mountant

Contains xylene. Flammable, harmful by inhalation and in contact
with skin. Irritating to skin. R-phrases: R1O-20/21-38. S-phrases:
S25-36/37

EDTA

Toxic; irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin

Eosin

Harmful by inhalation, in contact with skin, and if swallowed.
Irritating

Ethane

Because of risk of explosion, the reliquification of gaseous ethane,
taken from a cylinder of liquid ethane, must be carefully
performed within a negative pressure fume extraction hood. Also,
following the preparation of specimen grids, the small liquid
ethane container must be left to evaporate within the fume hood

Ethanol

Highly flammable
(continued overleaf )

382

SELECTED REFERENCE DATA FOR CELL AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

Ethanolamine

Harmful if swallowed, inhaled or absorbed through skin. Material
extremely destructive of tissues of mucous membranes, upper
respiratory tract, eyes and skin. Inhalation may be fatal

Ethidium bromide

Harmful. Ethidium bromide is a strong mutagen and can induce
cancer. Always use gloves and clean up equipment carefully!

Ethyl acetate

Ethyl acetate should be handled with care, and disposed of by means
appropriate for organic solvents

FITC

Harmful by inhalation, skin absorption or ingestion

Fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC)

May be harmful by inhalation, ingestion or skin absorption. Causes
eye and skin irritation. Irritating to mucous membranes and upper
respiratory tract. Repeated exposure may cause asthma and allergic
reactions. Prolonged exposure can cause nausea, dizziness,
headache and lung irritation

Formaldehyde (liquid and
vapour)

Toxic by inhalation, ingestion and by skin contact (causes
sensitization). Possible risk of irreversible effects. Wear gloves and
eye protection

Freund’s adjuvant

Potentially harmful by inhalation, ingestion or skin absorption. Potent
inflammatory agent if introduced intradermally or into eyes. In the
case of skin or eye contact flush with copious amounts of water
for at least 15 min

Giemsa staining solution

Contains methanol. Highly flammable. Toxic by inhalation and if
swallowed. R-phrases: R11-23/25. S-phrases: S7-16-24-45

Glutaraldehyde

Glutaraldehyde is harmful if inhaled or if allowed to come into
contact with the skin. Inhalation of the vapour may cause irritation
to the mucous membranes, upper respiratory tract, eyes and skin.
Sensitization with allergic, respiratory and skin reactions may
occur. Handle in the fume cupboard, and wear gloves

Glycine

May be harmful if swallowed, inhaled or absorbed through skin. May
cause irritation

Guanidinium
hydrochloride

Harmful

HCl

Very toxic, causes burns

Hexylene glycol

Irritating to eyes and skin

Hydrochloric acid

May be fatal if inhaled, swallowed or absorbed through skin. Causes
burns. Material extremely destructive of tissues of upper
respiratory tract, eyes and skin. Inhalation may be fatal

Hydrofluoric acid

Safety precautions must be taken when working with these strong
acids, particularly hydrofluoric acid, for which an antidote cream
should be available in case of burns. Hydrofluoric acid must only
be handled in the fume cupboard, using protective gloves and
clothing

Hydrogen peroxide

Strong oxidizing agent

CHEMICAL SAFETY INFORMATION

125

I-iodine

383

Radioiodine is a γ-emitter and is extremely hazardous. It is essential
to consult your Radiation Protection Officer for a full list of
precautions before using it. Minimize the risk of exposure to it by
working in a designated fume hood with a lead shield between you
and the source. Minimize also the time of exposure. Wear double
gloves and lab coat. Prevent aerosol formation and monitor each
step of the procedure and waste material with a monitor suitable
for detecting γ-rays

KCl

Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin

KH2 PO4

Irritating to eyes and skin. Eye contact: irrigate thoroughly with
water. If discomfort persists obtain medical attention. Inhalation:
remove from exposure. Skin contact: wash off skin with water.
Ingestion: wash out mouth thoroughly with water and give plenty
of water to drink. In severe cases obtain medical attention

KI

Irritating to eyes and skin. Eye contact: irrigate thoroughly with
water. If discomfort persists obtain medical attention. Inhalation:
remove from exposure. Skin contact: wash off skin with water.
Ingestion: wash out mouth thoroughly with water and give plenty
of water to drink. In severe cases obtain medical attention

KNO3

Flammable. Contact with combustible material may cause fire.
Extinguishing media: carbon dioxide, dry chemical powder or
appropriate foam

KOH

Causes severe burns (see NaOH for details)

Leishman’s staining
solution

Contains methanol. Highly flammable. Toxic by inhalation and if
swallowed. R-phrases: R11-23/25. S-phrases: S7-16-24-44

Liquid nitrogen

Causes low temperature burns (−196 ◦ C) as liquid and as gas. Wear
insulated gloves and goggles or face mask. Wear clothing which
gives good skin and foot protection. Always handle in a
well-ventilated area to prevent build-up of high nitrogen levels,
which will reduce the concentration of available oxygen and cause
asphyxiation

Lysozyme

Harmful

Mayer’s haematoxylin

Harmful and irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin

Methanol

Used as a fixative and a solvent for stains – highly flammable, toxic
by inhalation and if swallowed

MgCl2

Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin

MgSO4 .H2 O

Irritating to eyes and skin. Eye contact: irrigate thoroughly with
water. If discomfort persists obtain medical attention. Inhalation:
remove from exposure. Skin contact: wash off skin with water.
Ingestion: wash out mouth thoroughly with water and give plenty
of water to drink. In severe cases obtain medical attention
(continued overleaf )

384

SELECTED REFERENCE DATA FOR CELL AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

MnSO4 .H2 O

Harmful: danger of serious damage to health by prolonged exposure
through inhalation and if swallowed. Do not breathe dust. In case
of contact with eyes, rinse immediately with plenty of water for
15 min and seek medical advice. In case of contact, immediately
wash skin with soap and copious amounts of water. If inhaled,
remove to fresh air. If not breathing give artificial respiration. If
breathing is difficult, give oxygen. If swallowed, wash out mouth
with water provided person is conscious

Na2 EDTA.2H2 O

Harmful by inhalation, in contact with skin and if swallowed.
Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin. In case of contact
with eyes, rinse immediately with plenty of water for 15 min and
seek medical advice.

Na2 HPO4

Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin

Na2 MoO4 .2H2 O

Harmful by inhalation, in contact with skin and if swallowed.
Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin. In case of contact
with eyes, rinse immediately with plenty of water for 15 min and
seek medical advice. In case of contact, immediately take off all
contaminated clothing and wash skin with soap and copious
amounts of water. If inhaled, remove to fresh air. If not breathing
give artificial respiration. If breathing is difficult, give oxygen. If
swallowed, wash out mouth with water provided person is
conscious

NaOH

Very corrosive, causes severe burns. Eye contact: rinse immediately
with plenty of water for 15 min and seek medical advice. Skin
contact: immediately wash skin with soap and copious amounts of
water. Ingestion: if the chemical has been confined to the mouth
give large quantities of water as a mouthwash. Ensure the mouth
wash is not swallowed. If the chemical has been swallowed, give
about 250 ml of water to dilute it in the stomach. In severe cases,
obtain medical attention

N-ethylmaleimide (NEM)

Toxic; irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin

NH4 NO3

Flammable: Contact with combustible material may cause fire.
Harmful by inhalation, in contact with skin and if swallowed.
Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin. In case of contact
with eyes, rinse immediately with plenty of water for 15 min and
seek medical advice. In case of contact, immediately take off all
contaminated clothing and wash skin with soap and copious
amounts of water. If inhaled, remove to fresh air. If not breathing,
give artificial respiration. If breathing is difficult, give oxygen. If
swallowed, wash out mouth with water provided person is
conscious

Nicotinic acid

Avoid contact with skin and eyes

Nitric acid

Corrosive. Safety precautions must be taken when working with
strong acids. Nitric acid must only be handled in the fume
cupboard, using protective gloves and clothing

CHEMICAL SAFETY INFORMATION

385

o-phenylene diamine
(OPD):

Harmful if swallowed, inhaled or absorbed through skin. Can cause
irritation to eyes, skin mucous membranes and upper respiratory
tract. Carcinogen

Osmium tetroxide

Osmium tetroxide is extremely hazardous. Very toxic. Flammable.
Extremely harmful to eyes, respiratory system and skin. Readily
volatilizes at room temperature. May produce irreversible effects.
Danger of cumulative effect Always handle in the fume cupboard
using protective gloves. Dispense over a safety tray to contain any
spillage. Contaminated glassware and used osmium tetroxide
fixative should be neutralized in 10% stannous chloride for
24–48 h, and then rinsed thoroughly with water

Paraformaldehyde

Paraformaldehyde is harmful if inhaled or if allowed to come into
contact with the skin. Inhalation of the vapour may cause irritation
to the mucous membranes, upper respiratory tract, eyes and skin.
Sensitization with allergic, respiratory and skin reactions may
occur. Handle in the fume cupboard, and wear gloves

Penicillin G

Harmful

Periodic acid

Contact with combustible material may cause fire; causes burns

Phenylmethylsulfonyl
fluoride (PMSF)

Very toxic by inhalation, in contact with skin and if swallowed;
causes burns, contact with water liberates extremely flammable
gases

Potassium iodide

Harmful if swallowed, inhaled or absorbed through skin. Causes eye
and skin irritation. Irritable to mucous membranes and upper
respiratory tract. May cause allergic, respiratory and skin reactions.

Potassium permanganate

Harmful oxidizing agent

Presept

Harmful if swallowed

Propylene oxide

Harmful. Highly flammable. Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and
skin. May form an explosive vapour mixture. Wear suitable
protective clothing, gloves and face protection

Pyridoxine-HCl

Avoid contact with skin and eyes

Schiff’s reagent

Causes burns; may cause cancer

Sodium azide

May be fatal if inhaled, swallowed or absorbed through skin. May
cause eye and skin irritation

Sodium cacodylate

Toxic. Danger of arsenic poisoning. Poisonous by inhalation or
ingestion. Avoid contact with skin and eyes. Do not breathe dust.
Wear suitable protective clothing, gloves and face protection when
preparing solutions and in their use. Danger of cumulative effect

Sodium dodecylsulfate

Harmful

Sodium metabisulfite

May be harmful by inhalation, ingestion and skin absorption. Causes
eye and skin irritation. Persons with allergies and/or asthma may
exhibit hypersensitivity to sulfites

Sodium tetrathionate

Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin
(continued overleaf )

386

SELECTED REFERENCE DATA FOR CELL AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

Sulfuric acid

Highly corrosive. Avoid contact with skin and clothes. Carry out the
operation over a sink, and use only small quantities. Wear
protective gloves

Taab resin

Harmful. Can cause inflammation of the skin and mucous
membranes. Can irritate respiratory system. Do not swallow or
inhale. Avoid contact with skin and eyes. Over long exposure can
produce skin sensitization

Taxol

Highly toxic cytotoxic agent

Tetramethylrhodamine

Irritant to eyes and skin

Thiamine-HCl

Avoid contact with skin and eyes

Tris

Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin

Trifluoracetate

Highly poisonous inhibitor

Triton X-100

Toxic; irritating to eyes, respiratory system and skin

Uranyl acetate

Very toxic. Radioactive. Irritating to eyes, respiratory system and
skin. Do not breathe dust. Wear suitable protective clothing, gloves
and face protection when preparing solutions and in their use.
Danger of cumulative effect

Virkon

Irritant

Xylene

Toxic; carcinogen; highly flammable – handle in fume cupboard

ZnSO4 .7H2 O

Irritating to eyes and skin. Eye contact: irrigate thoroughly with
water for at least 10 min. If discomfort persists obtain medical
attention. Inhalation: remove from exposure, rest and keep warm.
In severe cases obtain medical attention

Centrifugation Data
Calculation of centrifugal force

In centrifugation it is important to differentiate between the speed of centrifugation
(RPM) and the centrifugal force (RCF or g) since these are often confused. The centrifugal force generated by a centrifuge can be easily calculated from the equation:
RCF = 11.18 × R × (RPM/1000)2
where R is the distance from the centre of rotation in centimetres, that is the centrifugal
force increases as the particles move down the centrifuge tube. As a general rule, the
greater the centrifugal force the shorter the separation time. However, centrifugation
also generates hydrostatic forces within the solution and so excessive centrifugal forces
can disrupt some biological particles such as ribosomes.

CENTRIFUGATION DATA

387

Applications of centrifuge rotors
Type of rotor

Fixed-angle
Swinging bucket
Vertical tube
Zonal rotor

Type of separation
Pelleting

Rate-zonal

Isopycnic
(organelles)

Isopycnic
macromolecules

Excellent but
pellet on side
Inefficient but
small pellet
Do not use
Do not use

Poor

Poor

Excellent

Excellent

Excellent

Acceptable

Good
Excellent

Good
Excellent

Excellent
Acceptable

Calculation of pelleting times

Pelleting is the separation of particulate and non-particulate material and it is one of the
simplest, most frequently used centrifugation techniques typically as part of a procedure
for harvesting cells or the isolation of precipitated material. As a very approximate guide
to the conditions needed to sediment various biological particles the following can be
used:
Eukaryotic cells
Nuclei
Mitochondria
Microsomes

200g for 10 min
1000g for 10 min
10 000g for 10 min
100 000g for 60 min

As a general rule differential centrifugation produces enriched fractions rather than purified fractions, for example, the ‘nuclear pellet’ obtained by differential centrifugation
almost always contains mitochondrial material that has co-sedimented with the nuclei.
Similarly, the ‘mitochondrial pellet’ always contains material from lysosomes and peroxisomes. Hence differential centrifugation is usually carried out as an early step in the
purification of subcellular components, often prior to further purification involving the
use of rate-zonal or, more frequently, isopycnic gradient centrifugation.
The time to pellet particles depends on the k-factor of the rotor; the smaller the kfactor of a rotor the more efficient it is for pelleting particles. The time in hours for
pelleting particles of known size (s-value) such as ribosomes can be calculated from the
formula:
T = k-factor/s-value
But this formula does assume that sedimentation is taking place in a liquid with the same
density and viscosity as water; in sucrose solutions the time required is significantly
greater.
Care of centrifugation equipment

One of the major problems when using centrifuges is the corrosion of centrifuge rotors,
particularly those made of aluminium alloys. Rotors made of aluminium alloys are very
susceptible to severe corrosion even when left to soak in water overnight. Solutions left

388

SELECTED REFERENCE DATA FOR CELL AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY

in aluminium rotors can cause internal corrosion of the metal alloy. After use always
rinse, drain and dry rotors to avoid corrosion and the build-up of contamination. Always
follow the manufacturers’ recommendations regarding the care of centrifuge rotors. If
at all possible use titanium or carbon composite rotors that are not affected by corrosion
by aqueous solutions.

Radioisotope Data
Radioisotope
3

H
C
22
Na
32
P
33
P
35
S
51
Cr
59
Fe
75
Se
125
I
131
I
14

Half-life

Type of
radiation

12.3 yr
5760 yr
2.6 yr
14.3 days
25.4 days
87.1 days
28 days
46.3 days
121 days
60 days
8.1

β
β
β
β
β
β
EC γ
βγ
EC γ
γ
β, γ

Shielding
required
None
None
Yes
Yes, 10 mm Perspex
Yes, 10 mm Perspex
None
Yes, lead shielding
Yes, lead shielding
Yes, lead shielding
Yes, lead shielding
Yes, lead shielding

Comments

Safer than
Volatile

32

P

Volatile
Volatile

Nuclease inhibitors

Nuclease inhibitors are included in gel electrophoresis procedures to prevent nucleic
acid degradation during electrophoresis. Table 7.1 lists the main nuclease inhibitors used
in many laboratory procedures. The RNase inhibitor diethyl pyrocarbonate (DEPC) is
used in the water and autoclaved used to make up all gel solutions. DEPC-treated
water should be autoclaved prior to use to prevent DEPC interfering with any further
analyses. Inhibitors are also often used during the isolation of RNA and DNA to prevent
degradation by the nucleases present in the host cells.
General manipulation procedures should also be observed to prevent nuclease action:
1. Wear plastic surgical gloves during all manipulations;
2. Autoclave or filter-sterilize all solutions;
3. Wipe surfaces clean prior to starting experiments;
4. Avoid leaning over or breathing into samples;
5. Autoclave or bake at 200 ◦ C all utensils prior to experiments.

RADIOISOTOPE DATA

Table 7.1

Agent
Aurintricarboxylic
acid (ATA)
Bentonite

Nuclease inhibitors and their working concentrations
Active
concentration

Method of nuclease
inactivation

10 µM

8M

Complexes to a wide
range of nucleases
Inactivation by adsorbing
to nucleases
Alkylates proteins
disrupting protein
structure
Reduces disulfide bonds,
denaturing proteins
Chelates divalent cations
needed for ribonuclease
activity
Inactivates ribonucleases

4M

Inactivates ribonucleases

3 mg/ml

Diethyl pyrocarbonate
(DEPC)

0.1%

Dithiothreitol (DTT)

1 mM

EDTA

Guanidine
hydrochloride
Guanidium
thiocyanate

Heparin

1–10 mM

0.5 mg/ml

8-Hydroxyquinoline
Macaloid
2-Mercaptoethanol

0.1% (w/v)
0.015% (w/v)
0.1–0.25 M

Phenol/chloroform
Polyvinyl sulfate
(PVS)
Proteinase K
Sodium dodecyl
sulfate
Ribonucleoside
vanadyl complex

50% (v/v)
1–10 µg/ml
100–200 µg/ml
0.1–1%
10 mM

Binds to basic
ribonucleases
Inactivates ribonucleases
Adsorbs to ribonucleases
Reduces disulfide bonds,
denaturing proteins
Denatures ribonucleases
Complexes to basic
nucleases
Hydrolysis of proteins
Disrupts protein structures
Binds to active site of
ribonuclease

Comments

Toxic

Toxic
Toxic, strongest
agent for
ribonuclease
inactivation

Very toxic
Very toxic
Toxic

389

Index
Page numbers followed by f indicate figures; page numbers followed by t indicate tables.
Aβ1 – 42 peptide
preparation of, 349
Abbé refractometer, 102
Acetone, 218
Achromat, 5
Acid phosphatase, 94
Acrylamide, 371
Adherins, 52
Agarose, 22
Agarose encapsulation
for cell suspensions, 39
Agarose gel, 39
Alcian blue-coated mica, 30
Alcian blue-treated mica, 32
Alkaline phosphatase, 97, 260
non-specific, 141
Alkaline phosphodiesterase, 97
assay for, 143
Alkylation damage, 256
Alzheimer’s disease (AD), 348
Amphibian Ringer’s solution, 242
Amphotericin, 364
Amylases, 96
Amyloid-ß
and enzymes, interactions between,
359, 363
fibrillogenesis, 359
phosphorylation of, 364, 368
phosphorylation by cyclin-dependent
kinase-1 (CDK-1), 367, 368
neurotoxicity, 359
peptide, synthesis of 359, 364, 368
phosphorylated
extraction from cells, 366
immunoassay measurement of,
366, 367

Amyloid precursor protein, 345
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 337
Anode buffer, 182
Anti-apoptotic proteins, 272
Anti-BrdU antibody, 212, 216
Anti-sense amino acid
identification of, 355t
Anti-sense peptides, 353, 358
comparison with known proteins, 354, 357
derivation of sequences, 354
direct binding to target proteins, 357, 358
synthesis of 353, 354, 358
Anticoagulant, 80
Antigenic epitopes, 23
Antigenicity, 23, 38, 70
Antineuraminidase antibody, 283
Apical and basolateral domains
fractionation from Caco-2 cells, 163, 164
fractionation from MDCK cells, 165, 166
Apoptosis, 259
immunocytochemical methods to study, 260,
262
inhibition of, 261, 262
Asialoglycoprotein
endocytosis by rat liver, 191, 192, 193
Aspartic acid, 256
Assembly promotion, 329
A-type lamins, 226
Autoradiograms, 229
Autoradiography, 229
Avidin, 23
Axial resolution, 14
Ball-bearing homogenizer, 89, 99, 110, 164, 165,
172, 174, 176, 188, 189

Cell Biology Protocols. Edited by J. Robin Harris, John Graham, David Rickwood
 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. ISBN: 0-470-84758-1

392

INDEX

Basolateral and bile canalicular plasma
membrane domains
separation from mammalian liver, 160, 161
Bath sonicator, 160
Beam-splitting prism, 11
Beckman fraction recovery system, 105, 129,
172, 189, 192, 195
Beckman Optiseal tube, 129, 166
BEEM capsule, 48, 49
Bench centrifuge, 54, 58, 76
Biological specimens
metal shadowing of, 35, 36
Biotin labelling, 353
Biotin-streptavidin binding affinity, 43
Block staining, 37, 48
Blocking buffer, 210
Blot overlay assay, 226, 229
Blotted proteins
detection by enhanced chemiluminescence
(ECL), 183, 184
Body tube, 2
Bongkrekic acid, 266
Bovine brain cytosol (BBC), 293–295
Bovine serum albumin (BSA), 29, 294
Bright field microscopy, 1, 6, 12
setting microscope for, 7
Buoyant density gradient purification, 91
Buoyant density iodixanol gradients, 156
Cacodylate buffer, 45
Cadherins, 52
Calcein AM, 264
Capillary action, 68
Carbon coating, 48
Carbon films, 29
Carbon rod sharpener, 35
Carbon thickness monitor, 26
Carbon-coated mica, 26
Carbon-formvar
preparation of, 25, 26
Carbon-formvar films, 29
Caspase inhibitor, 259
Caspase inhibitor ZVAD, 263f
Caspases, 259
Catalase, 95, 255, 359
Catalase assay, 123
duration of, 123
equipments for, 123
procedure for, 123
reagents for, 123
Cathode buffer, 182
Caveolae
isolation of, 170, 171
Caveolin, 171

Cell
analysis of, 51, 53
concentration, calculation of, 68
counting of, 65, 66
counts, quantitation of, 67, 69, 70
cultures, use of, 69, 70
dead, removal using isopycnic centrifugation,
65, 66
freezing of, 74, 75
isolation of, 51, 53
isolation from body fluids, 61, 62
membrane, 51
recovery from effusions, 63
recovery from monolayer cultures, 71, 72, 73
thawing, 76, 77, 79
viability, 65, 66
calculation of, 68
determination of, 65
Ceramides, 283
Charcot-Marie-tooth disease (CMT), 337
Chase period, 215
Chemiluminescence, 182
Chlorophyll, 97
Chlorophyll a/b complex
reconstitution into liposomes, 300, 304
Chloroplast chlorophyll
measurement of, 147
Chloroplast integrity
assessment of, 148
Chloroplasts, 97
functional assays, 97
isolation from green leaves 145, 146
isolation from pea seedlings, 145, 146
isolation of, 97
Chromatic beam splitter, 13, 14
Chromatin, 220
Chromatin assembly, 207f
Chromosomes,endogenous
nuclear assembly around, 232f
Circular dichroism (CD), 304
Cisplatin, 250
Cisplatin nanocapsules, 250
characterization of, 252, 253
delivery of contents, 253
electron micrograph of, 252f
encapsulation efficiency, 252
principle, 251
shape of, 252, 253
size of, 252, 253
synthesis, procedure for, 251, 252
Citrate, 80, 82, 83
Class II cabinet, 71, 76
Classical nuclear matrix method, 46, 48
Clathrin, 286, 288

INDEX

Clathrin-coated vesicles (CCVs)
purification from rat brains, 286, 287
CLSM, See Confocal laser scanning microscopy
(CLSM)
Cold trypsinization, 58, 59
Collagen, 60
Collagen fibril
in vitro assembly of, 375, 376, 377, 378
Collagenase, 60
concentration used for tissue disaggregation,
61t
types of, 61t
Collagenase type Ia, 60
Collagenase type IV, 60
Colloidal gold, 23
conjugate, 43, 46
Colorimetric assay, 157
Complementary strand, 353
Compound microscope
components of, 2, 6
Condenser, 2, 3
Condenser-iris diaphragm, 2
Confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM),
14, 242
Confocal microscopy, 14, 16, 154
image collection, factors affecting, 16t
Continuous carbon films
preparation of, 25, 26
Continuous cultures, 70
contamination, signs of, 70
Continuous linear gradients, 156
Coomassie blue, 181, 332
Coverslip, 4, 8, 67
Creatine phosphokinase, 204
Cristae, 255
Critical point drying, 48
Cross-contamination, 70, 72
Cross-link stabilized nuclear matrix method, 46
Cross-linking agents, 18
Cryoelectron microscope, 22, 34
Cryoholder system, 34
Cryomicroscopy, 23
Cryopreservation, 72, 73
critical factors in, 72
Cryoprotectant, 72
Cryotransfer, 34
Cultured cells
purification of mitochondria in Nycodenz
gradient, 114, 115
Cyclin-dependent kinase-1 (CDK-1), 359, 364
Cyclosporin A, 266
Cysteine proteases, 259
Cytochalasin, 233
Cytochrome c

393

measuring release in isolated mitochondria,
271
Cytochrome c, 255
Cytomatrix
of keratinocyte, 323f
Cytomatrix proteins
detection by immunogold embedment-free
electron microscopy, 317, 325
cell extraction 319, 320
equipments for, 319
preparation for 320, 321
reagents for, 318, 319
staining with antibodies, 321, 322
Cytoskeletal buffer, 220
Cytoskeleton, 96
imaging by embedment-free electron
microscopy, 44, 45, 46, 50
Cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase I
(cTPxI), 255
Cytosolic thioredoxin peroxidase II, 255
Cytotoxic effect, 253
Cytotoxicity, 66, 253, 364
Dark field microscopy, 11, 12
Dehydration, 47
Dense sucrose solution (DSS), 139
Densitometric scanning, 229
Density gradient centrifugation, 91, 92
Density gradient fractionation, 96
Deoxyribonuclease I, 102
Depurination
of DNA, 212, 218
Desmosomes, 96
Detergent-resistant membranes (DRMs), 155
DEVD, 259
Dewar flask, 76
Dextran, 96, 135
4 -6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI), 210, 211,
224, 330
Diaminobenzidine (DAB), 183
Diatrizoate, 78
Diethylene glycol distearate (DGD), 44, 48, 318
Differential cell fractionation, 314
Differential centrifugation, 90, 91
equipment for, 91
problems in, 90
Differential interference contrast (DIC), 1
microscopy, 11
Digestion buffer, 222
Diluent, 74
Dimethyldichlorosilane, 100
Dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), 72, 74, 76
Dioleoyl-phoshatidylglycerol (DOPG), 252
Dioleoyl-phosphatidic acid (DOPA), 252

394

INDEX

Dioleoyl-phosphatidylethanolamine
(DOPE), 252
Dispase, 60
concentration used for tissue
disaggregation, 61t
types of, 61t
DNA
double labelling with halogenated thymidine
analogues, 214, 215, 216
safety precautions, 216
single labelling with halogenated thymidine
analogues, 209, 210, 212, 213
fingerprinting, 70
proteins and halogen-dU-substituted
simultaneous immunostaining of, 217, 218,
219
DNase I, 103, 106
DNases, 249
Dounce homogenization, 166, 176
Dounce homogenizer, 89, 91, 99, 109–112, 139,
160, 172, 174, 188
Droplet immunolabelling, 32
Droplet negative staining procedure, 27, 28
equipments for, 27
preparation of
duration, 28
procedure for, 27, 28
reagents for, 27
Dual-beam spectrophotometer, 131
Dye exclusion method, 66
Dystrophic neurites, 348
EDTA, 80, 82, 83, 192
EGTA, 88
Electroblotting, 171
Electron microscopy (EM), 21, 24, 317
methods of, 22
preparative equipments, 24
reagents used for, 24
resinless section, 44
sections for, staining of, 40, 41
whole mount, 44
Electron-dense marker, 23
Electrostatic interactions, 251
Embedment-free electron microscopy (EFEM),
44, 50, 317
Endocytic intermediates
electron micrographs of, 288, 292
reconstitution on lipid monolayer, 288, 289,
291, 292
Endocytosis, 158, 159, 253, 288
analysis of, 159
iodixanol gradients for, 189t
ligand labelling, 158

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER), 51, 95, 96
analysis in sedimentation velocity iodixanol
density gradients, 177, 178, 178t, 179
analysis using iodixanol density gradients,
174, 175, 176
buoyant density separation of, variations in
gradient conditions, 175t
chemical markers for, 95, 96
enzyme markers for, 95, 96
rough, 95, 96
separation in preformed sucrose gradient, 127,
128
separation in self-generated iodixanol
gradient, 129, 130
smooth, 95, 96
subfractions
analysis using sucrose density gradients,
172, 173
Endoplasmic reticulum-golgi-plasma membrane
pathway
membrane compartments in, analysis of, 156,
157
buoyant density iodixanol gradients, 156
by electroblotting, 157
by SDS-PAGE, 157
sedimentation velocity iodixanol gradients,
157
sucrose-D2 O gradients, 156
Endosome-lysosome events
analysis in mammalian liver, 194, 195, 196
Endosomes, 95, 96, 159, 195
early, 190
recycling, 190
Enhanced chemiluminescence (EC), 314
Envelope suspension buffer (ESB), 102
Enzyme activity, 60
Epifluorescence, 13
setting microscope for, 14, 17
Epifluorescence microscope, 13f, 210, 215, 218
dichroic mirror block in, 13f
EPR, 335
ER-golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC),
96, 156
analysis using iodixanol density gradients,
174, 175, 176
Erythrocyte ghost pellet, 137
Erythrocyte ghosts, human
purification of, 137, 138
Erythromycin, 66
Ethanol, 89
Euchromatin, 44
EVON chopstick electrodes, 297
Extraction buffer (EB), 104, 221
Eyepiece, 1, 2, 5

INDEX

FASTA format, 354
Ferricyanide, 97
β fibril formation, 345, 347
equipments for, 345
procedure for, 345, 346
reagents for, 345
Fibrillogenesis, 345
Aβ fibrillogenesis, 345
Ficoll, 195
Field iris diaphragm, 2
Filters, 2
Fiske-Subbarow reducing agent, 132, 141
FITC-dextran, 296
Fixatives, 18t
Flameless atomic absorption spectrometry, 252
Fluorescence microscopy, 1, 12, 13
Fluorescence unit, 120
Fluorimeter, 120
Fluorinert, 176, 179, 192, 195
Fluorochrome dye, 12
Fluorochromes, 218
Fluorometric assay, 157
Flutec-blue, 192, 195
Formaldehyde, 18, 217
Formaldehyde fixative, 222
Formvar, 28
Formvar film, 46, 49
Fractin, 261
Fractin staining, 261
Freeze-fracture, 23
Fume extraction hood, 33
Functional enzyme activity assays, 359
β-Galactosidase, 94
fluorometric assay, 120
spectrophotometric assay, 119
Galactosyl transferase, 96
Galactosylation, 96
Ganglioside
flip-flop translocation in lipid bilayers, 283
Gelatinous pellet, 102
Gibbs-Donnan equilibrium, 78
Glucose-6-phosphatase, 95
Glucose-6-phosphatase assay, 132
ß-D glucosidase, 96
Glutaraldehyde, 18, 24, 36
Glutaraldehyde fixation, 32, 39
Glutaraldehyde fixative, 45, 47
Glutathione, 258
Glutathione-dependent peroxidase, 255
Glycerol, 72, 181
Glycolipids, 281
asymmetric incorporation into liposomal
membranes, 280, 281, 283

395

asymmetric incorporation into membranes,
280, 285
Glycolysis, 255
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI), 280, 283
GM3
neuraminidase cleavage of, 282f
GM3 ganglioside
sphingomyelinase induced flip-flop of, 284f
Golgi
analysis using iodixanol density gradients
duration of, 175
Golgi complex, 51
Golgi membrane, 96
analysis in sedimentation velocity iodixanol
density gradients, 177, 178, 178t, 179
analysis using iodixanol density gradients,
174, 175, 176
binding of vimentin to, 310f
buoyant density separation of, variations in
gradient conditions, 175t
enzyme marker of, 96
isolation from liver, 134, 135
purification of, 308
tubule formation from, 293, 294, 295
purified
vimentin binding to, biochemical assay for,
307, 308, 309, 312
trans-Golgi network (TGN), 95, 96, 154
analysis in sedimentation velocity iodixanol
density gradients, 177, 178, 179
Golgi stack, negatively stained, 294f
Golgi subfractions
analysis using sucrose density gradients, 172,
173
Golgi-vimentin interaction, 307, 311f, 312
immunofluorescence analysis of, 309, 310, 312
Gradient master, 121, 127, 170, 178
GST-synaptobrevin, 275
Haemocytometer chamber, 69f
Halogenated nucleosides, 210
Hanks balanced salt solution (HBSS)
without calcium and magnesium, 54, 57, 58,
71, 74
Hela cells, 204
Hematoxylin, 49
Heparin, 80, 82, 83, 104
Hepatocyte, reconstituted
micrograph of, 279f
Hepatocytes, 158
Hepes-buffered saline (HBS), 80, 82, 83, 163
Heterochromatin, 44, 93, 103
Heteropolymers, 338
Hexylene glycol buffer, 100

396

INDEX

[3 H]-inulin, 296
Hoechst 33258, 70
Holey carbon support films, 33
preparation of, 25, 26
Homogenization, 88, 90
Homogenization buffer (HB), 172
Homogenization medium (HM), 89t, 98, 110,
121
Horseradish peroxidase (HRP), 159
Hotplate/magnetic stirrer, 56, 58
Human Aβ1 – 42 peptide, 346f
Hydropathic interactions, 353
Hydroperoxide tolerance
determination of, 256, 257
Hydrophilicity, 28
Hydrostatic pressure, 91, 93
Hyperosmotic medium, 90
Hypoosmotic disruption, 97
Hypoosmotic medium, 90, 99
Hypotonic lysis, 96
Hypotonicity, 64
IF oligomers, 335
Immunoblot analysis, 275
Immunoblotting, 231
Immunocytochemistry, 351, 352
Immunodepletion, 236
column preparation for, 235, 236
of proteins, 234
Immunofluorescence, 12, 238, 239
Immunofluorescence microscopy, 231, 317
Immunofluorescent signal, 213, 216
Immunofluorescent staining
indirect, 209
Immunolabelling, 23, 36
post-embedding indirect, 42, 43
Immunolocalization, 46
Immunonegative staining, 26, 29, 30
Immunostaining, 18
Inclusion bodies (IBs)
isolation of, 332, 333
purification of, 332, 333
Interference filters, 13
Intermediate filament (IF), 307, 331, 335f, 337
assembly of, 334, 335
Interpupillary distance, 7
Inverted phase contrast microscope, 71, 74
Iodinates density gradient media
molecular structure of, 77f
Iodixanol, 122, 143, 154, 181, 185, 189, 191
Iodixanol gradient, 155
Iodixanol working solution (IWS), 124
p-Iodonitrotetrazolium violet, 94, 116
Ischaemia, 259

Isoenzymes, 70
Isoosmotic medium, 78, 89
Isopycnic centrifugation, 65, 105
JEOL X-band spectrometer, 335
Jurkat cells, 90
Karyotypes, 70
Keratinocytes, 296
Köhler illumination, 6, 11
setting of, 8
Labconco auto densi-flow device, 129, 169, 172,
176, 189, 192, 195
Laemmli gel electrophoresis system, 157
Laminopathies, 226
Lateral displacement, 11
Lead citrate, 41, 43
Levamisole, 141
LHCIIb, See Light-harvesting chlorophyll (Chl)
a/b protein complex of photosystem II
(LHCIIb)
LHCIIb complex
fluorescence emission spectra of, 302f
LHCIIb liposomes
fluorescence emission spectra, 303f
LHCIIb proteoliposomes, 304
circular dichroic absorption spectra of, 302f
fluorescence emission spectra of, 302f
Light microscope 1, 2t, 6
care of, 16
limit of resolution, 2
maintenance of, 16
parts of, 4f
problems in, 16
Light mitochondrial pellet (LMP), 114, 117
Light path
conventional vs confocal microscopy, 15f
Light source, 2
Light-harvesting chlorophyll (Chl) a/b protein
complex of photosystem II (LHCIIb), 300
function of, 300
Lipid flip-flop movement
detection of, 283
Lipid rafts
isolation of, 167, 168t, 169
duration of, 168
equipments for, 167
by gradient separation, 167
procedure for, 167, 168
from post-nuclear supernatant, 167
reagents for, 167
from total cell lysate, 167

INDEX

Lipophilicity, 250
Liposomes, 158, 250, 251, 280, 281
GPI incorporation into the outer monolayer of,
282f
Liver endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
invitro reconstitution of, 277, 278, 279
London resin, 38
Lowicryl resin, 38
Lymphocyte separation medium, 80
Lymphocytes, 90
Lymphoprep, 65, 78, 80
Lyophilization, 252
Lysine/hydroxylysine residues, 375
Lysosomes, 51, 91, 93, 94, 109, 114, 190, 192,
194
enzyme markers of, 94
isolation in Nycodenz gradient, 117, 118
isolation of, 94
marker of, 94
purification of, 94
Madin Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells, 296
Magnification system, 1
Mammalian liver
fractionation of light mitochondrial fraction,
125f
isolation of nuclei from, 98, 99
purification of mitochondria in Nycodenz
gradient, 114, 115
Mammalian peroxisomes
isolation in iodixanol gradient, 121, 122
Mannitol, 108
Membrane proteins
SDS-PAGE of, 180, 181
Membrane vesicles
separation from cytosolic proteins, 157, 158
Membranes and cytosolic fractions
separation from bacteria, 185, 186
separation from mammalian cells, 185, 187
Metal shadowing, 23
Metaphase chromosomes
isolation of, 100, 101
Methacrylate resin, 42
Methylamine tungstate, 28
Methylamine vanadate, 28
Metrizamide, 100
Metrizoate, 77
Mg-ATPase, 103
Microscope, 1
components of
body, 2
condenser, 3
eyepiece, 5
lamp, 2

397

objective, 4
stage, 4
illumination system of, 2
magnification system of, 2
Microscopy
techniques of, 6
Microsomes, 154
Microtiter plate binding, 359
Microtubule assembly promoters (MTAPs), 326
Microtubule organizing centre, 310
Microtubule peroxisome interaction, 313, 315,
315f
Microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs), 330
Millicell electrical resistance system (ERS), 296
Mitochondria, 51
enzyme markers of, 93, 94
functional marker of, 93, 94
isolated
protein import into, 272
isolation of, 93, 94
Mitochondrial fraction, light
preparation from cultured cells, 110, 111
preparation from tissues, 110, 111
Mitochondrial inhibitors, 258
Mitochondrial membrane potential, 264
Mitochondrial permeability transition
m loss determination
in cells using confocal laser imaging, 264,
265, 266, 267
in isolated mitochondria using confocal
laser imaging, 264, 267
m loss measurement
in cells on FACS, 270
in isolated mitochondria on FACS, 270
in isolated mitochondria using fluorometer,
268, 269
PT loss determination
in cells using confocal laser imaging, 264,
265, 266, 267
in isolated mitochondria using confocal
laser imaging, 264, 265, 266, 267
PT loss measurement
in cells on FACS, 270
in isolated mitochondria on FACS, 270
in isolated mitochondria using fluorometer,
268, 269
Mitochondrial thioredoxin peroxidase I, 255
Mitotic lysates
preparation of, 230, 231
Molar extinction coefficient
p-nitrophenol, 143
of reduced cytochrome c, 131
of reduced INT, 116
Monolayer cultures, 71

398

INDEX

MTT reduction, 365
Mycoplasma, 70
Myosin filaments
aggregation, prevention by S100A4, 374
assembly/disassembly in presence of S100A4,
372, 374
disassembly, S100A4 stimulated, 373
preparation of, 373
Myosin II filaments, 369
Na+ /K+ -ATPase, ouabain-sensitive
assay for, 144
N-acetyl-glucosamine, 94, 96
NADPH-cytochrome c reductase, 95
determination of, 95
NADPH-cytochrome c reductase assay, 131
Nanocapsules, 250, 253
Nanoprecipitate, 251
Negative staining, 22, 28
Negative staining-carbon film technique,
31, 32
Neogalactosylalbumin, 192
Neubauer chamber, 67
Neubauer haemocytometer, 74
Neuraminidase, 281, 283
Neuroblastoma cells, 178
Neurodegenerative diseases, 259
Neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), 348
Neurofilament (NF), 337
Neurofilament (NF) assembly, 337, 338, 340,
340f, 341
in SW-13/cl.2 vim− cells, 339, 340
Neurofilament (NF) proteins
purification of, 339
SDS-PAGE of, 340f
Neuronal apoptosis
in vitro assessment of, 259, 260, 262, 263
Neurotoxicity, 250, 359, 364
Neutral protease, 60
Newton’s rings, 67
Nigrosin, 66
Nitrocellulose, 182
Nitrocellulose membrane, 297
Nitrogen cavitation, 99, 101, 163
Nitrophenol, 94
Nocodazole, 233
Nomarski optics, 266
Non-β-amyloid β component (NAC), 342
Non-immune serum, 29
Non-nucleolar matrix proteins, 107
Nosepiece, 2
Nuclear assembly, 238
and immunofluorescence, 237, 238, 239
steps in, 237

Nuclear components
isolation of, 92, 93
Nuclear envelope (NE), 226, 237
isolation of, 102, 103
Nuclear ghosts, 102, 103
Nuclear lamina, 226
Nuclear matrix
classical, 223, 224
cross-link stabilized, 223
imaging by embedment-free electron
microscopy, 44, 50
equipments for, 46
procedure for, 46, 50
reagents for, 44, 45
using resinless sections, 48, 50
solutions for, 45
using whole mount of cells, 46, 48
of keratinocyte, 323f
preparation of, 106
ultrastructure of, 221f
uncovering in cultured cells,
220, 223, 224
Nuclear matrix-lamin interactions
blot overlay assay, 226, 228, 229
nuclear reassembly assay, 230, 232, 233
Nuclear pore complex (NPC), 237, 240
isolation of, 104, 105
Nuclear transport
optical single transporter recording (OSTR)
measurements of, 244, 245, 245f,
246f, 247
Nuclei
pelleting of, 92
purification of, 92
Nucleocytoplasmic transport,241f
measurement of, 242f
measurement using Xenopus oocyte nuclei,
240, 243
Nucleolar decondensation, 103
Nucleoli, 106
preparation of, 107
Nucleoplasmic lamin binding proteins, 226
Nucleosomal histones, 224
Nucleosome assembly
coupled to DNA repair synthesis, 204, 205,
206, 208
Nucleosomes, 204
5 -nucleotidase, 97
assay for, 141
Nucleotide excision repair (NER) pathway,
204
Nucleotide precursor, 210
Nycodenz, 78, 101, 117, 143, 154, 181
Nycoprep, 78, 80, 117

INDEX

Objective lens, 1, 2, 6f
properties of, 5t
Observation methods
selection of, 3f
Octylglucopyranosid (OGP), 306
Ocular lens, 1
Oil immersion microscope
focusing procedure, 9
Oil immersion objective, 8, 9
Optical single transporter recording (OSTR), 244
OptiPrep, 78, 80, 82, 83, 98, 121, 165, 170, 186
OptiPrep diluent (OD), 124
Optiseal tube, 192
Orcinol reagent, 133
Organelles
analysis in performed iodixanol gradient, 124,
125, 126
fractionation in iodixanol gradient, 125t
functional analysis of, 88, 97
isolation of, 88, 97
Osmic acid, 24
Osmium fixative, 45
Osmium tetroxide, 37, 38, 45
Osmotic shock, 73
Osmotic stress, 256
Ouabain, 144
Oxidative phosphorylation, 89, 255
p20 antibody, 261
p20 staining, 261
p35-overexpressing N2a cells, 349
Palmitoylation, 274
Parafilm, 27
Pellet
contamination, prevention of, 90
Pelleting, 90, 92, 119
Penetratin, 259
Penicillin, 364
Peptide J, 262
toxicity on cortical neuron cultures, 262f
Percoll, 92, 94
Perichromatin fibrils, 220
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
purification on density barrier, 80, 81
purification using barrier flotation technique,
83, 84, 86
purification using mixer technique, 82
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC),
human
isolation of, 77, 79
using barrier flotation technique, 78, 79
using density barrier, 77, 78
using mixer technique, 78
Permeability transition (PT), 264

399

Permeability transition (PT) inhibitor, 266
Peroxidase, 103
Peroxide, 123, 258
Peroxiredoxins, 255
Peroxisome-microtubule binding assay, 313,
314, 314f, 315
Peroxisomes, 89, 91, 93–95, 192, 313
enzyme markers of, 95
Phase contrast microscope,9, 10f, 61, 102, 106,
176, 134
limitations of, 9
setting microscope for, 11, 13
Phenol red, 61
Phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (PMSF), 233, 370
Phosphate buffered saline (PBS), 29, 39, 42,
167, 183
Phosphatidylcholine, 281, 284
Phosphatidylethanolamine, 284
Phospholipase A2 enzyme
Ca2+ -independent, 293
Phospholipase C, 285
Phospholipids, 288
Phosphorylated lamina proteins, 231
Phosphotungstic acid (PTA), 293
Photobleaching, 15
Photomultiplier (PMT), 14
Photosystem 2
reconstitution into liposomes, 305, 306
biobeads pretreatment, 306
equipments for, 306
liposome preparation, 305
procedure for, 306
reagents for, 306
Plan Achromat, 5
Plan Apochromat, 5
Plasma membrane, 96, 97
analysis using enzyme markers, 97
Plasma membrane domains, 155, 156
Plasma membrane sheets
isolation from rat liver, 139, 140
Plasmid DNA, 206
Plastoquinone, 305
Platinum shadowing, 291
Plunge-freezing apparatus, 33
Poly-L-lysine coating, 18, 19
Polyacrylic acid, 291
Polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs), 78, 82
Polysaccharide, 78
Polystyrene box, 75
Polysucrose, 195
Polysucrose gradients, 195
Polysucrose-Nycodenz gradient, 194
Polytron, 145
Polytron homogenizer, 89, 134, 160

400

INDEX

Polyvinylidine difluoride, 157
Ponceau S stain, 228, 229
Post-embedding immunogold cytochemistry
on COLO 20 cells, 324f
Post-nuclear supernatant (PNS), 165
Potassium ferricyanide, 148
Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer, 89, 98, 108, 110,
111
Pregnant mare’s serum gonadotropin (PMSG),
235
Propidium iodide, 249
Protease inhibitor, 112
Protein assay kit, 309
Proteins
immunogold localization of, 46
Proteoliposomes, 158
Pulmonary oedema, 233
Pulse period, 215
Quartz crystal, 26
Radioactivity, 233
Rat liver
isolation of heavy mitochondrial fraction
from, 108, 109
microsomes, fractionation in self-generated
iodixanol gradient, 130f
sinusoidal domain
isolation using antibody-bound beads, 162
Red blood cells (RBC)
removal by snap lysis, 64
removal using isopycnic centrifugation, 65, 66
Refractive index, 11
Refractometer, 103, 139
Renaturation, 229
Resin, 38
Resin embedding, 37, 38
Resinless section electron microscopy, 44
Resolution, 1, 2
Ribonucleoprotein (RNP), 220
RNA analysis, 133
RNA splicing, 220
Rough ER suspension medium (RSM), 127
S100A4, recombinant
isolation of, 373
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 255
Scintillant, 136
SDS-PAGE, 231, 275
SDS-PAGE gel, 181

Sectioning
of frozen tissues, 19
of paraformaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded
tissues, 19
Sedimentation velocity iodixanol
gradients, 157
Semi-dry blotting, 182
Semi-dry Western blotting, 157
Seminiferous tubules, 297
Serine-protease inhibitor, 340
Sertoli cells, 296, 297
assembly of TJ-permeability barrier, 298f
electron micrograph of, 297f
Silicotungstate, 28
Smitin, 369
isolation of, 369
Smitin-myosin II coassembly arrays, 369, 371
synthesis of , 369, 370
SNARE complexes, ternary
formation of, 274, 274f, 275, 276
Sodium cacodylate, 45
Sodium citrate, 40
Sodium phosphotungstate, 28
Soluble NSF attachment protein receptor
(SNARE) proteins, 274
Sonication, 156
Sonicator, 171
Specimen
fixation, 18, 19
metal shadowing, 23
preparation of, 16, 17
staining of, 16, 17
tissue sections, preparation of, 19
Spectrophotometer, 119, 123, 377
Sphingolipid, 155
Sphingomyelin, 280, 284
Sphingomyelinase, 280, 285
Stains,19, 19t
Stereomicroscope, 240
Streptavidin, 23
Streptolysin O (SLO), 248
cell permeabilization with, 248, 249
Streptomycin, 364
Subcellular membranes
fractionation of, 154, 159
methods, 154, 155
Subconfluent monolayer, 46, 48
Succinate dehydrogenase, 93
Succinate-INT reductase assay, 116
Sulfydryl-activatable toxin, 248

INDEX

Supercoiling assay, 208
Supernatant, 63, 69
Suspension buffer (SB), 106
Swinging-bucket rotor, 90, 92
Syntaxin, 274
α-Synuclein fibril formation
tubulin induced, 342, 343, 343f, 344
Synucleinopathies, 342
Tau hyperphosphorylation, 348
Aβ1 – 42 peptide induced, 348, 349, 352
western immunoblotting analysis of, 350, 351
Tau phosphorylation,351f
Taxol, 326, 329
TdT mediated dUTP nick end labelling
(TUNEL), 260
staining, 260, 261
Teflon block, 289, 289f
Tetramethylrhodamine (TMRM), 265
Thermanox coverslip, 48, 49
Thin section electron microscopy, 106
Threonine, 256
Thymidine, 215
Tight junction
assembly of, 296, 299
cell cultures for, 296, 297
procedure for transepithelial electrical
resistance (TER)measurement, 297,
299
Tissue
disaggregation using collagenase, 60, 62
disaggregation using dispase, 60, 62
mechanical disaggregation of, 52, 53
disaggregation by mechanical
mincing/chopping, 54, 55
methods for disaggregating, 53t
red blood cell removal during disaggregation,
63
disaggregation by warm trypsinization, 56, 57
Tissue culture hood, 46
Tissue processing, 37, 38
Titanium oxysulfate, 95, 123
Titin, 369
Topoisomerase, 208
Transblotted proteins, 228
Transepithelial electrical resistance (TER), 296
Transfection, 250, 337
Transferrin
endocytosis in transfected MDCK cells, 188,
190

401

Transitional endoplasmic reticulum
(tER), 278
Transitional solvent, 49
Trehalose, 23
Trichloroacetic acid (TCA), 132
Tricine-buffered saline, 80, 82, 83
Triton X-100, 106
Trypan blue, 66–68, 249
Trypan blue dye exclusion, 365
Trypsin, 56
Trypsin inhibitors, 56, 57, 59
Trypsinization, 57, 59, 224
cold, 56, 58, 59
warm, 56
Tubulation buffer, 294
Tubulin, 326, 343
Tubulin assembly
monitored on absorption spectrometer, 328f
induced by microtubule assembly promoters
(MTAPs), 326, 330
induced by taxol, 326, 327, 330
monitored by fluorescence, 329f
Turbidimetry, 375
Type I collagen fibril
axial structure of, 375, 378
reconstitution of, 376f
UDP-galactose galactosyl transferase
assay of, 136
Ultra-Turrax, 145
Ultrasonication, 104, 105
Ultrasonicator, 104, 107
Uranyl acetate, 24, 40, 43
Uranyl acetate stain, 291
Uranyl formate, 28
v-SNARE synaptobrevin, 274
Vacuum coating unit, 31
VAMP seev-SNARE synaptobrevin
Vectashield solution, 239
Vernier scale, 4
VersaDoc imager, 184
Vesiculation, 155
Vimentin, 307
production of, 331, 332
spin labelled, 334f
EPR spectra from, 335f
preparation of, 333, 334
purification of, 333, 334
Vitrification, 22, 23

402

INDEX

Vitrified specimens
negatively stained, 33, 34
unstained, 33, 34
Waring blender, 145
Western immunoblotting, 349
Whole mount electron microscopy, 44
Working distance, 5
Xenopus laevis
egg extracts, preparation of, 234, 235, 236

Yeast
mitochondria, purification in Nycodenz
gradient, 112, 113
protective role of antioxidant proteins,
determination of, 255, 258
scheme viability of, 257f
synthetic medium for, 256
Yeast peptone dextrose (YPD), 258
Yeast spheroplast, 112
ZVAD, 259

