Cells
Molecules and Mechanisms

Axolotl

Academic Publishing Co.

Cells: Molecules and Mechanisms
by E. V. Wong, Ph.D.
Copyright 2009, ISBN 978-0-9852261-1-4	
Axolotl Academic Publishing Company, Louisville, KY.

This work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons BY-NC-SA version
3.0 license as fully described on the following page. In short, you may create derivative works from Cells: Molecules and Mechanisms as long as (1) you acknowledge the
original author/publisher, (2) you do not sell it and make it freely available, and (3) your
work is also to be distributed under this CC BY-NC-SA license.

THIS WORK (AS DEFINED BELOW) IS PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THIS CREATIVE COMMONS PUBLIC
LICENSE (“CCPL” OR “LICENSE”). THE WORK IS PROTECTED BY COPYRIGHT AND/OR OTHER APPLICABLE LAW.
ANY USE OF THE WORK OTHER THAN AS AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS LICENSE OR COPYRIGHT LAW IS PROHIBITED. BY EXERCISING ANY RIGHTS TO THE WORK PROVIDED HERE, YOU ACCEPT AND AGREE TO BE BOUND
BY THE TERMS OF THIS LICENSE. TO THE EXTENT THIS LICENSE MAY BE CONSIDERED TO BE A CONTRACT,
THE LICENSOR GRANTS YOU THE RIGHTS CONTAINED HERE IN CONSIDERATION OF YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF
SUCH TERMS AND CONDITIONS.

above rights include the right to make such modifications as are technically necessary to exercise the rights in other media and formats. All rights not expressly
granted by Licensor are hereby reserved, including but not limited to the rights
set forth in Sections 4(e) and 4(f).

1. Definitions

1. You may distribute, publicly display, publicly perform, or publicly digitally
perform the Work only under the terms of this License, and You must include a
copy of, or the Uniform Resource Identifier for, this License with every copy or
phonorecord of the Work You distribute, publicly display, publicly perform, or
publicly digitally perform. You may not offer or impose any terms on the Work
that restrict the terms of this License or the ability of a recipient of the Work to
exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the License. You
may not sublicense the Work. You must keep intact all notices that refer to this
License and to the disclaimer of warranties. When You distribute, publicly display,
publicly perform, or publicly digitally perform the Work, You may not impose any
technological measures on the Work that restrict the ability of a recipient of the
Work from You to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of
the License. This Section 4(a) applies to the Work as incorporated in a Collective
Work, but this does not require the Collective Work apart from the Work itself
to be made subject to the terms of this License. If You create a Collective Work,
upon notice from any Licensor You must, to the extent practicable, remove from
the Collective Work any credit as required by Section 4(d), as requested. If You
create a Derivative Work, upon notice from any Licensor You must, to the extent
practicable, remove from the Derivative Work any credit as required by Section
4(d), as requested.
2. You may distribute, publicly display, publicly perform, or publicly digitally
perform a Derivative Work only under: (i) the terms of this License; (ii) a later
version of this License with the same License Elements as this License; or, (iii)
either the unported Creative Commons license or a Creative Commons license for
another jurisdiction (either this or a later license version) that contains the same
License Elements as this License (e.g. Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0
(Unported)) (“the Applicable License”). You must include a copy of, or the Uniform
Resource Identifier for, the Applicable License with every copy or phonorecord of
each Derivative Work You distribute, publicly display, publicly perform, or publicly
digitally perform. You may not offer or impose any terms on the Derivative Works
that restrict the terms of the Applicable License or the ability of a recipient of
the Work to exercise the rights granted to that recipient under the terms of the
Applicable License. You must keep intact all notices that refer to the Applicable
License and to the disclaimer of warranties. When You distribute, publicly display,
publicly perform, or publicly digitally perform the Derivative Work, You may not
impose any technological measures on the Derivative Work that restrict the ability of a recipient of the Derivative Work from You to exercise the rights granted
to that recipient under the terms of the Applicable License. This Section 4(b) applies to the Derivative Work as incorporated in a Collective Work, but this does
not require the Collective Work apart from the Derivative Work itself to be made
subject to the terms of the Applicable License.
3. You may not exercise any of the rights granted to You in Section 3 above in
any manner that is primarily intended for or directed toward commercial advan-

1. “Collective Work” means a work, such as a periodical issue, anthology or encyclopedia, in which the Work
in its entirety in unmodified form, along with one or more other contributions, constituting separate and
independent works in themselves, are assembled into a collective whole. A work that constitutes a Collective
Work will not be considered a Derivative Work (as defined below) for the purposes of this License.
2. “Derivative Work” means a work based upon the Work or upon the Work and other pre-existing works,
such as a translation, musical arrangement, dramatization, fictionalization, motion picture version, sound
recording, art reproduction, abridgment, condensation, or any other form in which the Work may be recast,
transformed, or adapted, except that a work that constitutes a Collective Work will not be considered a
Derivative Work for the purpose of this License. For the avoidance of doubt, where the Work is a musical
composition or sound recording, the synchronization of the Work in timed-relation with a moving image
(“synching”) will be considered a Derivative Work for the purpose of this License.
3. “Licensor” means the individual, individuals, entity or entities that offer(s) the Work under the terms of
this License.
4. “Original Author” means the individual, individuals, entity or entities who created the Work.
5. “Work” means the copyrightable work of authorship offered under the terms of this License.
6. “You” means an individual or entity exercising rights under this License who has not previously violated
the terms of this License with respect to the Work, or who has received express permission from the Licensor
to exercise rights under this License despite a previous violation.
7. “License Elements” means the following high-level license attributes as selected by Licensor and indicated
in the title of this License: Attribution, Noncommercial, ShareAlike.
2. Fair Use Rights. Nothing in this license is intended to reduce, limit, or restrict any rights arising from fair
use, first sale or other limitations on the exclusive rights of the copyright owner under copyright law or
other applicable laws.
3. License Grant. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, Licensor hereby grants You a worldwide,
royalty-free, non-exclusive, perpetual (for the duration of the applicable copyright) license to exercise the
rights in the Work as stated below:
1. to reproduce the Work, to incorporate the Work into one or more Collective Works, and to reproduce the
Work as incorporated in the Collective Works;
2. to create and reproduce Derivative Works provided that any such Derivative Work, including any translation in any medium, takes reasonable steps to clearly label, demarcate or otherwise identify that changes
were made to the original Work. For example, a translation could be marked “The original work was translated from English to Spanish,” or a modification could indicate “The original work has been modified.”;
3. to distribute copies or phonorecords of, display publicly, perform publicly, and perform publicly by means
of a digital audio transmission the Work including as incorporated in Collective Works;
4. to distribute copies or phonorecords of, display publicly, perform publicly, and perform publicly by means
of a digital audio transmission Derivative Works;
The above rights may be exercised in all media and formats whether now known or hereafter devised. The

4. Restrictions. The license granted in Section 3 above is expressly made subject to
and limited by the following restrictions:

tage or private monetary compensation. The exchange of the Work for other copyrighted works by means
of digital file-sharing or otherwise shall not be considered to be intended for or directed toward commercial
advantage or private monetary compensation, provided there is no payment of any monetary compensation
in connection with the exchange of copyrighted works.
4. If You distribute, publicly display, publicly perform, or publicly digitally perform the Work (as defined
in Section 1 above) or any Derivative Works (as defined in Section 1 above) or Collective Works (as defined in
Section 1 above), You must, unless a request has been made pursuant to Section 4(a), keep intact all copyright
notices for the Work and provide, reasonable to the medium or means You are utilizing: (i) the name of the
Original Author (or pseudonym, if applicable) if supplied, and/or (ii) if the Original Author and/or Licensor
designate another party or parties (e.g. a sponsor institute, publishing entity, journal) for attribution (“Attribution Parties”) in Licensor’s copyright notice, terms of service or by other reasonable means, the name
of such party or parties; the title of the Work if supplied; to the extent reasonably practicable, the Uniform
Resource Identifier, if any, that Licensor specifies to be associated with the Work, unless such URI does not
refer to the copyright notice or licensing information for the Work; and, consistent with Section 3(b) in
the case of a Derivative Work, a credit identifying the use of the Work in the Derivative Work (e.g., “French
translation of the Work by Original Author,” or “Screenplay based on original Work by Original Author”). The
credit required by this Section 4(d) may be implemented in any reasonable manner; provided, however, that
in the case of a Derivative Work or Collective Work, at a minimum such credit will appear, if a credit for all
contributing authors of the Derivative Work or Collective Work appears, then as part of these credits and in
a manner at least as prominent as the credits for the other contributing authors. For the avoidance of doubt,
You may only use the credit required by this Section for the purpose of attribution in the manner set out
above and, by exercising Your rights under this License, You may not implicitly or explicitly assert or imply
any connection with, sponsorship or endorsement by the Original Author, Licensor and/or Attribution Parties,
as appropriate, of You or Your use of the Work, without the separate, express prior written permission of the
Original Author, Licensor and/or Attribution Parties.
5.For the avoidance of doubt, where the Work is a musical composition:
1. Performance Royalties Under Blanket Licenses. Licensor reserves the exclusive right to collect whether
individually or, in the event that Licensor is a member of a performance rights society (e.g. ASCAP, BMI,
SESAC), via that society, royalties for the public performance or public digital performance (e.g. webcast) of
the Work if that performance is primarily intended for or directed toward commercial advantage or private
monetary compensation.
2. Mechanical Rights and Statutory Royalties. Licensor reserves the exclusive right to collect, whether
individually or via a music rights agency or designated agent (e.g. Harry Fox Agency), royalties for any phonorecord You create from the Work (“cover version”) and distribute, subject to the compulsory license created
by 17 USC Section 115 of the US Copyright Act (or the equivalent in other jurisdictions), if Your distribution of
such cover version is primarily intended for or directed toward commercial advantage or private monetary
compensation.
6. Webcasting Rights and Statutory Royalties. For the avoidance of doubt, where the Work is a sound recording, Licensor reserves the exclusive right to collect, whether individually or via a performance-rights society
(e.g. SoundExchange), royalties for the public digital performance (e.g. webcast) of the Work, subject to the
compulsory license created by 17 USC Section 114 of the US Copyright Act (or the equivalent in other jurisdictions), if Your public digital performance is primarily intended for or directed toward commercial advantage
or private monetary compensation.
5. Representations, Warranties and Disclaimer
UNLESS OTHERWISE MUTUALLY AGREED TO BY THE PARTIES IN WRITING, LICENSOR OFFERS THE WORK AS-IS
AND ONLY TO THE EXTENT OF ANY RIGHTS HELD IN THE LICENSED WORK BY THE LICENSOR. THE LICENSOR
MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND CONCERNING THE WORK, EXPRESS, IMPLIED,
STATUTORY OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MARKETABILITY,
MERCHANTIBILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR THE ABSENCE OF LA-

TENT OR OTHER DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OF ABSENCE OF ERRORS,
WHETHER OR NOT DISCOVERABLE. SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW THE
EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED WARRANTIES, SO SUCH EXCLUSION MAY NOT APPLY TO
YOU.
6. Limitation on Liability. EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW,
IN NO EVENT WILL LICENSOR BE LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY FOR
ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR EXEMPLARY DAMAGES
ARISING OUT OF THIS LICENSE OR THE USE OF THE WORK, EVEN IF LICENSOR HAS
BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
7. Termination
1. This License and the rights granted hereunder will terminate automatically
upon any breach by You of the terms of this License. Individuals or entities who
have received Derivative Works (as defined in Section 1 above) or Collective Works
(as defined in Section 1 above) from You under this License, however, will not
have their licenses terminated provided such individuals or entities remain in full
compliance with those licenses. Sections 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, and 8 will survive any termination of this License.
2. Subject to the above terms and conditions, the license granted here is perpetual (for the duration of the applicable copyright in the Work). Notwithstanding
the above, Licensor reserves the right to release the Work under different license
terms or to stop distributing the Work at any time; provided, however that any
such election will not serve to withdraw this License (or any other license that
has been, or is required to be, granted under the terms of this License), and this
License will continue in full force and effect unless terminated as stated above.
8. Miscellaneous
1. Each time You distribute or publicly digitally perform the Work (as defined in
Section 1 above) or a Collective Work (as defined in Section 1 above), the Licensor
offers to the recipient a license to the Work on the same terms and conditions as
the license granted to You under this License.
2. Each time You distribute or publicly digitally perform a Derivative Work, Licensor offers to the recipient a license to the original Work on the same terms and
conditions as the license granted to You under this License.
3. If any provision of this License is invalid or unenforceable under applicable
law, it shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of the terms
of this License, and without further action by the parties to this agreement, such
provision shall be reformed to the minimum extent necessary to make such provision valid and enforceable.
4. No term or provision of this License shall be deemed waived and no breach
consented to unless such waiver or consent shall be in writing and signed by the
party to be charged with such waiver or consent.
5. This License constitutes the entire agreement between the parties with respect to the Work licensed here. There are no understandings, agreements or
representations with respect to the Work not specified here. Licensor shall not be
bound by any additional provisions that may appear in any communication from
You. This License may not be modified without the mutual written agreement of
the Licensor and You.

Preface
Yet another cell and molecular biology book? At the very least, you would think that
if I was going to write a textbook, I should write one in an area that really needs one
instead of a subject that already has multiple excellent and definitive books. So, why
write this book, then? First, it’s a course that I have enjoyed teaching for many years,
so I am very familiar with what a student really needs to take away from this class
within the time constraints of a semester. Second, because it is a course that many
students take, there is a greater opportunity to make an impact on more students’
pocketbooks than if I were to start off writing a book for a highly specialized upperlevel course. And finally, it was fun to research and write, and can be revised easily for
inclusion as part of our next textbook, High School Biology.
As with every textbook, this one owes a huge debt to the many excellent textbooks
that came before it. And in fact, because I consider this more of a teaching text than a
reference text, if a student is serious about this subject area, and has the funds, I very
strongly recommend picking up one of the classic tomes in this field of biology, either
Molecular Biology of the Cell by Bruce Alberts and colleagues (Garland Science), or
Molecular Cell Biology, by Harvey Lodish and colleagues (W.H. Freeman & Co.). But to
come back to a reason for writing my own text, as wonderful as those two books are,
they are actually overloaded with information for an average introductory (sophomorelevel) course in cell biology.
One of the areas that was carved out of the primary text is the historical perspective
and experimental design that led to the discovery of the molecules and mechanisms
described. This was a difficult decision because I am a strong believer in understanding the scientific thought process and learning from history. In the end though, I
decided to provide that kind of information as ancillary material that can be included
by course instructors at their discretion, because long experience and many conversations with students indicate that even if they thought it was going to be “on the test”,
they tended to gloss over the “names and dates” stuff while studying, and on my end,
I would rather use exam “space” to test them on information more relevant to success
Preface, version 1.01

and understanding of more complex concepts later in the course
(or in more advanced coursework).
This book is free. It has been published with a Creative Commons
BY-NC-SA license, which means that you can copy and distribute
it to anyone you want as long as you do not charge for it, and
you properly acknowledge its origin. You may create derivative
works from it as long as you do not change the original intent
or meaning of the work, and all derivative works must carry the
same kind of license. This license does not apply to any images
marked as being copyrighted and used with permission to do so
in this context only (mostly figures from recent journal articles).
Axolotl Academic Publishing Company is devoted to the idea that
only a scientifically literate general population can make sound
decisions on a host of important governmental and non-governmental matters that involve the many advances in science and
technology that have occurred in the past few decades. Paradoxically, the science literacy of the average citizen did not keep pace
with development by our leading scientists and engineers, and
the widening gap has led to many conflicts that, in our opinion,
may not exist if everyone was fully versed in the science. Complex issues such as genetic engineering or stem cell research have
been boiled down to erroneously simplified sound bite definitions.
Providing free textbooks is just one step of many needed to lower
some of the economic barriers to quality science education.
Although I must claim responsibility for much of the book (for
better or worse), I can only take credit for a little of the art. My
talented illustrator, Patrick J. Burton, did most of the original artwork, and served as a reviewer of the text as well. Sources for all
other figures are acknowledged in the figure caption.
Finally, this book would not have come about had it not been
for the unflagging support from my wife and children, who are
ultimately the reason for everything I do.
						
E.V.Wong

Table of Contents
Anatomy of a Cell					
Basic Cell Chemistry					

1
8

Water	 8
Acids and Bases						
Carbon 							
Sugars 							
Nucleotides							
Amino Acids							
Chirality							
Fatty Acids							
Bioenergetics						
Enzymes							
Enzyme Kinetics						
Regulation of Enzyme Activity				
Membranes						
Membrane Permeability					
Membrane Transport Proteins				
The Action Potential in Neurons				
Metabolism 1						
Glycolysis							
Fermentation							
Oxidative Phosphorylation					
Uncoupling Electron Transport from ATP Synthesis	
Structure of Electron Carriers				
Other Catabolic Reactions					
Starch and Glycogen Depolymerization			
Fatty Acid Breakdown					
Amino Acid Degradation					
Metabolism 2						
Anabolic Reactions						

11
12
13
15
16
18
20
23
27
30
31
36
40
44
49
53
53
58
66
70
71
71
72
72
75
77
77

Preface, version 1.01

Photosynthesis					
The Calvin Cycle					
Gluconeogenesis					
Glycogen synthesis					
Fatty acid synthesis					
Amino acid synthesis					
DNA							
Semi-Conservative DNA Replication			
Prokaryotic Replication				
Eukaryotic Replication 				
DNA Lesions						
DNA Repair						
Telomeres						
Transcription					
Prokaryotic Transcription 				
Eukaryotic Transcription 				
Post-Transcriptional Processing of RNA		
Gene Regulation					
Prokaryotic Transcriptional Regulation 		
Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation 		
Translation					
Prokaryotic ribosomes 				
Eukaryotic ribosomes 				
The Genetic Code 					
tRNAs are rather odd ducks				
Prokaryotic Translation 				
Eukaryotic Translation				
Regulation of Translation				
ER, Golgi, and Vesicles				
Proteolytic Cleavage 					
Protein Trafficking 					
Protein Folding in the ER 				

77
81
86
89
90
91
93
98
98
105
106
110
113
116
119
121
123
129
129
133
139
140
140
141
143
146
149
151
155
155
157
162

N-linked Protein Glycosylation Begins in the ER 			
O-linked Protein Glycosylation takes place entirely in the Golgi	
Vesicular Transport							
Receptor-mediated Endocytosis					
Cytoskeleton							
Intermediate Filaments						
Actin Microfilaments							
Microtubules								
Microtubule Organizing Centers					
Transport on the Cytoskeleton					
Cytoskeletal Dynamics						
Cell Motility								
ECM and Adhesion						
Collagen								
Proteoglycans								
Fibronectins								
Laminins								
Integrins								
Hemidesmosomes							
Dystrophin Glycoprotein Complex					
Desmosomes								
Cadherins								
Tight Junctions							
Ig Superfamily CAMs							
Selectins								
Gap Junctions								
Cell Communication						
Receptors and Ligands						
7-TM receptors (G-protein-coupled)					
Receptor Tyrosine Kinases						
Ca++ Signaling								

Preface, version 1.01

163
166
167
172
175
176
178
179
181
182
189
192
198
199
201
202
203
204
206
207
208
209
211
212
213
215
217
218
219
224
227

Cell Cycle						
The Prokaryotic Cell Cycle				
Controlling the Cell Cycle				
Activation and inactivation of the cyclin		
G1/G0 phase						
S phase						
G2 phase						
Mitosis						
Cell Death						
Meiosis						
Advanced Topics					
Viruses						
Lytic “life” cycle of viruses				
The Lysogenic Pathway				
Cancer							
Oncogenes						
Tumor Suppressor Genes				
Human Cancers					
Metastasis						
The Immune System					
Antibodies						
DNA Rearrangement					

229
229
231
234
236
236
237
237
243
246
253
253
255
257
259
262
264
266
267
268
269
271

Anatomy of a Cell :
A Very Brief Overview

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.
This chapter, as a very simple introductory chapter, has no advanced material, and
anything inthe right column should be considered basic information.

Since this entire course is devoted to understanding the workings of the cell, it is almost
superfluous to dedicate a chapter to identifying the parts of the cell and their functions.
However, because it is easy to get lost in the intricacies of the molecules and chemical reactions within the cell, consider this chapter more of a framework or map for the course, giving
context to the minutiae.
The cell is the smallest unit of life, so all cells, whether they are unicellular organisms
or just a tiny part of a multicellular organism, have certain characteristics in common:
they must contain genetic information and the mechanisms to regulate and use that
information to produce its own parts and to reproduce new cells, they must be able
to use energy in chemical reactions and physical actions, they must be able to regulate
those activities, and they must respond to stimuli.
Cells use DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) for their genetic material, and all cells contain
the transcriptional and translational enzymes to read it and use the information to
construct more cell components. However, simply having genetic material does not
define life: viruses have genetic material containing all the information necessary to
make a complete virus, but it does not contain the enzymes necessary to do so, nor the
ability to obtain the raw molecular material needed to do so. It is absolutely dependent on the machinery inside whatever cell it infects. Therefore, a virus is not a living
organism.
The genome is not only an instruction set for making a cell (or an organism, for that
matter), it is also replicable itself. Roughly speaking, during part of its life cycle, the
cell makes an extra copy of its genome and increases the numbers of all the other
“stuff” (proteins, fats, etc.) of which it is made, and then it reproduces by division: the
mother cell splits into two daughter cells, each with the same complement of genetic
information, and with approximately the same cellular components. Thus we see that
while the genome is often considered the blueprint for a cell/organism, in fact cells are
not built up from scratch directly from DNA. Every cell comes from another cell. The
Chapter 1, The Cell, version 1.0

Page 1

DNA can then be used to customize that cell for specific purposes as determined by its
environment. When a particular component of the cell is needed, the information for
making that component is read from the DNA and copied into RNA which is used as
a program from which ribosomes can manufacture the proteins needed. A living cell
needs all these things: the genetic information, the mechanisms and machinery to use
the information to build cell parts, and the ability to harness energy to do so.
As we will see in chapter 3, the physical laws of nature require that everything tends
towards its simplest, least organized, state unless there is an input of energy to work
against that tendency. Since cells are a highly ordered collection of very complex molecules, they must therefore require energy to remain as cells. Thus, life requires the
ability to obtain energy, either from sunlight or food, and the ability to convert that
energy into forms that can be readily used by the cell to maintain itself by building or
rearranging necessary molecules and macromolecular structures.
How do cells know when to carry out these activities? This leads us to the next characteristic of living cells, the ability to respond to stimuli. In other words, they are
self-regulating. If glucose levels run low and the cell needs energy, glucose transport
proteins are made, or if the cell needs to move to an area of higher food concentration,
the cell cytoskeleton rearranges to move the cell. The cell has the ability to initiate
repair processes if it detects lesions in its genome, it can pause the cell cycle to allow
such repair processes time, and it can even initiate its own death if repairs are repeatedly unsuccessful.

Ribosomes
DNA

Cell Membrane

Cytoplasm

Cell Wall

Capsule

Figure 1. A Prokaryotic Cell.

In addition to responding to internal signals, living cells are also able to respond to
external stimuli. Whether it is contact with a neighboring cell, binding a hormone
released from a cell far away, or simply interacting with non-cellular environmental
objects, a cell is able to respond to such stimuli. Responses may include making new
proteins, destruction of existing proteins, moving away from the stimulus, moving towards the stimulus, initiation of reproduction, and many other possibilities.
There are two basic types of cells: prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The difference is simple
and readily recognizable under light microscopy. Eukaryotic cells contain intracellular
membrane-bound compartments (called organelles). Prokaryotic cells do not contain
any such compartments (fig. 1). There is only one membrane in prokaryotes, the cell
membrane, and only one compartment in prokaryotic cells, the cytoplasm. That does
not preclude a certain level of organization in prokaryotes, but it is not as complex as
eukaryotes. The genomic DNA is usually organized in a central nucleoid. There are
not intracellular membranous organelles, but the cell is defined by a cell membrane.
Outside of the cell membrane, prokaryotes have a cell wall. This wall is relatively rigid
Chapter 1, The Cell, version 1.0

Page 2

and confers shape to the cell. Depending on the type of bacteria, the thickness of the
wall varies (thick = “gram positive”, thin = “gram negative”). Some, but not all bacteria
also secrete another layer outside of the cell wall. This is a relatively tight matrix called
a capsule that helps protect the cell from dessication in dry environments. A comparatively loose matrix of the same types of molecules may be secreted, and instead of
the capsule, the result is called a slime layer. The slime layer is important in bacterial
attachment and formation of biofilms (see chapter 13, Extracellular Matrix).
Eukaryotic cells are considerably more complex. Eukaryotic organisms are currently
classified into four kingdoms: animal, plant, fungus, and protists. The animal cell in
figure 2 depicts has many features in common with cells of the other three kingdoms.

Golgi Body
Cell Membrane
Nuclear Membrane

Lysosome

Smooth
Endoplasmic Reticulum
Nucleus

Rough
Endoplasmic Reticulum

Nucleolus
Peroxisome

Cytoplasm

Free Ribosomes

Mitochondrion

Figure 2. A prototypical animal cell.

Obviously, the biggest difference between the animal cell (or any eukaryotic cell) and
prokaryotic cells is the presence of internal membrane-bound compartments, or organelles. The most prominent of these is the nucleus, which houses the DNA. Traditionally, it has been assumed that most eukaryotic genomes can range from 10 to 100
Chapter 1, The Cell, version 1.0

Page 3

x 106 nucleotides (10-100 Mb) in total length, over two or more chromosomes (DNA
molecules) of roughly similar size. In contrast, prokaryotic genomes have traditionally been viewed as a single circular chromosome, and mostly under a megabase (106
nucleotides) in length.
The nucleus is bounded by a double-layered membrane (most other organelles are
bounded by a single membrane) that is continuous with the the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER). The endoplasmic reticulum is subdivided into the rough ER (RER) and the smooth
ER (SER) based on appearance in electron micrographs. The “studs” on the RER are
ribosomes, which are the molecular machinery for making proteins in the cell. There
are also free-floating ribosomes - the difference is that the free ribosomes make proteins that stay in the cytoplasm, while ribosomes attached to the RER are synthesizing
proteins that are destined to insert into a membrane, localize inside an organelle, or be
secreted out of the cell entirely. The RER makes modifications to the proteins as well
as compartmentalizing them. The SER counts lipid synthesis (e.g. to make membranes)
and detoxification reactions among its duties. It should be noted that ribosomes on the
RER are not permanently attached, and after they have produced a protein, they dissociate from the RER and rejoin the general pool of free ribosomes in the cytoplasm.

Recent and better methods for genome mapping and sequencing,
and a broadening of the sample organisms has shown those numbers to be inaccurate. In fact, eukaryotic genomes range from ~3
Mb to over 4000 Mb. Prokaryotic genomes vary from 0.5 Mb to
a little over 10 Mb (0.5 to 6 Mb for Archaea, 0.6 to 10 Mb for Bacteria) and may be spread over multiple DNA molecules that may
be either linear or circular.

The Golgi complex, or Golgi bodies, while physically independent, are a functional extension to the protein processing and sorting that occurs in the ER. Proteins leave
the Golgi in vesicles bound for the cell membrane or other organelles. Vesicles, while
membrane-bound, are not generally counted as organelles: they are simply small transport packages.
Mitochondria are complex organelles that are not only bounded by a membrane, but
also contain a second membrane that is highly crenulated. Mitochondria make aerobic
respiration possible, using oxygen as an oxidizer to produce chemical energy (i.e. ATP)
far more efficiently than the anaerobic processes used by most prokaryotes. This ability
to produce more energy from the same amount of food allows eukaryotic cells to grow
larger than prokaryotes.
Lysosomes are acidic and contain digestive enzymes that break down large food molecules — particularly proteins and fats — to make them usable by the rest of the cell.
These enzymes work optimally in acidic conditions, which acts as a sort of safety
mechanism: if a lysosome breaks and releases its enzymes into the cytoplasm, they will
not break down cellular components willy-nilly because the cytoplasmic pH is close
to neutral and the enzymes do not work well. Once thought to be exclusive to animal
cells, lysosomes have now been described in all cells from all eukaryotic kingdoms.

Chapter 1, The Cell, version 1.0

Page 4

Peroxisomes also break down or convert molecules, but they generally act on smaller
molecules by oxidation. For example, some peroxisomes in human liver cells are used
to break down alcohol (ethanol). Processes like this often produce H2O2, hydrogen peroxide, as a byproduct. Since H2O2 in high concentrations is harmful, peroxisomes often
contain an enzyme, catalase, that converts it into water and molecular oxygen.
Peroxisome

Nucleolus

Smooth
Endoplasmic Reticulum

Chloroplast
Lysosome

Rough
Endoplasmic Reticulum

Nucleus

Cell Wall

Nuclear Membrane
Central Vacuole

Golgi Body

Cytoplasm
Cell Membrane

Free Ribosomes

Mitochondrion

Figure 3. A typical plant cell.

Plant cells have all of the above named organelles, but additionally may also bear two
other types of organelles: chloroplasts and vacuoles. In addition to this, plant cells also
have a rigid cell wall external to the cell membrane. Chloroplasts are similar to mitochondria in shape and structure (membranes within the outer membrane). However,
its function is very different: chloroplasts absorb light energy from the sun (or other
light sources) and convert them into chemical energy in the form of simple sugars for
the cell to store and use later, in essence turning the cell into a solar energy warehouse
and distribution center. Since plants and some photosynthetic bacteria are the only
Chapter 1, The Cell, version 1.0

Page 5

organisms capable of converting solar energy into a form useful to living cells, they are
crucial to the survival of all other life.
Vacuoles are essentially storage units. They may store starches for use as energy sources
when sunlight is unavailable or when immediate photosynthesis alone is not sufficient
to provide for the energy needs of the cell. Other vacuoles, such as the one depicted
above in fig. 3, store water, which helps the cell to maintain rigidity in combination
with the cell wall.
Plant cell walls are composed of very different materials than the previously mentioned
bacterial cell walls. Plant cell walls are primarily composed of the glucose polymer, cellulose, but contain other polysaccharides as well. Depending on the type of plant cell,
there may be multiple layers of cellulose composing the cell wall. The wood and bark
of trees, for example have both a primary (thin) cell wall and a secondary (thick) wall,
while the leaves would have only a primary wall. Fungi also have cell walls, and they
too are different from bacterial cell walls. True fungi have cell walls that are composed
primarily of the polysaccharide chitin, and no cellulose.

Interestingly, two groups once classified as fungi: oomycetes and
dictyostelids, have cell walls composed of cellulose (and some
have both). These organisms have been reclassified in Protista.

Finally, consider the cytoplasm. Once considered merely the aqueous environment in
which the “important” molecules or organelles floated, it is now better understood to
be filled with important structural and transport elements (fig. 4). The cytoskeleton
provides not only an internal physical structure but also a transport system to move
molecules, vesicles, and even organelles to where they are needed.
All of the cell parts introduced in this chapter will be explained in much greater detail in subsequent chapters. More importantly, the intertwined relationships between
many of the molecules and organelles will be discussed and elucidated. As you go
through this course, you will notice that the same species come up over and over as
examples. These are the model organisms upon which the great majority of molecular
cell biology research is based. Most prokaryotic research has been based on Escherichia
coli (E. coli), which is a Gram-negative rod-shaped bacterium commonly found in the
gut of many higher animals. The Gram-negative soil bacteria, Bacillus subtilis, is a sporeforming organism that has also been used in research because, like E. coli, its genome
is easily manipulated for experimentation, and is also relatively easy to grow in the lab.
On the eukaryotic side, yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae, or Schizosaccharomyces pombe)
are very commonly used for simpler intracellular processes due to simple genetics and
very fast generation times. Caenorhabditis elegans (a nematode) and Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly) are popular invertebrate model organisms, especially for developmental and genetic studies due to the small number of cells, mostly with traceable lineage,
and fast generation time (for metazoans). Frogs, particularly the South African clawed
Chapter 1, The Cell, version 1.0

= Microtubules
= Intermediate Filaments
= Actin Filaments
= Centrosome

Figure 4. Animal cell cytoskeleton

Page 6

frog, Xenopus laevis, and the Northern Leopard frog, Rana pipiens, are popular for certain types of developmental and cell cycle studies because they have huge oocytes that
are amenable to many kinds of genetic and physiological manipulation not possible in
other cells. Arabidopsis thaliana is the most commonly used model organism for the
study of plant genetics. Finally, because they are mammals like us (humans), but breed
quickly and can be genetically manipulated with relative ease, mice (Mus musculus) are
very commonly used in the study of more complex intra- or inter-cellular mechanisms.
More recently, the near complete sequencing of the genome and development of techniques to manipulate it, have made the rat (Rattus norvegicus) another viable research
organism for the study of mammalian genes.

Further information on model organisms can be found at the
United States’ National Institutes of Health web site:
http://www.nih.gov/science/models/

The commonalities that make all of these organisms excellent models for the study of
the molecules of the cell and the interactions between them that constitute life, are a
relatively short generation time, well-described (and in most cases fully sequenced) genome, and ease of experimental manipulation. Most of the molecules and mechanisms
you will learn in the course were discovered in the simpler model mechanisms, and
then found again, often with elaboration in the more complex ones.

Figure 5. Model Organisms. The Northern Leopard frog, Rana pipiens (left), the mustard-family plant, Arabidopsis thaliana (center), and the common rat, Rattus norvegicus
(right). All images released to the public domain by the United States Goverment (USGS, NPS, NIH).

Chapter 1, The Cell, version 1.0

Page 7

Basic Cell Chemistry :
A Review of Chemical Compounds and their Interactions

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.
In this chapter, there are few “advanced” concepts, and the right side text should be
considered clarification and review.

Water
There is no life without water. In this chapter, water will be used to review some very
basic ideas in chemistry, particularly as applies to cell and molecular biology. What is
water? H2O. Two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom (Fig. 1). Together they form
a molecule of water. They are defined as a molecule by the presence of strong chemi-

A

e-

e-

8p
8n

e-

e-

B

e-

δ-

If any of the first five pages is not a review, then your high school
chemistry class failed to prepare you properly for college. Go take
an intro chemistry class before proceeding with this course. Then
go complain to your high school administrators and tell them to
stop dumbing down courses and teaching to the lowest common
denominator.

O
e-

e-

H

H

δ+

δ+
e-

e-

e-

Oxygen
eee-

e-

8p
8n

e-

ee-

1p

1p

Hydrogen

e- e-

1p

Figure 1. (A) Oxygen and hydrogen (B) Water.

cal bonds connecting each atom. In this case, each atom is connected to another by
a covalent bond. These are the strongest type of chemical bonds, and form when two
atoms are sharing electrons in order to fill their outermost (valence) electron shell and
increase stability. In the case shown here, hydrogen (H) has only one electron, and
for maximal stability of that electron shell, it should have two. Oxygen, on the other
hand, has six electrons in its outer shell, and a filled shell would have eight. Thus, it
would “like” to pull in two more electrons for maximal stability. As shown in Fig. 1B,
Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

The volume of an atom is defined by electrons in a very fast and
energetic obit around a nucleus. The electrons are very small
negatively charged particles, and the nucleus is composed of neutrons (electrically neutral) and protons (positively charged), both
relatively massive in comparison to electrons. The electrons’ orbits around the nucleus can be approximated by “shells” or levels.
These shells characteristically have limitations on the number of
electrons that can fit within them: the first shell (closest to nucleus) holds only 2 electrons, while the second shell holds 8, and the
third shell holds 18. The atom is most stable when its outer shell
(and by extension, all inner ones also) is filled. The energy of the
electrons also varies by level - innermost electrons have the least
energy while the outermost electrons have the most.
Page 8

both of those requirements are fulfilled when each of the hydrogen atoms shares an
electron with the oxygen, which also shares an electron each with the hydrogen. The
water molecule can also be written as H—O—H, in which the single solid line indicates
a pair of shared electrons, i.e. a single covalent bond. The energy of an average single
covalent bond is about 80 kcal/mol. However, as shown
H
H
at left, double and even triple covalent bonds are posC C
H C C H
sible. The strength of those types of bonds is slightly less
H
H
than double (~150 kcal/mol) or triple (~200 kcal/mol) the
Ethylene
Acetylene
energy of the single bonds.
Sharing electrons is not the only way to create bonds between atoms. Ionic bonds are
created when an atom donates or receives an electron, rather than sharing one. When
an atom gives up an electron, the electrical balance between the numbers of positively
charged protons in its nucleus and negatively charged electrons is upset, and the overall atom now has a positive electrical charge. Similarly when an atom receives an extra electron, the balance in a neutral atom is upset, and the atom becomes negatively
charged. An ionic bond is formed when one atom donates an electron to an adjacent
atom, creating an ionic pair, one positively and one negatively charged. The electrical
attraction between the oppositely charged atoms holds them together. Ionic bonds
are weaker than covalent bonds, with an average bond energy of ~5.5 kcal/mol. Both
covalent and ionic bonds are thermodynamically stable in dry, room temperature conditions (25°C, 298 K, 77°F). The average energy imparted when molecules collide at this
temperature is only ~0.6 kcal/mol, far less than the energy needed to break a covalent
or ionic bond.
Figure 2. (A) Individually, the Na atom
and the Cl atom are electrically neutral.
However, they are both very reactive
chemically because both need only get
rid of (Na) or take in (Cl) one electron to
have a full outer shell. (B) Because an
electron is completely transferred, the Na
becomes Na+ and Cl becomes Cl-, reflecting the new charge imbalance. Although
electrically no longer neutral, the thermodynamic enhancement from filling
the outer shells makes both of these ions
very stable.

A

Although salts (such as NaCl) are ionic compounds, not all ionic
compounds are salts. The chemical definition of a salt requires
that the compound be formed by the substitution of a hydrogen
ion (H+) in the original compound. This usually occurs in neutralization reactions, such as the neutralization of hydrochloric acid,
HCl (or H+Cl-) with sodium hydroxide (Na+(OH)-), which yields the
salt NaCl, and water (HOH = H2O).

e- ee- e-

ee-

e-

11 p
11 n
e-

e- e-

e-

ee-

e-

e-

ee-

e-

e-

Na

17 p
17 n
e-

e-

e-

e-

e-

e-

e-

e-

e-

e-

e-

e-

e-

Cl

(11 electrons)

(17 electrons)

B

e- ee- e-

ee-

e-

11 p
11 n
e-

e- e-

e-

e-

Na+

(10 electrons)

Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

Bond energy is a measure of the strength of the bond between
two covalently joined atoms, and is proportional to the bond distance, which is determined by the atomic radii. It is not the same
thing as bond dissociation energy, which is the energy released in
a homolytic reaction (bond is split with electrons equally distributed) taking place at absolute zero, but they are similar in being
measures of bond strength.

e-

e-

e-

e-

ee-

e-

17 p
17 n
e-

e-

e-

e-

e-

Cl-

(18 electrons)

Page 9

Covalent and ionic bonds between atoms are the only way to make molecules, which
are stable collections of chemically bonded atoms. However, other attractive interactions between atoms and molecules exist, but they are significantly weaker, and can be
disrupted with relatively small changes in temperature or environmental conditions.
These are van der Waal’s forces. They are very short-range interactions, requiring close
apposition of the two atoms. As mentioned, an individual hydrogen bond (a specific
type of van der Waal’s force described below) or other van der Waal’s interaction can
be easily disrupted, but these types of interactions generally occur en masse. In a sense,
they are like molecular Velcro® - each individual little plastic hook and individual loop
of nylon could barely hold two hairs together, but a suit of velcro can hold a person on
a vertical wall (a la Late Night with David Letterman, 1984).
In the case of hydrogen bonds, these occur when there is permanent asymmetric electron sharing within a covalently bonded molecule so that the shared electrons spend
more time around one nucleus (thus imparting a negative character), than the other
(which is therefore somewhat positive in character) to create a permanent electrical
dipole. These dipole moments can interact with oppositely charged moments on other
molecules or the same molecule. Van der Waals forces also include induced (nonpermanent) dipole-dipole interactions in which a temporary shift in electron density as
they orbit the nucleus forms a minute charge differential, that can induce an opposite
and attractive charge differential in a very close neighboring atom. In fact, some texts
define van der Waals forces exclusively as such, leaving hydrogen bonds as a separate
category altogether. One of the arguments for that idea is that the bond length of the
average H-bond is smaller than the sum of the van der Waal’s radii of the two atoms.
As noted above, hydrogen bonds result from severely uneven sharing of electrons that
generate permanent dipoles. In biological systems, this generally means that a hydrogen is covalently bound to either an oxygen or a nitrogen atom, which are both highly
electronegative atoms, strongly attracting the shared electrons away from the hydrogen. Common hydrogen-bonding pairs are OH :O, OH :N, NH :N, and NH :O.
Dotted lines are a common method for depicting hydrogen bonds in printed text and
diagrams.
Water is a molecule that has a permanent dipole (i.e. it is a polar molecule), with the
highly electronegative oxygen nucleus taking the lion’s share of the shared electrons’
time, leaving the hydrogen nuclei stripped bare down to their protons. The geometry
of the water molecule (Fig. 1B) makes one side of the molecule somewhat negative with
two pairs of free electrons, and the opposite side positive, because the shared electrons
are only rarely near the hydrogen nuclei. This gives water the ability to hydrogen bond,
and is the basis for several of water’s most important qualities. The ability to form
Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

H

H

δ+

δ+

δ+

H

H

H

O

δ+

δ+

δ-

O

H

δO

O

δ+

H

H

δ+

δ+

H

H

δ+

δ-

O

δ-

O

δ+

δ+

O

H

δ-

H

H

H

δ-

O
H

δ+

δ+

δ-

δ+

δ+

δ+

δ+
δ-

H

H

H

H

δ+

O

δ+

δ+

H

H

δ-

O

H

δδ+

δ-

O

O

δ+

Figure 3. The hydrogen bonding of water molecules to one another is an important determinant of the physical properties of water.

δ-

δ-

δ+

H

O

H

δ+

δ+

H

H

δ+

Page 10

many hydrogen bonds leads to a high specific heat of water, and enables it to act as
a generous heat buffer. In order to get enough molecules of water moving faster and
increase the temperature of the water, the energy put into the water must first be used
to break apart the hydrogen bonds without generating heat. This is unlike most other
liquids, which do not link internally with H-bonding. So the water is able to absorb
more heat (energy) without a phase change than many other liquids.
Another important and unique characteristic of water is that the solid phase (ice) is less
dense than the liquid phase. With most other liquids, as the temperature drops, the
molecules have less energy, so they move less, and they stay closer together, increasing
the density. Only part of that holds true with water. Again, the ability to form hydrogen bonds is directly related to this: as the temperature is lowered, the molecules move
around less, affording them more opportunities to form hydrogen bonds. However,
even though they are attractive, the H-bonds also act as spacers separating the water
molecules more than if they were allowed to tumble about together in a liquid without
forming H-bonds.
From a chemical standpoint, the polar nature of water makes it an excellent solvent
for ionic and polar molecules. As you can see in the figure, the hydrogen side of water
interacts with the negatively charged chloride ion, while the oxygen side of water interacts with the positively charged sodium ion, thus easily dissolving the salt. However,
the polarity of water also makes it repel nonpolar molecules or by non-polar regions of
molecules. This property, known as hydrophobicity, is crucial to life, since it is the basis
for the formation of the biological membranes that define a cell. In general terms, the
H-bonding between water molecules is very stable. Non-polar molecules cannot participate in H-bonding, and therefore create areas of instability wherever they are touching aqueous (water-based) solutions. The resolution to this problem is for hydrophobic
molecules to aggregate, thus lowering the total surface area in contact with water. In
living organisms, many protein and lipid molecules are amphipathic, with some portions hydrophobic, while other parts of the molecule are hydrophilic.

This aspect of water chemistry is actually more important to life
in a geologic sense than at the cellular level. At the cellular level,
the consequence is that freezing cells causes the water in them
to expand and burst, killing them at low temperatures unless the
cell has chemicals that act as antifreeze and lower the freezing
temperature of the cytoplasm. On the other hand, at the geological level, when a pond or lake freezes in winter, the ice is less
dense than water, thus staying on top of the pond, insulating
deeper layers, and helping them stay liquid and able to support
life (many organisms migrate deeper down in the winter). If water became more dense as it froze, as many other molecules, ice
would sink, and eventually the entire pond would be completely
solid, killing off most life in it once a year!

Acids and Bases
While it is easiest to think of water as H2O, it is in fact in an equilibrium between the
ionized molecules H+ (which is simply a proton) and OH— (the hydroxyl ion). The H+
itself can be subsequently bound to a water molecule to form a hydronium ion, H3O+.
The release of H+ and OH— are not limited to water molecules, and many compounds
do so in aqueous solutions. These compounds can be classified as acids (raising the
free H+ concentration) or bases (increasing the free hydroxyl concentration]. The ex-

Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

Water can dissociate from H2O into the ions H+ and OH—, in which
the departing hydrogen leaves its electron with the oxygen. However, H+ is extremely reactive and almost immediately attaches to
a nearby water molecule, forming the hydronium ion H3O+.

Page 11

tent to which acids and bases donate or remove protons is measured on the pH scale,
which is a logarithmic scale of relative H+ concentration. Thus the Coca-Cola® that I
am drinking, and which counts phosphoric, carbonic, and various other acids among its
ingredients, has a pH around 3, which means that it liberates 104 times more H+ than
water, which has a pH of 7. Inside cells, the pH range is tightly restricted to slightly
above neutral (neutral = pH 7), although in eukaryotes, various intracellular organelles
(e.g. lysosomes) may have significantly different internal acidity/alkalinity. This is
important biologically because changes in acidity or alkalinity can alter hydrogen and
ionic bonds, thus potentially changing the shape and activity of enzymes and other
biomolecules.
Sometimes, this can be used to an organism’s advantage. For example, cells lining the
stomach of an animal such as yourself secrete the enzyme pepsin into the stomach to
help digest proteins. Pepsin has a pH optimum close to pH 2, which is great because
stomach pH is also around 2. However, considering that cells themselves contain a lot
of proteins, and we don’t want pepsin-containing cells to digest themselves away, what
is the solution? Because the pH inside the cell is close to 7.2, far above the pH optimum
for pepsin, it is inactive inside the cell, and only works after it has been secreted into
an acidic environment.

Carbon
The major constituent molecules in all living organisms are based on carbon. Carbon
has versatility stemming from its four outer shell electrons allowing the possibility
of four covalent bonds with a variety of partners, incuding very stable carbon-carbon
covalent bonds. Because of this, long carbon chains can form the backbone of more
complex molecules, and makes possible the great diversity of macromolecules found in
the cell. The carbon chains themselves are not very reactive, but they often have reactive chemical groups attached to them.
Common groups are the hydroxyl (—OH), carbonyl (—CO), carboxyl (—COOH), and phosphate (—PO4). Carbon chains may even have other carbon chains attached to them:
the smaller ones behave and are named as groups also: methyl (—CH3), ethyl, (—C2H5),
propyl (—C3H7), and so forth. Figure 4B (right) depicts several functional groups that
can be found in the simple molecule, acetic acid (very dilute acetic acid is the primary
component of vinegar).

A

B

e-

O

O

C

C

H3C

e-

e-

6p
6n

Acetic Acid

e-

C
OH

Carboxyl group -COOH

Carbonyl group -CO

eH
H

e-

OH

O

C
H

Methyl group -CH3

O H
Hydroxyl group -OH

Figure 4. (A) The carbon atom has four electrons in its outer shell. (B) Functional
groups that can be identified from a molecule of acetic acid.

Carbon is also the basis for the four major classes of biological molecules: sugars, nucleotides, amino acids, and fatty acids. The first three are classes of molecules that can

Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

Page 12

be strung together by covalent bonds to make important large biomolecules: simple
sugars can form large polysaccharides such as starch, cellulose, or glycogen, nucleotides
can form RNA (ribonucleic acids) or DNA (deoxyribonucleic acids), and amino acids can
form proteins. Fatty acids, on the other hand, are acid derivatives of long chains of
carbons linked to one another, with hydrogens taking up most of the other bonding
positions.

Sugars
Sugars, and glucose in particular, are important molecules for cells because they are
the primary energy source. Sugars have the general chemical formula CH2O, and can
be joined together almost infinitely for storage. However, because they are hydrophilic, they allow water molecules to intercalate between them, and cannot pack as
efficiently as fats, which are hydrophobic and thus exclude water. On the other hand,
the sugars can be mobilized for use more quickly. Therefore, polysaccharides are usually short-term reservoirs of energy for an organism, while fats are used for longer-term
storage.
The general chemical formula cannot fully define a particular sugar, because the same
set of atoms, e.g. C6H12O6 can refer to glucose, fructose, mannose, or galactose, and
that doesn’t even include the stereoisomers. Isomers are rearrangements of the same
atoms, such as with glucose and fructose (fig. 5), while stereoisomers are much more
similar: they are mirror-images of one another. Thus glucose can exist as l-glucose or
d-glucose, depending on whether it is a “left-handed” or “right-handed isomer. This
may seem like an esoteric distinction, but it becomes important in intermolecular interactions, because many are based on recognition of specific shapes, so an l-conformation
molecule may not be recognized by an enzyme that recognizes its d- isomer.
Another important aspect of sugar chemistry is whether it is an aldose or a ketose,
based on the type of carbonyl group it carries. This is easiest to understand looking at
the position of the carbonyl group in the linear structure: put simply, an aldehyde is a
terminal carbonyl group, while a ketone is an internal carbonyl group. Sugars in aqueous solution exist in an equilibrium between the linear form and the ring form, which
is formed by intramolecular attack by a hydroxyl group on the carbonyl. Technically,
the cyclic sugar is a pyranose (6-membered ring) or a furanose (5-membered ring), so
that d-glucose cyclizes into d-glucopyranose. However, in most cell biology courses,
the cyclic sugar will still be referred to as its non-cyclic alter ego. Note that due to the
difference between the C6H12O6 aldose glucose, and the C6H12O6 ketose fructose, cyclization generates a pyranose in one case, and a furanose in the latter (fig. 5), although the

Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

H

C

O
HO

H C OH

H

HO C H

HO

H C OH
H C OH
CH2OH

CH2

CH2OH
O

H
OH

H

H

OH

H
OH

H C

O

HO

HO

H C OH
H C OH

O

CH2

HO C H

H

H

HO

HO

H

CH2 OH

CH2OH

Glucose

Fructose

Figure 5. Glucose is an aldose (terminal carbonyl) that cyclizes into a pyranose,
fructose is a ketose (internal carbonyl) that cyclizes into a furanose.

Page 13

number of carbons (and other atoms) are the same. These two molecules are therefore
recognized differently by the enzymes of the cell, leading to different metabolic pathways.

A

Simple sugars can be joined together by condensation reactions to form glycosidic bonds.
These reactions are called condensation reactions because they form water as a byproduct. The glycosidic bond is an —O— linkage between carbons of two sugars. The
bond is usually named with the specific linkages: for example in cellulose, glucoses are
linked by b(1,4) linkages, which means in a standard ring diagram, the upward-facing
b-hydroxyl on the 1-carbon interacts with the —OH on the 4-carbon of a neighboring
glucose (fig. 6B). [Technically, since only two glucoses are shown here, this is a molecule of cellobiose, not cellulose.] In contrast, the maltose shown in the same figure
(fig. 6A), while also showing two glucoses linked together, is an a(1,4) linkage, with a
downward-facing a-hydroxyl on the 1-carbon.
Large polysaccharides generally have one of two functions: as a very strong structural
component of a cell, and as a storage molecule for readily accessible energy. The two
major structural polysaccharides made by cells are cellulose and chitin. Cellulose is primarily synthesized by plants, while chitin is mostly synthesized by invertebrates (think
crab shells), though it is also made by many fungi and algae. As we just saw, cellulose
is an array of parallel lengths of glucose monomers joined together by b(1,4) glycosidic
bonds (fig. 7). These long glucans are stacked closely on one another so that many Hbonds can form along their lengths, which are virtually limitless, determined by the
needs of the organism. Interestingly, chitin is also a homopolymer linked by b(1,4) glycosidic bonds, but instead of glucose, the monosaccharide used is N-acetylglucosamine
(often abbreviated GlcNAc, see chapter 11). However, the macromolecular structure is
very similar to cellulose, and like cellulose, it is very strong.

Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

H

H

B

H

H

OH

C

H

O

H

H

H

OH

OH

H
4) linkage

CH2

HO

O

H
OH

H

OH
β(1

H

H

O

H

OH

CH2

HO

HO

H

H

H
4) linkage

O

H
OH

O

H

O

OH
α(1

CH2

HO

H

H

H

CH2

HO

O

HO

H

H

HO

α(1

OH

H

6) linkage

O
CH2

HO
H

CH2

O

H

H

H

H

H

H
OH

OH

H

O

H

O

OH

OH

H

Figure 6. (A) the a(1,4) glycosidic bond of maltose, (B) the b(1,4) bond of cellobiose,
and (C) the a(1,6) bond in branching glycogen.

HO
H

As with structural polysaccharides, there are also two primary energy-storage polysaccharides: starch, which is synthesized by plants, and glycogen, which is synthesized by
animals. Starch is actually a mixture of two slightly different polysaccharides. One
is a-amylose, which is a glucose homopolymer like cellulose, but connected by a(1,4)
glycosidic linkages, which makes it completely different structurally. Unlike the linear
and highly stackable cellulose polysaccharides, a-amylose takes on a twisting a-helical
shape. The other starch polysaccharide is amylopectin, which is like a-amylose with
the addition of branches formed from a(1,6) glycosidic bonds every 24-30 residues (fig.
6C). The storage polysaccharide for animals, glycogen, is essentially amylopectin with
a higher frequency of branching, approximately every 8-14 residues. Whereas the tight
packing of the structural polysaccharides renders them waterproof, this is certainly not
the case for starch or glycogen, both of which can interact with many water molecules

CH2

HO

HO
H

CH2

H

OH

CH2

H

OH

HO
H

O

H

H

H

H

HO
O
H

O

H
OH

HO

HO

CH2
H
OH

CH2

H

OH

OH

O

H

OH

H

H

CH2

H

O
H

CH2

H

OH

H

OH

O

CH2

O

H

H

H

H

OH

OH

CH2

H

H

O

H

OH

OH

O

OH

OH

H

CH2

H

H

CH2

H

OH

H

OH

O

CH2

O

H

H

H

H

OH

OH

CH2

H

H

O

H

OH

OH

O

H
OH

OH

H

CH2
H
OH
H

H

O
H

CH2

H

H

OH

OH

OH

H

CH2

O

H
OH

H

H

OH

H

H

HO
O
O
H

H

H

O

H
OH

H

O

H

HO

H

CH2
H
OH

O

H

H

O

H

CH2
H
OH

O

H

HO

O

H

CH2

H

O
H

H
OH

O
H

H

H

HO

CH2

H

OH

O

H
OH

H
OH

H

H

HO

O

H

HO
O
H

O
H

H

CH2
H
OH

HO

CH2

H

O

H

O

H
OH

H
OH

H

HO
O
H

OH

HO

H

H

H

O

H
OH

H
OH

H

H

HO
O

HO

O

HO

H

H

CH2
H
OH

O
H

H

O

H

CH2
H
OH

O

H

HO

O

H

CH2

H

O
H

H
OH

O
H

H

H

HO

CH2

H

OH

O

H
OH

H
OH

H

H

HO

O

H

HO
O
H

O
H

H

CH2
H
OH

HO

CH2

H

O

H

O

H
OH

H
OH

H

HO
O
H

OH

HO

H

H

H

O

H
OH

H
OH

H

H

HO

H

HO

H

HO

O

HO

H

H

CH2
H
OH

O

O

HO
H

CH2
H
OH

H
OH

O

H
OH

H

O
H

H

CH2

O

H
OH

H

H

OH

H

Figure 7. Cellulose is a very strong material due to the many hydrogen bonds (in
β(1 4) linkage
red) possible when strands of b(1,4)-linked glucoses are aligned.

Page 14

simultaneously, and swell up with the hydration, as any cook who has ever made a
pudding (the thickening ingredient is starch from corn) can attest.

Nucleotides

H
H

H

H2C
H
O-

P

H

O
O

O-

C

O

N

N

C

H

P

O

H

OH

O

O

N

H

U

O

CH2

H

H

NH2

H

O-

5’

H

3’

N

O

H2C
H
OH

G

H

OH

O
-O

H
NH2

N

O

O

H

H

OH

N

P

P

N

N

O

O

3’

H

N

-O

O
N

O
H

A
H

N

H

OH
O

O

H

H

H

H

O

O

O

CH3

T

P

H

O-

CH2
O

N

H N

N

A

O
H2C

O

NH2
N

O

H

O

O

P

H

H

O
-O

N

N

P

H

H

G

H 2N

H

H

H

O

N

O

H2C

H N

N

C

O

N

H

O

-O

CH2

O

NH2

H

N

N

O

H2C

O

P

H

H

N

O

O

O

-O

N
H

H

O

P

O

H

H

O

NH2

H
O-

O

O

N

P
O

H

N

C

H

O

N

H

G

N

H

NH2

O-

H2C

H

N

O

H2C

O

5’
-O

CH2

H2N

H

H

O

H

P

N

N

O

-O

H

3’

OH

H

H
O

A

H

H

N

N

O

N

O

H2C

H

O

O

N

O

T

O

H

P

B

H2N

O
H 3C

O-

H

5’
-O

H

DNA or RNA are built from nucleotides through linkages of the sugars, and the polymerization occurs by condensation reactions, but these bonds are not glycosidic bonds
like with polysaccharides. Instead, bonds form between the 5’ phosphate group of one
nucleotide and the 3’ hydroxyl group of another. These are phosphodiester bonds, and
a quick glance at the structure (fig. 8) explains the naming: an ester bond is a carbonoxygen linkage, and the phosphodiester bond is a C-O-P-O-C, so there are two esters
with a phosphorus linking them. With the purine or pyrimidine base on the 1-carbon,
this arrangement places the bases on the opposite side of the sugar from the polymerizing phosphodiester bonds. This forms a sugar-phosphate backbone to the DNA/RNA,
which then has the bases projecting out from it.

A

H

Nucleotides, the building blocks of RNA and DNA, are themselves composed of a pentose sugar attached to a nitrogenous base on one side and a phosphate group on
another. The sugar is either the 5-carbon sugar ribose or its close cousin, deoxyribose
(the “deoxy” refers to a “missing” hydroxyl group on the 2-carbon, which has an H instead). The attached nitrogenous base can be a purine, which is a 6-member ring fused
to a 5-member ring, or a pyrimidine, which is a single 6-membered ring. These bases
are usually adenine (purine), guanine (purine), thymine (pyrimidine), and cytosine (pyrimidine) for DNA, with a substitution of uracil for thymine in RNA bases. However,
there are also some unconventional and modified bases that show up in special situations, such as in tRNAs. In addition to being the monomer components of DNA and
RNA, nucleotides have other important functions as well. The best known, adenosine
triphosphate, or ATP, is the primary “instant” energy source for the cell by the energy
released through hydrolysis of its terminal phosphate group.

H

O

H

OH

NH2
N

N

H
O
-O

O

O

N

P O P O P O CH2
O-

O-

OH

O

H

H

OH

OH

N

H

H

Figure 8. (A) DNA and (B) RNA differ by the presence of —OH on the 2-carbon of
ribose but not deoxyribose and the use of uracil in RNA instead of thymine. Both
are constructed from nucleotides like adenosine triphosphate (C).

The bases will then likely interact with the bases of other nucleotides, whether part
of another nucleic acid strand or free-floating. Not only do they interact, but they
interact with great specificity and consistency: adenines base-pair with thymines (or
uracils) through two hydrogen bonds, while guanines interact with cytosine through
three H-bonds. Note that while one extra hydrogen bond does not appear to be particularly significant, the attraction between G-C is 50% stronger than between A-T, and
over long stretches of DNA, areas high in G-C content are significantly more difficult to
unzip (separate strands) than areas high in A-T pairs. This specific base-pairing, known
as Chargaff’s rules, is the basis for life: base-pairing is needed to make DNA double-

Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

Page 15

stranded which gives an organism a built-in backup of genetic information and it is also
the basis for transforming that information into proteins that form the bulk of a cell.
Nucleic acids, the long polymers of nucleotides, exist in either single or double stranded
forms in vitro. However, in the cell, most RNA is single-stranded, and most DNA is
double-stranded. This difference is important to their function: RNA is a temporary
information transfer molecule for a particular gene, DNA is the permanent repository
of all genetic information needed to make an organism. Therefore, RNA needs to be
easily read, meaning that the bases need to be accessible, and not locked to a complementary strand. Its long-term stability is not particularly important because when it
is made, usually many copies are made at the time, and it is only needed while the
cell needs to make the protein it encodes. Conversely, the same strand of DNA is read
over and over to make the RNA, and since there are only two copies of each chromosome (a chromosome is a single double-stranded DNA molecule) in a cell, the ability
to maintain the integrity of the DNA is crucial. Because of base pairing, each strand
of DNA contains all the information necessary to make a complete exact copy of its
complementary strand.
Of course, the point of the genetic information in DNA is to encode the production of
proteins that can then carry out the functions that define cellular life. Some of those
functions, such as DNA replication, gene regulation, transcription, and translation, require the proteins to interact with a nucleic acid. Usually, part of the recognition
process involves apposition of a positively charged region of the protein to the DNA (or
RNA), which is a very negatively charged molecule, as expected from all the phosphates
in the sugar-phosphate backbone. RNA, but not DNA (with some exceptions), can also
interact with itself by complementary base-pairing. If a stretch of RNA sequence comes
into contact with a stretch of RNA with a complementary sequence on the same molecule, then base-pairing can occur. Depending on the number of nucleotides between
the complementary areas, secondary structures such as stem-and-loops and hairpins
can form.

Amino Acids
Most of the major molecules of the cell - whether structural, like cellular equivalents
of a building’s girders and beams, or mechanical, like enzymes that take apart or put
together other molecules, are proteins. Proteins interact with a wide variety of other
molecules, though any given interaction is usually quite specific. The specificity is determined in part by electrical attraction between the molecules. So, what determines
the charge of different regions of a protein?

Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

Page 16

NH3+

Polar Charged:

NH

C
O
O

O-

C

CH2
+H N
3

C

+H N
3

O-

C

H
N+

CH2

CH2

HC

CH2

CH2

CH2

C

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

C

C

+H N
3

O-

C

C

C

O-

+H N
3

H O
Lysine
(Lys, K)

H O
Glutamic acid
(Glu, E)

H O
Aspartic acid
(Asp, D)

NH

NH3+

CH2

O-

C

O-

C

+H N
3

H O
Arginine
(Arg, R)

C

N

C

CH
CH2

H2C

H

H2C

O-

N
+

H

H O
Histidine
(His, H)

C C OHO
H

Proline
(Pro, P)

Polar Uncharged:

OH
O

+H N
3

C

NH2

OH

CH3

CH2

CH2

H C OH

CH2

C

O-

C

+H N
3

H O
Serine
(Ser, S)

C

C

O-

+H

3N

H O
Threonine
(Thr, T)

C

O

C

NH2
CH2

CH2
C

O-

+H N
3

H O
Glutamine
(Gln, Q)

C

+H N
3

O-

C

C

C

O-

H O
Tyrosine
(Tyr, Y)

H O
Asparagine
(Asn, N)

Nonpolar:
H3C
H3C

CH2
+H N
3

C

C

O-

+H

3N

H O
Alanine
(Ala, A)

CH3
CH
C

C

CH2
O-

+H

3N

H O
Valine
(Val, V)

+H N
3

C

C

O-

H O
Glycine
(Gly, G)

3N

C

C

H

O

Cysteine
(Cys, C)

S

O-

3N

C

+H N
3

C

H O
Isoleucine
(Ile, I)

C

CH2
C

CH2
C

H O
Methionine
(Met, M)

H C CH3
+H

NH

CH2

CH2

C

CH3

O-

CH3

CH2
+H

C

H O
Leucine
(Leu, L)

SH
H

CH3
CH

O-

+H N
3

C

C

H

CH2
C

H O
Phenylalanine
(Phe, F)

O-

+H

3N

C

O-

C

H O
Tryptophan
(Trp, W)

O-

Nonessential a.a.
(Human)

Figure 9. The Amino Acids. The backbone is shown in black, while the side chains are colored red. Amino acids circled in blue can be synthesized by humans, while the uncircled amino acids
must be ingested. Amino acids with a yellow background have unique structural considerations: the extremely small side chain of glycine allows it to fit into tight spaces, the sulfhydryl group of
cystein allows the formation of disulfide bonds, and the cyclic structure of proline introduces a forced bend in the polypeptide chain.

Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

Page 17

Amino acids (figure 9), which are joined together to make proteins, may be positively
charged (basic), negatively charged (acidic), polar, or nonpolar, based on the characteristics of their side chains. The charge on the amino or carboxyl end of each amino
acid does not play a role in the overall character of any particular region of the protein,
because they are effectively neutral, having been linked, the amino group of one amino
acid to the carboxyl group of another, by a peptide bond. Note the figure of the amino
acid: it is one carbon, called the a carbon, linked to amino and carboxyl groups on
opposite sides, and to hydrogen, and a side chain, denoted by R. These side chains, of
which there are twenty common ones, can be as simple as a hydrogen atom (glycine),
or could be quite complex, involving extended ring structures (histidine, phenylalanine). The variety in their size, shape, and charge all add up to an extremely versatile
set of building blocks for some of the most important working molecules of the cell.
In the cell, a peptide bond is formed between two amino acids with enzymatic help
from the ribosome. Like the previous two polymerizing reactions, formation of peptide
bonds is a condensation reaction in which the carbon of the carboxyl group and the nitrogen from the amino group of their respective amino acids are bonded together (fig.
10). This is a very stable bond due to resonance of the amide group. In the cell, peptide
bonds are mostly nonreactive, except when attacked by proteolytic enzymes.
Figure 10. Peptide Bond Formation.
A condensation reaction between
CH2
the carboxyl group of alanine and
and the amino group of valine genH N C C Oerates a peptide bond linking the 2
two amino acids, with a molecule of
H O
water as a byproduct.
Alanine

CH2
H2 N

C

C

H

O

H3 C
H2N

CH3
CH
C

C

O-

H O
Valine

H3C

CH3
CH

N

C

C

H

O

O-

+ H2O

A peptide is an inexact term used for relatively few (usually <30) amino acids joined
together. Each amino acid in a polypeptide or protein may also be referred to as a
“residue” which can sometimes be confusing because the same term is also applied to
monomers of nucleic acids and of polysaccharides. Larger polymers are known as polypeptides or as proteins, although polypeptide has more of a structural connotation and
may be used to indicate an unfinished or not-yet-functional state, whereas protein generally implies some physiological function. On of the key characteristics of proteins is
the ability to form secondary, tertiary, and for proteins, quaternary structure by means
of specific folding patterns. If you think of a long piece of thread, yarn, or rope, you
Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

Chirality
Almost all amino acids (glycine is the exception) are optically active, which means that they are asymmetric in such a way that
it is impossible to superimpose the original molecule upon its
mirror image. There is a “handed-ness” about them, much as
your right hand cannot be superimposed on your left hand if
both palms must face the same
direction. In fact, in the figure
here, you can also understand
why glycine is an exception,
since its R-group is a simple hydrogen atom.
figure released to public domain by NASA

Chiral pairs, or enantiomers, not only have the same atomic components like all isomers, they also have the same bonds and bond
order. The term “optically active” comes from the discovery that
polarize light is rotated in different directions by enantiomers.
Amino acids are often labeled as either d- (dextrorotatory) or l(levorotatory) depending on their atomic configuration in relation
to the enantiomers of glyceraldehyde. This is a common naming
system, but not always logical, in that almost half of the l-amino
acids are in fact dextrorotatory (clockwise rotation of light), but
their molecular configurations resemble the levorotatory isomer
of glyceraldehyde.
Ribosome-created proteins and peptides are all constructed with
l-amino acids. However, d-amino acids do exist in nature, and
can be incorporated into peptides through non-ribosomal means.
An excellent example is found in the cell walls of some bacteria.
Because most proteolytic enzymes only act on proteins with lamino acids, the incorporation of d-amino acids into the cell wall
can protect the bacteria from harm. These D-amino acids are
incorporated by transpeptidase. Transpeptidase is also the target
of the antibiotic, penicillin, which is an irreversible inhibitor of
that enzyme.

Page 18

can probably imagine an infinite number of different ways to arrange it, from spirals to
loops to random tangles. This is essentially what can happen with a protein with the
constraints put upon it by the size and charge of the amino acids that compose it.
The primary structure of a protein is simply the sequence of amino acids that compose
the protein. These amino acids are joined by peptide bonds from the carboxyl terminal
of one amino acid to the amino terminal of the next. Secondary structure refers to
the localized, simple, shapes that can be formed, such as alpha-helices, or beta-sheets.
These come about primarily through hydrogen bonding to nearby (relative to the primary structure) residues.

Not surprisingly, the proteins of thermophilic archaebacteria
such as Thermophilus aquaticus (Taq) or Pyrococcus furiosus
(Pfu) have a high proportion of cysteines and disulfide bonds,
since they live in deep sea volcanic ocean vents under high pressure and temperatures.

Tertiary structure is 3-dimensional structure that is built upon arrangements of second-

A

G

T

Y

G

S

S

F

D
S S

B
α helix

C
β sheet
Figure 11. (A) Primary structure, (B) Secondary structure: an a-helical region,
(C) Secondary structure: a b-pleated sheet region, (D) Tertiary structure.

ary structures, often through disulfide bonds and hydrophobic interactions in addition
to hydrogen bonding. In the context of structural stability, cysteine plays a special role.
Beyond the primary structure, most protein folding is held in place by hydrogen bonds.
Although strong enough in most situations, they can be disrupted without extraordinary energy. Disulfide bonds ( —S—S—) are covalent bonds that form between the
sulfhydryl groups of two cysteines that effectively locks the local protein structure in
place, making the protein extremely stable.
Finally, quaternary structure is the arrangement of different individual polypeptides
(subunits) into a functional protein. Obviously, only multi-subunit proteins have a
quaternary structure.

Figure 12. Quaternary structure is illustrated here by hemoglobin, which is composed of four independent polypeptide subunits that come together in a specific
conformation to make a functional hemoglobin protein.

Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

Page 19

Fatty Acids
Unlike monosaccharides, nucleotides, and amino acids, fatty acids are not monomers
that are linked together to form much larger molecules. Although fatty acids can be
linked together, for example, into triacylglycerols or phospholipids, they are not linked
directly to one another, and generally no more than three in a given molecule. The
fatty acids themselves are long chains of carbon atoms topped off with a carboxyl
group. The length of the chain can vary, although most are between 14 and 20 carbons,
and in higher order plants and animals, fatty acids with 16 and 18 carbons are the major
species. Due to the mechanism of synthesis, most fatty acids have an even number
of carbons, although odd-numbered carbon chains can also be generated. More variety can be generated by double-bonds between the carbons. Fatty acid chains with
no double bonds are saturated, because each carbon is saturated with as many bonded
hydrogen atoms as possible. Fatty acid chains with double bonds are unsaturated (fig.
13). Those with more than one double bond are called polyunsaturated. The fatty acids
in eukaryotic cells are nearly evenly divided between saturated and unsaturated types,
and many of the latter may be polyunsaturated. In prokaryotes, polyunsaturation is
rare, but other modifications such as branching and cyclization are more common than
in eukaryotes. A table of common fatty acids is shown below.
Myristic Acid

14:0 (14 carbons, no double bonds)

Palmitic Acid

16:0

Stearic Acid

18:0

Arachidic Acid

20:0

Palmitoleic Acid

16:1

Oleic Acid

18:1

Linoleic Acid

18:2

Arachidonic Acid

2:4

There are significant physical differences between the saturated and unsaturated fatty
acids due simply to the geometry of the double-bonded carbons. A saturated fatty acid
is very flexible with free rotation around all of its C-C bonds. The usual linear diagrams
and formulas depicting saturated fatty acids also serve to explain the ability of saturated fatty acids to pack tightly together, with very little intervening space. Unsaturated
fatty acids, on the other hand are unable to pack as tightly because of the rotational
constraint impoarted by the double bond. The carbons cannot rotate around the double bond, so there is now a “kink” in the chain. Generally, double-bonded carbons in
fatty acids are in the cis- configuration, introducing a 30-degree bend in the structure.
Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

H
O
C
HO

C
H

H
H
C

C
H

H

H
H
C

C
H

H

H
H
C

C
H

H

H
H
C

H
H

C

C

H

H

H
H

C

C

H

H

H
H

C

C

H

H

H
H

C

C H

C

H

H

H

H

Stearic acid
H
O

C

C

H

HO

H
H
C
H

C
H

H
H
C
H

C
H

H
H
C

C
H

H
C

H
C

H

H

H
C

C
H

Oleic acid

H

H

H
C

C
H

H

H

H
C

C
H

H

H

H
C

C
H

H

H

Figure 13. Fatty acids. (Top) Stearic acid is a fully saturated fatty acid with no
carbon-carbon double bonds. (Bottom) Oleic acid is an unsaturated fatty acid.

O

H
H C

O

H C

O

H C

O

H

C
O
C
O
C

Figure 14. Triglycerides. These lipids are formed by conjugation of a glycerol to
three fatty acyl chains through ester bonds from each glycerol oxygen.

Page 20

Fatty acids inside cells are usually parts of larger molecules, rather than free acids.
Some of the most common lipids derived from fatty acids are triacylglycerols, phosphoglycerides, and sphingolipids. Triacylglycerols, as the name implies, is three fatty acid
(acyl) chains connected to a glycerol molecule by ester bonds (fig. 14). Triacylglycerols,
also known as triglycerides, may have fatty acids of the same (simple triacylglycerols)
or varying types (mixed triacylglycerols). Mixtures of these are the primary long-term
energy storage molecules for most organisms. Although they may be referred to colloquially as fats or oils, the only real difference is the degree of saturation of their constituent fatty acids. Mixtures with higher percentages of saturated fatty acids have a
higher melting point and if they are solid at room temperature, they are referred to as
fats. Triacylglycerol mixtures remaining liquid at room temperature are oils.

H3C

H H

H3C N+ C
H3C

O

C

H H

Choline

H

P

O C

H

O-

H C

O

H C

O

Phosphate

H

Glycerol

Hydrophilic Head Group

In human medicine, a common test for heart disease risk factors is measurement of
triglyceride levels in the blood. Although various cell types can make and use triglycerides, most of the triglycerides in people are concentrated in the adipose tissue, which
is made up of adipocytes, or fat cells, though liver is also a significant fat store. These
cells have specialized to carry fat globules that take up most of the volume of the cell.
When triglyceride levels in the blood are high, it means that fat is being produced or
ingested faster than it can be taken up by the adipocytes.
Phospholipids (also called phosphoglycerides or glycerophospholipids), are also based
on attachment of fatty acids to glycerol. However, instead of three fatty acyl tails,
there are only two, and in the third position is a phosphate group (fig. 15). The phosphate group also attaches to a “head group” . The identity of the head group names the
molecule, along with the fatty acyl tails. In the example figure, 1-stearoyl refers to the
stearic acid on the 1-carbon of the glycerol backbone; 2-palmitoyl refers to the palmitic
acid on the 2-carbon of the glycerol, and phosphatidylethanolamine refers to the phosphate group and its attached ethanolamine, that are linked to the glycerol 3-carbon.
Because of the negatively-charge phosphate group, and a head group that is often polar
or charged, phospholipids are amphipathic - carrying a strong hydrophobic character
in the two fatty acyl tails, and a strong hydrophilic character in the head group. This
amphipathicity is crucial in the role of phospholipids as the primary component of cellular membranes.
Sphingolipids (fig. 16) are also important constituents of membranes, and are based
not upon a glycerol backbone, but on the amino alcohol, sphingosine (or dihydrosphingosine). There are four major types of sphingolipids: ceramides, sphingomyelins, cerebrosides, and gangliosides. Ceramides are sphingosine molecules with a fatty acid tail
attached to the amino group. Sphingomyelins are ceramides in which a phosphocholine or phosphoethanolamine are attached to the 1-carbon. Cerebrosides and ganglioChapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

O H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H

O

C C C C C C C C

C

C

C C

C C

C

C H

H H H H H H H H H H H H H H H
O H H H H H H H

Fatty Acid Chains

H
H
C C C C C C C C C
H
H
C
H H H H H H
H
C
H
C
H
H
C
H
H
C
H
C
H
C
H
H
H
H

Hydrophobic Tail

Figure 15. A phospholipid: the glycerol backbone (red) connects to two fatty acids
and to a phosphate and polar head group.

A

H

HO C

H

H C

NH3+

H C

C

C

HO

H

H

B

H3C

H H

H3C N+ C
H3C

C

HO
H
HO

CH2

C

O

H H

H

H

OH

H

P

O C

H

O-

H C

NH

H C

C

C

HO

H

H

O
C

H

O

H
OH

O

H

O C

H

H C

NH

H C

C

C

HO

H

H

O
C

Figure 16. Sphingolipids are based on the amino alcohol, sphingosine (A). Ceramides have a fatty acid tail attached, and a ceramide with a phosphocholine head
group is a sphingomyelin (B). If the head group is a sugar, then the molecule is
a cerebroside. (C).

Page 21

sides are glycolipids - they have a sugar or sugars, respectively, attached to the 1-carbon
of a ceramide. The oligosaccharides attached to gangliosides all contain at least one
sialic acid residue. In additional to being a structural component of the cell membrane,
gangliosides are particular important in cell to cell recognition.
Lipids are vaguely defined as biological compounds that are insoluble in water but are
soluble in organic solvents such as methanol or chloroform. This includes the fatty
acid derivatives listed above, and it includes the final topic for this chapter, cholesterol.
Cholesterol (fig. 17) is the major biological derivative of cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene, a saturated hydrocarbon consisting of four fused ring formations. It is an
important component of plasma membranes in animal cells, and is also the metabolic
precursor to steroid hormones, such as cortisol or b-estradiol. Plant cells have little if
any cholesterol, but other sterols like stigmasterol are present. Similarly, fungi have
their particular sterols. However, prokaryotes do not, for the most part, contain any
sterol molecules.
CH3

H3C
CH3

CH3

CH3

HO

Figure 17. Cholesterol is an important lipid both as a membrane component and as a steroid precursor.

Chapter 2, Cell Chemistry, version 0.2

Page 22

Bioenergetics:

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the
vertical divider, and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced
course are printed in blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally,
additional biomedically relevant information can be found in red print on either
side of the divider.

Energy, Thermodynamics, and Enzymes

Two fundamental concepts govern energy as it relates to living organisms: the First
Law of Thermodynamics states that total energy in a closed system is neither lost nor
gained — it is only transformed. The Second Law of Thermodynamics states that entropy constantly increases in a closed system.
More specifically, the First Law states that energy can neither be created nor destroyed:
it can only change form. Therefore, through any and all processes, the total energy of
the universe or any other closed system is constant. In a simple thermodynamic system, this means that the energy is transformed either by the transfer of heat energy (i.e.
heating and cooling of a substance) or by the production of mechanical work (i.e. movement). In biological and chemical terms, this idea can be extended to other forms of
energy such as the chemical energy stored in the bonds between atoms of a molecule,
or the light energy that can be absorbed by plant leaves.

Work, in this case, need not imply a complicated mechanism. In
fact, there is work accomplished by each molecule in the simple
expansion of a heated mass of gaseous molecules (as visualized
by expansion of a heated balloon, for example). This is expressed
mathematically as the Fundamental Thermodynamic Relation:
		
dE = T dS — p dV
in which E is internal energy of the system, T is temperature, S is
entropy, p is pressure, and V is volume.

The Second Law dictates that entropy always seeks to increase over time. Entropy is
simply a fancy word for chaos or disorder. The theoretical final or equilibrium state is
one in which entropy is maximized, and there is no order to anything in the universe
or closed system. Spontaneous processes, those that occur without external influence,
are always processes that convert order to disorder. However, this does not preclude
the imposition of order upon a system. Examining the standard mathematical form of
the Second Law:

Unlike the First Law which applies even to particles within a
system, the Second Law is a statistical law — it applies generally
to macroscopic systems. However, it does not preclude smallscale variations in the direction of entropy over time. In fact, the
Fluctuation theorem (proposed in 1993 by Evans et al, and demonstrated by Wang et al in 2002) states that as the length of time
or the system size increases, the probability of a negative change
in entropy (i.e. going against the Second Law) decreases exponentially. So on very small time scales, there is a real probability that
fluctuations of entropy against the Second Law can exist.

DSsystem + DSsurroundings = DSuniverse, where DSuniverse > 0
shows that entropy can decrease within a system as long as there is an increase of
equal or greater magnitude in the entropy of the surroundings of the system.
The phrase “in a closed system” is a key component of these laws, and it is with the idea
encapsulated in that phrase that life can be possible. Let’s think about a typical cell:
in its lifetime, it builds countless complex molecules - huge proteins and nucleic acids
formed from a mixture of small amino acids or nucleotides, respectively. On its surface,
Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

The “universe” is a closed system by definition because there is
nothing outside of it.

Page 23

this example might seem to be a counterexample to the second law - clearly going from
a mixture of various small molecules to a larger molecule with bonded and ordered
components would seem to be a decrease in entropy (or an increase in order). How is
this possible with respect to the second law? It is, because the second law applies only
to closed systems. That is, a system that neither gains nor loses matter or energy.
A living cell is not a closed system: it has inputs and outputs. However, the second law
is still useful if we recognize that the only way that it can be bypassed is through the
input of energy. If a cell cannot take in food (input of matter and energy into the system) it dies, because the second law requires that everything eventually breaks down
into more random/chaotic collections of smaller components. The order required to
sustain life (think about all the different complex molecules that were mentioned in
the previous chapter) is phenomenal. The same thing applies on the organismal level
(fig. 1) - without an input of energy (in the form of food molecules for animals or in the
form of light for plants), the organism will die and subsequently decompose.
Creating molecules from atoms costs energy because it takes a disordered collection of
atoms and forces them, through chemical bonds, into ordered, non-random positions.
There is likewise an energy cost to formation of macromolecules from smaller molecules. By imposing order in the system, there must be an associated input of energy.
This happens at every level of the system: atoms to molecules, small molecules to macromolecules, groups of molecules to organelles, etc.

Figure 1. In the top panel,
depicting an open system in
which there are inputs for
matter and energy (in the
form of food), the box is open
and air can be exchanged, food
dropped in, etc, thus allowing
the mouse to grow. However,
in the bottom panel, depicting
a closed system, the mouse
does not have ready access any
more oxygen than is in the box,
nor does it have access to food.
Without these inputs, the second law takes effect, and the
mouse dies and decomposes
into many smaller molecules.

A

B

A

B

C

C

X

As the polymerizing reaction reduces entropy, it requires energy
generated (usually) by the breakdown of ATP into AMP and PPi,
which is a reaction that increases entropy.

Where does that energy go? It ends up in the bonds that are holding the molecules or
macromolecules in their ordered state. When such a bond is broken, and a molecule
is turned back into a collection of atoms, energy is released. The energy in a chemical
bond is thus potential energy - it is stored energy that, when released, has the ability
to do work. This term, if you recall your high school physics, is usually learned along
with kinetic energy, which is energy that is being used in the process of actually doing
work (i.e. moving an object from one place to another). The classic example is the rock
on the top of a hill: it has potential energy because it is elevated and could potentially
come down. As it tumbles down, it has kinetic energy as it moves. Similarly in a cell,
the potential energy in a chemical bond can be released and then used for processes
such as putting smaller molecules together into larger molecules, or causing a molecular motor to spin or bend - actions that could lead to pumping of protons or the
contraction of muscle cells, respectively.
Coming back to the second law, it essentially mandates that breaking down molecules
releases energy and that making new molecules (going against the natural tendency towards disorder) requires energy. Every molecule has an intrinsic energy, and therefore
Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

Page 24

whenever a molecule is involved in a chemical reaction, there will be a change in the
energy of the resulting molecule(s). Some of this change in the energy of the system
will be usable to do work, and that energy is referred to as the free energy of the reaction. The remainder is given off as heat.
The Gibbs equation describes this relationship as DG=DH-TDS. DG is the change in free
energy, DH is the change in enthalpy (roughly equivalent to heat), T is the temperature
at which the reaction takes place, and DS is the change in entropy. As a matter of convention, release of free energy is a negative number, while a requirement for input of
energy is denoted with a positive number. Generally, a chemical reaction in which DG
< 0 is a spontaneous reaction (also called an exergonic reaction), while a chemical reaction in which DG > 0 is not spontaneous (or endergonic). When DG = 0, the system is in
equilibrium. DG can also be expressed with respect to the concentration of products
and reactants:
DG = DG° + RT ln ([P1] [P2] [P3] ... / [R1] [R2] [R3] ...)
Terms in square brackets denote concentrations, DG° is the standard free energy for the
reaction (as carried out with 1M concentration of each reactant, at 298K and at 1 atm
pressure), R is the gas constant (1.985 cal K-1 mol-1), and T is the temperature in Kelvin. In
a simpler system in which there are just two reactants and two products:
aA + bB

cC + dD

the equation for free energy change becomes
 [C ]c [D ]d 

DG = DG° + RT ln 
 [A]a [B ]b 


This is important to us as cell biologists because although cells are not very well suited
to regulating chemical reactions by varying the temperature or the pressure of the reaction conditions, they can relatively easily alter the concentrations of substrates and
products. In fact, by doing so, it is even possible to drive a non-spontaneous reaction
(DG > 0) forward spontaneously (DG < 0) either by increasing substrate concentration
(possibly by transporting them into the cell) or by decreasing product concentration
(either secreting them from the cell or by using them up as substrates for a different
chemical reaction).

Changes in substrate or product concentration to drive a non-spontaneous reaction are
an example of the more general idea of coupling reactions to drive an energetically unfavorable reactions forward. Endergonic reactions can be coupled to exergonic reactions
as a series of reactions that ultimately is able to proceed forward. The only requirement is that the overall free energy change must be negative (DG < 0). So, assuming
standard conditions (DG = DG°’), if we have a reaction with a free energy change of +5
Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

Page 25

kcal/mol, it is non-spontaneous. However, if we couple this reaction, to ATP hydrolysis
for example, then both reactions will proceed because the standard free energy change
of ATP hydrolysis to ADP and phosphate is an exergonic -7.3 kcal/mol. The sum of the
two DG values is -2.3 kcal/mol, which means the coupled series of reactions is spontaneous.
In fact, ATP is the most common energy “currency” in cells precisely because the -7.3
kcal/mol free energy change from its hydrolysis is enough to be useful to drive many
otherwise endergonic reactions by coupling, but it is less costly (energetically) to make
than other compounds that could potentially release even more energy (e.g. phosphoenolpyruvate, PEP). Also, much of the -14.8 kcal/mol (DG°’) from PEP hydrolysis would
be wasted because relatively few endergonic reactions are so unfavorable as to need
that much free energy.
Even when a reaction is energetically favorable (DG < 0), it may not occur without a little “push”, chemically speaking. The “push” is something called activation energy, and it
overcomes thermodynamic stability. Consider glucose, for instance. This simple sugar
is the primary source of energy for all cells and the energy inherent within its bonds is
released as it breaks down into carbon dioxide and water. Since this is large molecule
being broken down into smaller ones, entropy is increased, thus energy is released from
reaction, and it is technically a spontaneous reaction. However, if we consider a some
glucose in a dish on the lab bench, it clearly is not going to spontaneously break down
unless we add heat. Once we add sufficient heat energy, we can remove the energy
source, but the sugar will continue to break down by oxidation (burn) to CO2 and H2O.

Why is ATP different from other small phosphorylated compounds? How is it that the g-phosphoanhydride bond (the most
distal) of ATP can yield so much energy when hydrolysis of glycerol-3-phosphate produces under a third of the free energy? The
most obvious is electrostatic repulsion. Though they are held
together by the covalent bonds, there are many negative charges
in a small space (each phosphate carries approximately 4 negative
charges). Removing one of the phosphates significantly reduces
the electrostatic repulsion. Keeping in mind that DG is calculated
from the equilibrium of both reactants and products, we also see
that the products of ATP hydrolysis, ATP and phosphate, are very
stable due to resonance (both ADP and Pi have greater resonance
stabilization) and stabilization by hydration. The greater stability
of the products means a greater free energy change.

Transition state

Free energy

Non-enzymecatalyzed
reaction

Activation energy (EA)
of uncatalyzed reaction

Enzyme-catalyzed
reaction

Initial state

Activation energy (EA)
of catalyzed reaction

Reactants

Free energy of reaction (∆G)
with or without enzyme

Final state

Products

Progress of reaction

Figure 2. Catalysts lower the activation energy barrier to chemical reactions without altering the free energy change for that reaction.

Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

Page 26

Put another way, the reactant(s) must be brought to an unstable energy state, known
as the transtion state (as shown at the peak of the graphs in fig. 2). This energy requirement barrier to the occurrence of a spontaneous thermodynamically favored reaction
is called the activation energy. In cells, the activation energy requirement means that
most chemical reactions would occur too slowly/infrequently to allow for all the processes that keep cells alive because the required energy would probably come from
the chance that two reactants slam into one another with sufficient energy, usually
meaning they must be heated up. Again, cells are not generally able to turn on some
microscopic bunsen burner to generate the activation energy needed, there must be
another way. In fact, cells overcome the activation energy problem by using catalysts
for their chemical reactions. Broadly defined, a catalyst is a chemical substance that
increases the rate of a reaction, may transiently interact with the reactants, but is not
permanently altered by them. The catalyst can be re-used because it is the same before
the reaction starts, and after the reaction completes. From a thermodynamic standpoint, it lowers the activation energy of the reaction, but it does not change the DG.
Thus it cannot make a non-spontaneous reaction proceed; it can only make an already
spontaneous reaction occur more quickly or more often.

Enzymes
Biological catalysts are called enzymes, and the overwhelming majority of enzymes are
proteins. The exceptions are a class of RNA molecules known as ribozymes, of which
most act upon themselves (i.e. part of the RNA strand is a substrate for the ribozyme
part of the strand). In this book (and most textbooks in this field), unless otherwise
specified, the term enzyme refers to one made of protein. Enzymes confer extraordinary specificity to a chemical reaction: a reaction that might occur between a variety
of potential substrates in an uncatalyzed situation may only be allowed between two
specific substrates when catalyzed by an enzyme. Enzymes allow cells to run chemical
reactions at rates from a million to even a trillion times faster than the same reactions
would run under similar conditions without enzymes. In some cases, the enzymes allow reactions to proceed that would normally (i.e. sans enzyme) require more extreme
temperature, pressure, or acidity/alkalinity. Finally, and perhaps most importantly for
life, enzymes can be regulated. This is crucial for the cell, since it must be able to react
to different situations, such as availability of energy, accumulation of toxic byproducts,
the need to reproduce, etc. Not only can enzymes be modified either covalently or noncovalently to increase or decrease their activity, the cell can also regulate production
of the enzymes, providing another level of control over particular cellular biochemical
reactions.

Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

Page 27

Enzymes are the most diverse type of protein in a cell. They vary not only in size, but
also in the number of independently manufactured subunits that must come together
to form an active enzyme, or holoenzyme. Part of the reason for requiring so many
different enzymes is that they are usually very specific for their substrate molecules,
and that specificity is based upon a combination of shape and charge. The interactions between substrate and enzyme are often likened to a lock and key or pieces of
a jigsaw puzzle. If the substrate fits the shape of the enzyme’s active site (the part of
the enzyme that carries out the actual catalytic reaction), and the charges interact (e.g.
positively charged amino acids on the enzyme lining up with negative charges on the
substrate), then there may be further stabilization of the interaction by Van der Waals
and hydrogen bond interactions. In fact, formation of a stable Enzyme-Substrate (ES)
intermediate is energetically analogous to the transition state (fig. 2) of reactions.
The specificity of enzymes is such that stereoisomers may not be recognized by some
enzymes: for example, a protease (enzymes that chop up proteins into smaller pieces
by hydrolyzing the peptide bonds between specific amino acids) such as trypsin can
be stymied by the presence of a D-amino acid in place of the usual L-amino acid in a
protein, even though it is a mirror image of the very same amino acid. This specificity
means that enzymes are highly selective with respect to the reactions they catalyze,
which means that specific reactions can be greatly enhanced without causing a general
increase in many related chemical reactions. Another implication of the high specificity is that enzymes can (and often do) have high affinity for their substrates without
the problem of binding non-substrate molecules (other than specific inhibitors - see
below).
If most biochemical reactions would proceed extremely slowly, if at all, without catalysis, enzymes are needed to lower the activation energy needed for chemical reactions
to support life. Exactly how does an enzyme lower the activation energy of a reaction?
What exactly does “activation energy” mean in the context of a cell? To understand
this, there are two principles to keep in mind: first, when we talk about chemical
reactions, generally, we are concerned with populations of substrate, product, and enzyme molecules, not individuals; and second, the reactions are generally taking place
between molecules dissolved in the aqueous cytoplasm of the cell.

Enzyme Classification
Enzymes have been catalogued and classified since the 1950’s, during which time there was an explosion of enzyme discoveries and
a need for a unified nomenclature and catalog. An International
Commission on Enzymes was established (yes, of course I’m serious, why do you ask?) and thus started the Enzyme List. This list
is now kept up-to-date online at http://www.chem.qmul.ac.uk/
iubmb/enzyme.
All enzymes now have both recommended names for common
usage, often reflecting historical naming, and a systematic name,
which is highly specific. They also have a classification number
based on their activity. The major classes of enzymes are (1)
Oxidoreductases, which carry out oxidation-reduction reactions,
(2) Transferases, which transfer functional groups, (3) Hydrolases,
which carry out hydrolysis reactions, (4) Lyases, which eliminate
groups to form double bonds, (5) Isomerases, which rearrange the
bonds in a molecule but do not add or remove atoms, and (6) Ligases, which form bonds in reactions coupled to ATP hydrolysis.
As an example, DNA ligase (recommended name) catalyzes the
formation of a phosphodiester bond between the 3’ end of one
DNA fragment and the 5’ end of another. Its rather long and tedious systematic name is “poly(deoxyribonucleotide):poly(deoxyr
ibonucleotide) ligase (AMP-forming)” and its classification number is 6.5.1.1. As a ligase, it is class 6; because it forms phosphoric
ester bonds, it is subclass 5; the sub-subclass of 1 in this case is
meaningless because it is the only sub-subclass of phosphoricester bond-forming ligases, but the final number designates the
DNA ligase separately from other 6.5.1 enzymes such as RNA ligase, which is 6.5.1.3.

Consider a reaction in which substrates A and B interact to form product C (fig. 3). If
this reaction is not catalyzed, it depends on the happenstance that a molecule of A runs
into a molecule of B in just the right orientation, and with the right amount of energy,
to react and form the new molecule. We can conceptualize “activation energy” as the
difficulty in getting A and B together perfectly so the reaction can proceed. How might
an enzyme lower this activation energy? By making it easier for A and B to find each
Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

Page 28

other with the right orientation and energy. So it could have binding sites for molecule
A and molecule B, and once it has bound these two molecules, it changes its conformation, bringing A and B together under exactly the right conditions to react and form C.
Once the reaction is complete, the product floats off because the enzyme has no affinity
for it, and the enzyme returns to its initial shape, ready to bind more substrates.
A

wrong
orientation

B

X

C

too little/too much
energy

B

X

C

A

A

C

B

A

Enzymes may also facilitate a chemical reaction by acting as a
temporary holding site for an active group being transferred from
one substrate to another. Alternatively, temporary formation of
hydrogen bonds or even covalent bonds between the enzyme and
substrate can alter chemical characteristics of the substrate to
make it react more easily. An example of enzyme mechanisms on
the molecular level is shown in Chapter 5: Figure 1.

C

B
Enzyme

Figure 3. Enzymes can lower activation energy by binding substrates individually and bringing
them together under optimal conditions to react.

Another example may be found with enzymes that break apart a molecule (figure 4). In
order for a molecule to break apart, it may need to collide with another molecule with
sufficient energy to break one or more of its covalent bonds. An enzyme that catalyzes
A

Substrate

B

Enzyme

Enzyme

C

D

Enzyme

C

Products

Enzyme

Figure 4. The enzyme (A) binds a specific substrate, leading to a conformational
change (B) that stresses the molecule (C) until it breaks down into two smaller
component molecules (D), which are released.

the breakdown reaction might bind to the molecule, and in binding it, undergoes a
conformational shift that bends or twists the molecule in such a way that the bonds
in the substrate molecule are weakened or broken. These two examples oversimplify
the chemistry of enzyme activity into a mechanical idea, but the general relationship in
how an enzyme lowers activation energy for a reaction is accurate.
Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

Page 29

Initial reaction velocity (v)

Vmax

Enzyme-catalyzed

Vmax
2

Non-enzyme-catalyzed

Km

Substrate concentration [S]

Figure 5. Saturation curve for a single-substrate enzyme-catalyzed reaction.

Enzyme Kinetics
Unlike uncatalyzed (but readily occurring) reactions, in which the rate of the reaction
is dependent only on the concentration of the reactants, the rate of enzyme-catalyzed
reactions is limited by the number of enzyme molecules available. This maximal rate
of turnover from substrate to product is a function of the speed of the enzyme and
the number of enzyme molecules. Vmax, this theoretical maximal rate or reaction, is approached when there is such a high concentration of substrate molecules that not only
is every available enzyme at a given time occupied, but as soon as an enzyme finishes
converting substrate to product, it immediately binds a new substrate. Another term,
Km, is related to Vmax in that Km (the Michaelis constant) is the concentration of substrate at which half-maximal reaction rate (Vmax/2)occurs. These two terms are related
in the Michaelis-Menten equation, which describes the reaction rate v with respect to
the substrate concentration [S].
			

Vmax [S]
v = 			
KM + [S]

Figure 6. Michaelis-Menten Equation

The Michaelis-Menten equation assumes a simple reaction of the form:
k

k3
E + S ‡ˆ ˆˆk1ˆ†ˆˆ ES 
→E + P

The Michaelis-Menten equation was derived by Leonor Michaelis
and his graduate student Maud Menten in 1913, based on work by
Victor Henri, and is applicable only to simple enzyme kinetics in
which there is only one substrate that is changed immediately to
a product during the reaction without forming any intermediate
compound, the enzyme in question shows no allostericity, and
the reaction is unidirectional.
It should be noted that the reaction rate v is actually the initial reaction rate at a particular substrate concentration, and is
sometimes denoted vo. Naturally, as the reaction continues, the
substrate concentration decreases, along with the reaction rate.

2

where E is an enzyme, S is the substrate, and P is the product. Note the formation of
the intermediate enzyme-substrate complex, ES, which is a transition state (recall fig. 2)
in which the substrate is unstable and associated with the enzyme. In fact, ES could as
Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

Page 30

easily be considered EP, since this state is essentially the tipping point between the conversion from substrate to product. In this construction, the Michaelis constant, KM, of
an enzyme-catalyzed reaction is (k2 + k3) / k1. That is the rate of ES dissociation over the
rate of ES association. KM, of course, varies not only depending on the enzyme, but also
with respect to the identity of the substrate. Some enzymes can work with multiple
substrates, and the KM of that enzyme for the different substrates is usually different.
Because the saturation curve in Fig. 5 can be difficult to work with, linearizations of the
Michaelis-Menten equation were developed. The most common is the double reciprocal
plot, better known as the Lineweaver-Burk plot. On this type of graphical representation of enzyme kinetics, the reciprocal of the substrate concentration is plotted against
the reciprocal of the reaction velocity. This generates a line in which the x-intercept is
then -1/Km, the y-intercept is 1/Vmax, and the slope of the line is Km/Vmax.

Noncompetitive
inhibition
1
V

Obtaining Vmax and Km from a direct plot of v against [S] can be
difficult because even at very high substrate concentrations, experimental data may still be significantly under the Vmax. This
leads to underestimation of the Vmax.
The Lineweaver-Burk plot addresses this concern, but has some
shortcomings of its own. Because it is easier to obtain data at
high concentrations, most of the data points are near 0, and
fewer data points are available further out (to the right of the
graph). Because these are reciprocals, under these low [S] conditions, small errors in measured values of v turn into large errors
in 1/v, and therefore large errors in KM and Vmax. This is evident on
examination of the Lineweaver-Burk equation:
1  KM  1
1
				
+
=

v

 V max  [ S ] V max

Figure 8. Lineweaver-Burk Equation

Competitive
inhibition

Uninhibited enzyme
1
Vmax
-1
Km

1
[S]

Figure 7. Lineweaver-Burk plot of enzyme kinetics and the effect of competitive and non-competitive inhibitors at constant concentrations.

Regulation of Enzyme Activity
Figure 7 (and 9) also illustrates the effects of two different types of inhibition on the
different components of enzyme kinetics. Enzymes can be slowed down or even prevented from catalyzing reactions in many ways including preventing the substrate from
entering the active site or preventing the enzyme from altering conformation to catalyze the reaction. The inhibitors that do this can do so either reversibly or irreversibly.
The irreversible inhibitors are also called inactivators, and either bind to the enzyme
with such high affinity as to be virtually irreversible, or they actually form covalent
bonds with the enzyme. Reversible inhibitors are generally grouped into two basic
types: competitive and non-competitive.

Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

Finasteride (trade names include Propecia and Proscar) is an irreversible inhibitor that binds very tightly to the enzyme 5-a-reductase, used in converting testosterone to dihydrotestosterone.
It is used in the treatment of male pattern baldness, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and prostate cancer.
Aspirin is an example of an irreversible inhibitor that actually
forms a covalent bond with the enzyme. The aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) transfers its acetyl group onto a serine residue on
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2). This stops the production of inflammation-producing prostaglandins and thromboxanes by COX-2.
Page 31

Competitive inhibition is perhaps the simplest to understand. The inhibitor molecule
competes directly with the substrate for the active site of an unbound enzyme. If an
inhibitor binds to the active site, the substrate is unable to do so until the inhibitor has
vacated the site. Thus, one could potentially overwhelm competitive inhibition with
sufficiently larger concentrations of substrate so that the probablility that the enzyme
bumps into a substrate to bind becomes exceeding large compared to the probablility of bumping into an inhibitor. Normal, uninhibited Vmax is then achieved despite
the presence of the competitive inhibitor, which has only affected the Km, that is, the
concentration of substrate needed to reach Vmax/2. This is the kinetic signature of competitive inhibitors: with increasing inhibitor concentrations, KM is increased but Vmax is
unaffected.

Methotrexate is a competitive inhibitor of dihydrofolate reductase
(DHFR), an enzyme that synthesizes tetrahydrofolate, which is a
precursor for purine synthesis, and therefore for DNA and RNA.
It has a very similar molecular structure for folic acid, the natural
substrate of DHFR. Methotrexate is used as an anti-cancer drug
because it affects rapidly reproducing cells (which need to make
DNA sooner than other cells) more than non-cancerous cells.

Initial reaction velocity (v)

Vmax(E) , Vmax(C)

Uninhibited
enzyme

Competitive inhibition

Vmax(E) Vmax(C)
2
2
,

Vmax(N)

Noncompetitive inhibition

Vmax(N)
2

Km(E) Km(C)
Km(N)

Substrate concentration [S]

Figure 9. Saturation curves for enzyme-catalyzed reactions without inhibitor (red) with
competitive inhibitor (blue) at a constant concentration, and with noncompetitive inhibitor (green) at a constant concentration.

Non-competitive inhibition involves inhibiting the enzyme by altering its ability to
complete the catalyzed reaction through binding of the enzyme at a position that is not
the active site. When the inhibitor binds to the enzyme, it causes a change, usually conformational, that may either prevent the enzyme from binding the substrate, or prevent
the enzyme from acting upon a bound substrate. In either case, increasing the availability of substrate will not ultimately overcome the effect of the inhibitor. Thus, Vmax
is reduced because some proportion of the enzymes are no longer usable, but because
the enzymes that are available have the same access to substrate as it would without
inhibitor (that is, it is not in competition with an inhibitor), the Km is not affected.
Non-competitive regulation is one example of allosteric regulation of enzymes. Allosteric interactions occur when the binding of a ligand (not necessarily a substrate) to a
protein influences the binding of another ligand to the protein at a separate binding
Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

Many of the enzymes in metabolic pathways (chapters 5 and 6)
are regulated by a naturally occurring non-competitive inhibitor.
One example is phosphofructokinase (PFK), which is involved in
glycolysis, which produces ATP for the cell. However, if there are
high enough levels of ATP in the cell that other cellular processes
aren’t using, the it can bind to phosphofructokinase outside of its
active site (it binds fructose-6-phosphate), and turn it off. This
blocks glycolysis and production of excess ATP when the cell does
not need it. As ATP is used up, there is less available to inhibit
PFK, and glycolysis starts back up.
There are two models for allosteric interactions. The symmetry model, also known as the concerted model, or MWC model
(Monod, Wyman, and Changeux, 1965), proposes that the allosteric enzyme is an oligomer of several subunits, each of which are
symmetrically related, and can be in either a “tensed” or “relaxed”
state, but all of the subunits are in the same state and at equilibrium. When a ligand binds, it changes the state of the subunit(s) to
which it binds, and to maintain equilibrium, that in turn causes
the state of the other subunits to match, thus altering binding
properties for a subsequent ligand. The sequential model, or
the KNF model (Koshland, Nemethy, and Filmer, 1966), proposes
Page 32

site. These kinds of interactions can be either positive (activating) or negative (inhibitory), and either homotropic (both ligands are identical) or heterotropic (ligands are
different). Interestingly, sometimes the regulator ligand may actually be a product of
the catalyzed reaction. In this kind of feedback mechanism, the progress of a reaction
is self-regulating.
Product
released

2

1

Active
site

Enzyme

Enzyme

Product
released

2

1

Active
site

Allosteric
site

Enzyme

Enzyme

Allosteric
site

Increasing product
concentration

3

Increasing product
concentration
3

X

= Reactants
= Product

Enzyme

Negative feedback
by allosteric binding
leading to decreased enzyme activity

= Reactants
= Product

Change in
conformation

Enzyme

Positive feedback
by allosteric binding
leading to increased enzyme activity

Figure 10. Feedback control loops. (Left) Negative feedback is a common biological mechanism for self-regulating processes. The product of the reaction, either by itself or inconjunction with other molecules, acts as
an allosteric inhibitor of the enzyme. (Right) Positive feedback is less common because it can lead to rapid
expansion of the scope of a reaction, and requires an external (relative to the enzymatic reaction) mechanism
for slowing or stopping the reaction.

While important, especially pharmaceutically, the use of enzyme inhibitors is not the
only way to regulate enzymes. There are numerous examples of one type of enzyme
activating or inhibiting another. The most common general example are the protein
kinases. These enzymes phosphorylate (transfer phosphate group to) other enzymes
and thereby activate them. Kinases are generally fast and very specific, and this is an efficient method for activating large numbers of particular enzymes quickly. Conversely,
protein phosphatases are enzymes (also quite fast, but much less specific than kinases)
that remove the phosphate groups from phosphorylated proteins, thereby turning off
those enzymes. Keep in mind that this is a generalization, and that not all phosphorylations are activating. In addition to enzymatic inhibition of enzymes, there is also inhibition by binding and sequestration of the substrates. In fact, the antibiotic vancomycin
works just this way, binding to the substrate peptide for transpeptidase and preventing
the enzyme from recognizing it. Transpeptidase normally helps stabilize the cell wall
of certain bacteria by altering some of the proteins, and without its activity, the protection of the cell wall is compromised and the bacteria may be more easily killed.

Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

something quite different: although it also supposes subunits in
either tensed or relaxed states, it does not require all subunits to
be connected in such a way as to mandate that all subunits be
in the same state, and therefore conformational changes in one
subunit need not be propagated to all. Instead, using an inducedfit model of ligand binding rather than the more rigid basic lock
and key mechanism, it suggests that when a ligand binds to the
enzyme, it induces a slight conformational change in the active
site that increases its affinity for the ligand. The conformational
change may slightly alter the conformation of other subunits of
the enzyme, but may not constitute a state change between relaxed and tensed depending on how tightly the subunits are interacting. However, the change is enough to increase substrate
affinity in adjacent subunits.

Most cell/molec courses stop the discussion of enzyme inhibitors at competitive vs non-competitive based on their kinetic profiles. However, it should be noted that if you take a biochemistry
course, you may encounter the terms uncompetitive inhibitor and
mixed inhibitor. These terms are defined not just by the enzyme
kinetics, but the mechanism of interaction: Uncompetitive inhibitors bind only to the enzyme-substrate (ES) complex, and not to
the enzyme before it has encountered substrate. This leads to
decreased Vmax and decreased Km. Mixed inhibition means that the
inhibitor can bind to either enzyme alone or the enzyme-substrate complex. Because the affinities of the inhibitor for the two
forms of the enzyme are different, and because part of it depends
on substrate concentration while the other kind of binding does
not, generally, Vmax decreases and Km increases. Non-competitive
inhibition is a special case of mixed inhibition in which the catalytic activity of the enzyme is diminished or abolished, but the
ability to bind substrate is unaltered.

Page 33

The activity of enzymes is greatly influenced by both pH and temperature, as expected
from the discussion of protein structure in the previous chapter. Activity profiles of
most enzymes shows a peak of activity that tails off on either side, whether it is pH
or temperature. This is an innate characteristic of the enzyme. For example, pepsin, a
digestive enzyme secreted into the stomach (pH 2) does not function when the pH > 5.
On the other hand, another digestive enzyme, trypsin, which is secreted into the duodenum (proximal small intestine) where the pH is ~8, does not work in acidic environments. Changes in pH can change ionization of amino acid side chains that can thereby
alter interaction with the substrate, or lead to changes in tertiary structure.

Well over half of the enzymes discovered so far do not act in the
simplistic Michaelis-Menten one-substrate-one-product mechanism, but rather operate with two substrates and two products,
usually with the transfer of an active group. These types of reactions are sometimes known as Bi Bi reactions. There are two
major classes of these reactions: the sequential reactions, in which
all substrates bind with the enzyme before the reaction proceeds,
and the ping pong reactions, in which one or more products are
created and released before all of the substrates have been bound.
In fact, unlike sequential reactions, the two substrates do not interact with one another while bound to the enzyme.

Figure 11. pH dependence of enzymatic activity. This graph depicts three
hypothetical enzymes with acidic, neutral, and basic pH optima.

Similarly, at suboptimal temperatures, the likelihood of protein-substrate interaction
is low but above the optimal temperature, the increased energy can lead to breaking
of hydrogen bonds within the structure of the enzyme, resulting in changes that inactivate the catalytic ability of enzyme or prevent it from binding substrate with sufficient affinity. The temperature optimum of most enzymes is very close to its typical
environment. Thus, a human enzyme would operate optimally around 37°C, while an
enzyme from bacteria that live in deep-sea volcanic vents (e.g. Thermophilus aquaticus)
might have temperature optima over 90°C. This is one of the reasons that refrigeration
can slow down growth of microorganisms (which obviously have no ability to regulate
their temperature), and why most microorganisms are killed (enzymes permanently
denatured) when put into sustained high temperature environments. Interestingly,
the DNA polymerase from the T. aquaticus bacteria, also commonly called Taq polymerase, is used in a rapid DNA-amplifying lab technique known as PCR (polymerase
chain reaction, see Methods chapter) in which samples are repeatedly heated to high
temperatures to separate DNA strands in preparation for making copies of them. DNA
polymerases from most prokaryotic or eukaryotic species would be denatured and inactivated by the high heat, but Taq has evolved (with respect to its tertiary structure)
for extraordinary structural stability even in heat extremes.
Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

Page 34

Finally, many enzymes require a molecular partner that has no catalytic activity of its
own, but like a catalyst, is not permanently altered by the chemical reaction. These
molecules are cofactors. Some are simple: elemental, in fact, including metal ions such
as Zn++ or Ca++. Others are slightly more complex: small organic cofactors are called
coenzymes, and accomplish the same thing, acting as a required partner to the enzyme
in catalyzing a reaction. The interaction with the enzyme itself varies and may be only
transient, as in NAD+/NADH which are coenzymes used in redox reactions, or permanently bound to the enzyme by covalent bond like the heme group of hemoglobin.
Often the function of the coenzyme is to provide an active group to facilitate the catalyzed reaction. Coenzyme A, in various metabolic pathways such as glycolysis or the
tricarboxylic acid cycle, can be bound to a substrate to form a stable product that then
acts as an intermediate. The Co-A is released from the molecule as it undergoes the
next step in a series of reactions in the metabolic pathway (see Chapter 5).
From a human health standpoint, it is interesting to note that many coenzymes are
vitamins, or derived from vitamins. These are the B vitamins biotin (B7), cobalamin (B12),
folic acid (B3), niacin/nicotinamide (B9), pantothenic acid (B5), pyridoxine (B6), riboflavin
(B2), and thiamine (B1). Vitamins are small organic compounds that are not synthesized
by an organism and must therefore be ingested. They are generally needed only in
small quanitities, but necessary nonetheless. Naturally, the vitamins we are familiar
with are those required by humans. The specific roles of these vitamins and the consequences of not having enough of them are discussed later in this textbook, as the
enzymes that they work with are introduced in detail.

Chapter 3, Bioenergetics, v. 1.01 Sep09

Page 35

Membranes:

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the
vertical divider, and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced
course are printed in blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally,
additional biomedically relevant information can be found in red print on either
side of the divider.

Structure, Physical and Chemical Properties, and Function

Biological membranes are the basis for many important properties of the cell, not the
least of which is to physically define the cell boundary, and in eukaryotes, the boundaries
of each intracellular organelle. However, they are not completely impermeable boundaries, and through embedded proteins, the membrane serves as the gatekeeper for the
passage of specific molecules into (e.g. nutrients) and out of (e.g. waste) the cell. Other
embedded proteins can identify the cell to other cells, and participate in numerous interactions with the environment or other cells. Finally, the membrane, or more precisely,
the chemical gradients across the membrane, is an important energy source for the cell.

Membrane Structure and Composition
Since most cells live in an aqueous environment and the contents of the cell are also
mostly aqueous, it stands to reason that a membrane that separates one side from the
other must be hydrophobic to form an effective barrier against accidental leakage of materials or water. In the earlier chapter on the basic biomolecules, cellular membranes
were partially defined as being composed primarily of phospholipids: molecules consisting of a phosphorylated polar head group attached to a glycerol backbone that has two
long hydrocarbon tails.  The composition of the hydrocarbons can vary in length and
degree of saturation, and there is also variation in the head groups.  It is also important
to remember that although we concentrate on the phospholipids as the primary components of the membrane, there are other significant parts: other lipids, including cholesterol, integral and peripheral membrane proteins, and glycosylated lipids and proteins. 
Because the phospholipids are amphipathic, meaning they have a hydrophilic head and
hydrophobic tail, the simplest conformation for a small group of phospholipids in aqueous solution might be expected to be a micelle (fig. 1A), but is this actually the case? 
Mixtures of hydrophobic molecules and water are thermodynamically unstable, so this
structure would protect the hydrophobic fatty acyl tails from the aqueous environment
with which the head groups interact.  Micelles can form with other amphipathic lipids,
the most recognizable being detergents such as SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate, also called
Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

Page 36

sodium lauryl sulfate), used in common household products such as shampoos. The detergents act by surrounding hydrophobic dirt (1B) and holding it in solution within the
micelle to be rinsed away with the water. At smaller sizes, the micelle is fairly stable;
however, when there are a large number of phospholipids, the space inside the micelle
becomes larger and can trap water in direct contact with the hydrophobic tails (1C). 
This renders the micelle unstable, so a large single layer of phospholipid is unlikely to
serve stably as a biological membrane.  Micelles form easily with SDS and other singletailed lipids because their overall shape (van der Waals envelope) is conical (1D), which
lends itself to fitting tight curvatures. However, phospholipids are more cylindrical,
and it is harder to fit them into a tight spherical micelle. If they do form micelles, they
tend to be larger, and likely to collapse.
Figure 1.
A

B

C

D

unstable

?
On the other hand, a phospholipid bilayer (figure 2A) could form a fatty acyl
sandwich in which the polar head groups face outward to interact with an aqueous
environment, and the fatty acids are sequestered in between.  However, this does
not resolve the problem on the edges of the sandwich.  Sometimes, a collapsed
micelle can form a closed bilayer in which the edges appear to be sealed, but due
to the shape of the phospholipids, there is poor contact between acyl chains. Such
a tight bend is unstable and the edge phospholipids are likely to break apart from
one another. So, the solution to the ideal phospholipid structure in an aqueous
environment is a spherical phospholipid bilayer (2B and cutaway in 2C) : no edges
mean no exposed hydrophobicity. 
Figure 2.

A

Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

B

C

Just as overly large micelles will be unstable, there is also a minimal concentration of lipid needed for a micelle to form. This
is known as the critical micelle concentration (cmc) and is a
property of each particular lipid. Below the cmc, there are not
enough amphipathic lipids to mutually shield their hydrophobic
tails from the water, and the more likely position of the lipids is
on the surface of the aqueous solution, hydrophilic heads in contact, with the hydrophobic tails in the air.
Liposomes are artificial spherical bilayers (Fig.2) that are used
both in research for study of both membrane lipids and integral
membrane proteins. They are also used to deliver drugs and other macromolecules into cells for either research of therapeutic
purposes. A common method for getting DNA, a large molecule
that is not normally transported into cells, into a cell is called
lipofection. This technique involves creating liposomes within a
solution containing the DNA of interest. This traps the DNA into
the liposome, which can then be applied to cells. The liposomes
then fuse with the plasma membrane and deliver the DNA into
the cell.
Another technique for introducing foreign DNA into a cell is
electroporation, which illustrates the self-sealing property of the
phospholipid bilayer (figure 3). The cell (usually thousands of
cells, actually) is placed in a DNA solution and subjected to an
electric current. This transiently pulls on the cell membrane in
all directions, causing many small holes to open up. DNA then
moves into the cell, and the holes spontaneously heal. Of course,
the process is not perfect, and due to variations in the cells and
in the electric field, some cells will be unable to reseal the holes,
or for other reasons may not survive the process.
Figure 3.

Page 37

The stability of the spherical phospholipid bilayer does not imply that it is static in
its physical properties.  In most physiologically relevant conditions, the membrane is
cohesive, but fluid. It can mold its surface to the contours of whatever it is resting on,
and the same thermodynamic and hydrophobic properties that make it so stable also
allow it to seal up minor tears spontaneously. Maintaining a working range of fluidity
is important to the cell: if the membrane is too rigid, then it may be unable to move or
undergo necessary processes such as endocytosis, in which a cell takes up large extracellular molecules by enveloping them with the cell membrane and pinching it off in a
vesicle; while if it becomes too fluid, it may lose integrity and fall apart.
There are three major factors that govern the fluidity of the membrane: (1) degree of
saturation of the fatty acyl chains, (2) the temperature, and (3) the concentration of
cholesterol.  Fully saturated fatty acyl chains can rotate freely around any bond and
therefore can pack together very tightly, thus decreasing membrane fluidity.  As more
unsaturated fatty acyl chains are introduced into the membrane, the more space there
is between some of the fatty acyl tails, and there is an increase in fluidity.  Similarly
at higher temperatures, even saturated fatty acyl chains, with their increased energy,
move more and create more space between the chains, also increasing fluidity.  Finally,
cholesterol, as a small planar lipid molecule, can intercalate between the fatty acyl
tails.  Interestingly, in normal physiological temperatures, the effect of cholesterol is
dependent on its concentration.  At normal concentrations, the cholesterol restricts
acyl tail movement and decreases fluidity.  However at very low concentrations, cholesterol has the opposite effect, separating the hydrophobic tails and slightly increasing fluidity, especially in the innermost regions of the membrane.  [In case you were
wondering, human medical problems with cholesterol are unrelated to the cholesterol
in the cell membranes, and refers to cholesterol (bound to lipoprotein carriers) in the
bloodstream. That cholesterol can build up in the blood vessels, decreasing the internal
diameter and along with it, blood flow. When this happens to the heart, which uses a
lot of oxygen, the oxygen deprivation can cause necrosis and a heart attack.]
In addition to the three factors noted above, phospholipid composition can also alter
membrane fluidity: shorter acyl chains lead to greater fluidity, while longer chains,
with more surface area for interaction, generate membranes with higher viscosity. The
phospholipid composition of biological membranes is dynamic and can vary widely. 
The table below shows the differences in the ratios of major phospholipid species
phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylserine (PS), and
sphingomyelin (SM) in plasma membranes from two different cell types. As you might
expect based on their differing functions, the ratios of plasma membrane lipids of a
myelinating Schwann cell are very different from the lipids in the plasma membrane
of a red blood cell. 
Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

CH3

H3C
CH3

CH3

CH3

HO

Cholesterol

Figure 4. Cholesterol is a small planar molecule that can fit in between the fatty
acyl tails of phospholipids in the membrane.

The effect of cholesterol is actually a little more complicated than
explained to the left. Cholesterol is not only planar but rigid, and
it intercalates close between acyl tails near the head region. Because cholesterol is somewhat shorter than many acyl tails, while
the parts of the hydrocarbon chains nearer the head groups are
stabilized and restricted in movement, the cholesterol actually
acts as a spacer for the other (methyl) end of each chain, so in
the center domain of the hydrophobic core of the bilayer, there is
actually increased fluidity around cholesterols. Cholesterol concentration varies greatly among organelles of the same cell, and
can even be dynamically regulated in response to temperature
changes. Membrane samples taken from fish living in warmer
temperatures contain more cholesterol than samples from the
same species acclimatized to a lower temperature.
H3C

PC:

H H

H3C N+ C
H3C

O

C

H H

O

H

P

O C

H

O-

H C

O

C

H C

O

C
O

O

H
H H

H

PE:

H N+ C
H

H

O

H

P

O C

H

O-

H C

O

C

H C

O

C
O

H

H C

C

C

H

O

O

H

P

O C

H

O-

H C

O

C

H C

O

C
O

O-

H
H3C

SM:

H H

H3C N+ C
H3C

O

H

H

H N+

PS:

O

C

H H

O

C

H H

O

O

O

H

P

O C

H

O-

H C

NH

H C

C

C

HO

H

H

O
C

Figure 5. The molecular structures of phosphatidylcholine (PC), phosphatidylethanolamine (PE), phosphatidylserine (PS), and sphingomyelin (SM). The acyl chains
of all four molecules are of variable length except the 13-C chain of SM.

Page 38

	
	
	
	
	

Lipid			
Schwann Cell PM	
Erythrocyte PM
Phosphatidylcholine		
44%			
19%
Phosphatidylethanolamine	
14%			
18%
Phosphatidylserine		
3%			
8%
Sphingomyelin			
29%			
17%

Even within a single cell, the composition of the plasma membrane differs from that
of intracellular organelles. There is even heterogeneity within a membrane itself the lipids are not simply distributed randomly in the membrane.  Research over the
last two decades have identified lipid “rafts” that appear to be specific for embedding
particular  proteins.  Since they are unanchored lipids, the rafts can move laterally
within the membrane just like most individual lipid molecules.  Finally, there are different ratios of the lipids between the two layers of the bilayer.  The cytoplasmic
face of every membrane will have different associations and functions than the noncytoplasmic face, so why should we expect the lipid composition to be the same? 
Although some phospholipids are directly linked to proteins and the cytoskeleton, most
are not, and are therefore free to move within the plane of its layer of the bilayer. 
In the experiment shown in figure 6 below, the cell surface has been labeled with a
covalently bound dye that fluoresces red when excited by green light. When the dye
molecules are exposed to high intensity light for an extended period, they no longer
fluoresce, a phenomenon known as photobleaching. Photobleaching is a permanent effect, and therefore it can be inferred that if a photobleached spot fluoresces again, then
other, non-bleached, phospholipids must have moved into the spot. This experiment
clearly proves the lateral mobility of phospholipids in a membrane.
Figure 6. (A) photobleaching experiments
can demonstrate lateral
mobility of lipids in a
bilayer. But, transverse
mobility is severely
limited and is usually
facilitated by a flippase
enzyme (B).

A

1

LASER

2

B

Flippase
3

4
ATP

ADP + Pi

However, this is not the case with transverse mobility from one face of the membrane
to the other. Due to the highly unfavorable energetics of pushing a polar head group
through the lipid tail layers, phospholipids very rarely move from one layer to the other
within a membrane (fig. 6B, far right yellow phospholipid).  Such movement is greatly
facilitated by a flippase enzyme, which hydrolyzes a molecule of ATP for the energy to
push a phospholipid from one face of the bilayer to the other.

Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

Though lipid rafts were considered a possibility in the fluid-mosaic
membrane model proposed by Singer and Nicholson in 1972, only
in the last two decades has the idea been researched seriously,
but there have been technical difficulties with visualizing a small
domain of lipids within a virtual ocean of lipids. In broad terms,
the rafts are considered small areas of ordered lipids within a
larger undirected membrane. Lipid rafts most often form in association with specific membrane proteins while excluding others.
Some of the proteins are peripheral membrane proteins such as
src or the GPI-linked adhesion molecule Thy-1, while others are
transmembrane proteins such as the T-cell receptor. Usually the
included proteins have signaling-related functions, and one model proposes that these proteins may direct the organization of
selected lipids around them, rather than the other way around.

For over a century since Meyer (1899) and Overton (1901) first
suggested it, the prevailing theory for the mechanism of gaseous
general anesthesia (e.g. ethyl ether, halothane, nitrous oxide, cyclopropane) has been that they partition into and interact with
the lipids of the plasma membranes of neurons and by altering
the physical membrane properties accomplish the anesthesia.
However, in 1985, Franks and Lieb published a report in Nature
that, for the first time, showed that an enzyme could be directly
affected by a gaseous anesthetic. Since that report, the evidence
has been building against the old model of altering membrane
lipid properties, and now the current model of direct gas-protein
interaction is assumed.
Page 39

In a pure phospholipid bilayer, membrane proteins as well as lipids have lateral mobility, but in living cells, the proteins are generally constrained either by preferential association with certain kinds of lipids, by direct attachment to cytoskeletal elements, by indirect attachment to the cytoskeleton, or by being “fenced in” by cytoskeletal gridwork
directly underlying the cell membrane. Since 1972, the Singer-Nicholson “fluid mosaic”
model of membrane structure has been accepted as a general model for biological
membranes. It proposes that integral membrane proteins as well as membrane lipids
have lateral freedom of movement. This has since been refined with the recognition of
lipid rafts and clustered membrane protein patches, but is still viable as a basic model.

Membrane Permeability
A pure phospholipid bilayer, whatever the lipid composition, is a semi-permeable membrane that is generally repellent to large molecules and to ions.  Small polar molecules
can sometimes pass easily (e.g. ethanol), but more often pass at low rates if at all
(e.g. water).  However, small nonpolar molecules are able to pass through the membrane with relative ease.  The reasons should be self-evident: larger molecules simply
cannot fit between the lipid molecules to make their way through.  Small molecules
Large Molecules
Ions
Na+

Sucrose

Small Nonpolar
Molecules

Small Polar
Molecules
H2O

Ethanol

N2

Figure 7. A pure phospholipid bilayer is inherently semi-permeable.

that can fit must be hydrophobic, otherwise the fatty acyl core of the membrane will
repel them and block them from proceeding.  Higher concentrations of cholesterol,
by filling in gaps between phospholipid tails, decreases permeability even for small
molecules that can normally pass through the membrane easily. Cells need far more
than small nonpolar molecules for their material and energy requirements.  Fortunately for life on earth, the membranes of living cells are not purely phospholipids,
and as we will see, proteins embedded in the phospholipid bilayer can form conveyances for the transport of many different molecules in and out of the membrane. 

Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

In fact, the observation of saturation kinetics in glucose transport
in erythrocyte membranes was the first indication of proteinmediated transport (the GLUT1 glucose transporter). Another
telling observation was the finding that glucose permeability
through erythrocyte membranes is a million times greater than
that through an artificial lipid bilayer. The concentration of glucose in the blood is relatively high compared to that inside of
most cells, so this is mediated transport, but passive transport
since it is going down the concentration gradient. To facilitate
the process by preventing a buildup of glucose concentration in
the cell, the first step of glucose metabolism is phosphorylation
to convert it into a different molecule, glucose-6-phosphate. Thus
the concentration of glucose stays very low, and it flows readily
from the bloodstream into the cell.
Page 40

There are some obvious differences between transport of molecules directly through
the lipid bilayer (nonmediated transport) and transport using a protein facilitator embedded in the membrane (mediated transport). Nonmediated transport is governed by
diffusion: the solute moves from areas of high concentration to areas of low concentration, thereby eliminating the gradient. As long as a solute (A) can get through the
membrane, its flux (J) is determined solely by concentration difference and the permeability (P) of the membrane: JA = PA ([A]out - [A]in) and the relationship between the flux
across the membrane and the concentration differential is linear.
This is not the case in mediated transport. As the name implies, a protein intermediary
is required, and alarm bells should be going off in your head saying, “there’s a limit,”
to the number of available transport proteins at any given time. Therefore, just as we
saw with enzyme kinetics in chapter 3, the flux of solutes going through a transporter
is not linearly related to the concentration differential across the membrane, though
there is still a concentration effect. Instead, the relationship is logarithmic, reaching
a saturation plateau once all the available transport proteins are in use. At that point,
increasing the concentration of the solute will not increase its flux across the membrane. Thus for simple unidirectional mediated transport of a solute (B), the flux (J)
can be expressed as a value of the affinity of the transporter for the solute (KM) and the
concentration of the solute:
				
JB = (Jmax[B])/(KM + [B])
Membrane permeability allows for the possibility of concentration gradients across
membranes, which in turn have potential energy associated with the concentration differential across the membrane.  This turns out to be a phenomenally important source
of cellular energy, and is the basis for aerobic synthesis of ATP by oxidative phosphorylation (chapter 5).  However, to have a meaningful discussion of how concentration
differences across semipermeable membranes store energy, we should review some
basic concepts first.  
If a point source (e.g. a “glob”) of a solute (e.g. honey) is placed into a solvent (e.g. tea), it
starts to dissolve, and as it does so, the concentration of solute near the point source will
start out much higher than the concentration towards the periphery of the container (e.g.
teacup).  Over time, the solute then diffuses from the point source outward in all available directions, and eventually the concentration of solute is equal at any point in teacup-space.  This behavior is governed by the Second Law of Thermodynamics.  The solute
is initially concentrated, which means that its constituent molecules are relatively organized.  By the second law, these molecules will tend toward chaos, moving away from the
constraints of the initial point toward an area with lower concentrations of the solute. 
Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

In case you have already forgotten and are too lazy to flip back to
chapter 3 to check, this is the law that states that the entropy of
the universe (or any closed system) tends toward maximum.

Page 41

Now, imagine a temporary wall around the point source.  The natural tendency is for
the solutes to spread out, so by preventing that movement, you have bottled up some
potential energy.  Of course, this is only potential energy if there is some chance that
the solutes can eventually go through the barrier (e.g. the wall has windows that can
be opened).  If the solutes have absolutely zero chance of passing through, then there
is no potential energy because there is no potential to get out and about.  Recalling the
Energy chapter in which the second law was introduced, the chemical potential energy
of a solute is G=RT ln[A]+G’, so the chemical potential difference across a membrane is
then DG= RT ln([Ai]/[Ao]).
Now imagine this as something like a hydroelectric dam, where there is a great deal of
pressure building up behind the dam, which can be utilized when some of the water
is allowed through, powering turbines that generate electricity.  In the biological case,
there is concentration pressure building up both inside and outside the cell because
the natural thermodynamic tendency is to bring the inside and outside concentrations
of each solute to equilibrium.  When this pressure is released by allowing the ions or
other molecules to flow across the membrane, energy is released, and may be captured
and used.  The most direct example of this the proton-gradient-driven ATP synthase
in the inner mitochondrial membrane (see Chapter 5, Metabolism), which contains a
direct molecular equivalent to the turning of a water wheel with the flow of water.
For another example, if we look at [Na+] in an animal cell, the extracellular concentration is much higher than that intracellularly.  When a Na+ channel is opened, the Na+
ions rush inward to try to equalize the concentration of Na+ inside and outside of the
cell.  Equilibrium is not actually reached in a living cell because Na+ channels are tightly
regulated and only open for short periods of time. 
In cells, concentration gradients of ions are great energy sources because the lipid part
of the membrane is strongly repellent to ions, preventing them from passing through,
but the membrane is embedded with channels and transporters that can allow the ions
through if and when they are open.  Because ions have both concentration differentials
and charge differentials across the membrane, the electrochemical potential difference
across the membrane is represented by a modification of the chemical potential difference equation with a term that takes that electrical charge into account:
DG=RT ln([Ai]/[Ao]) + ZFDY
Z is the charge of the ion (e.g. +1 for Na+, -1 for Cl-, +2 for Ca++), F is the Faraday constant
(9.6485 x 105 C/mol), and DY is the membrane potential.  In an average animal cell, the
membrane potential is approximately -70mV.  The number is negative to show that the
inside of the cell is negative with respect to the outside.  Thus, again considering Na+,
not only is there a chemical gradient of more Na+ ions outside the cell than inside, there
Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

Potassium leak channels are structurally as well as functionally
different from other potassium channels. Where most K+ channels have one pore domain, the leak channels have two. While
leak channels, by definition are not voltage gated, nor appreciably
activated or inactivated, this is not true of all members of the
tandem pore domain family of potassium channels. Interestingly, some (e.g. TASK-1) are mechanoreceptors, opening in response
to membrane stretch, and others act as thermoreceoptors, with
heat-sensitive activation (e.g. TREK-1).
Page 42

is also a charge gradient of more positive charges outside the cell to inside, so both
forces contribute to the energy of Na+ flow into the cell.  The equilibrium potential of
one ion (e.g. Na+) across a membrane is determined by the Nernst equation:
			

Em= (RT/zF) ln ([Na+]out/[Na+]in)

which is extended in the Goldman equation (also Goldman-Hodgkin-Katz equation)
that calculates membrane potential based on multiple ion gradients.  For most animal cells, a good approximation of the overall membrane potential can be calculated using the three major gradients: Na+, K+, and Cl-.  There are, of course, other
ion gradients, but their contributions are normally much smaller than these three. 
		

Vm= (RT/F) ln

PNa+[Na+]out + PK+[K+]out + PCl-[Cl-]out
PNa+[Na+]in + PK+[K+]in + PCl-[Cl-]in

The membrane potential is relatively stable in non-excitable cells, but in neurons
and muscle cells, the membrane potential is quite dynamic, so the membrane potential in a non-excited state is referred to in these cells as the resting potential.  The
membrane (resting) potential in most animal cells is around -70mV.  This is due in
large part to the presence of K+ leak channels.  These channels leak K+ from the cell
down the concentration gradient until the chemical potential difference of K+ is
at equilibrium with the membrane potential.   In other words, the gradient pushing K+ out will eventually be stopped by an equal force from the gradient pushing
positive ions (including K+) back in.  There are also Na+ and Cl- leak channels, but
there are far fewer and they contribute far less to the resting potential than K+.
Although we most commonly think of water as the solvent in which “interesting” molecules (e.g. ions) diffuse, its concentration and movement across membranes has important biological consequences. Osmosis is a term that specifically refers to the diffusion of water across a membrane.  In this case, water is considered a solute rather than
a solvent, so that if a water-permeant liposome, embedded with aquaporin channels to
allow the passage of water, is placed in a very salty saline solution, the cell will shrink
because there is a lower ratio of water to dissolved salts outside of the cell than inside. 
This is a hypertonic solution relative to the cell.  Therefore the water flows from the
cell (higher water concentration) out into the saline (with lower water concentration). 
Conversely, a cell placed in distilled and deionized water will swell and potentially burst
because the water rushes from the highest possible concentration (pure water) to a
cytoplasm with lower water concentration (because dissolved in it are various ions and
other molecules).  This is an example of a hypotonic solution.  An isotonic solution will
have the same concentration of water inside and outside of the cell.
Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

Figure 8. Osmosis. An
artificial “cell” that is
permeable to water
but not to Na+, K+, or
Cl- is placed in a aqueous solutions of varying salinity.

Hypotonic

Isotonic

H2O

Na+

Hypertonic

Cl-

Page 43

Membrane Transport Proteins
Membrane proteins come in two basic types: integral membrane proteins (sometimes
called intrinsic), which are directly inserted within the phospholipid bilayer, and peripheral membrane proteins (sometimes called extrinsic), which are located very close
or even in contact with one face of the membrane, but do not extend into the hydrophobic core of the bilayer.  Integral membrane proteins may extend completely through
the membrane contacting both the extracellular environment and the cytoplasm, or
they may only insert partially into the membrane (on either side) and contact only the
cytoplasm or extracellular environment. There are no known proteins that are completely buried within the membrane core.
Integral membrane proteins (fig. 9) are held tightly in place by hydrophobic forces, and
purification of them from the lipids requires membrane-disrupting agents such as organic solvents (e.g. methanol) or detergents (e.g. SDS, Triton X-100). Due to the nature of
the bilayer, the portion of integral membrane proteins that lie within the hydrophobic
core of the membrane are usually very hydrophobic in character, or have outward-facing hydrophobic residues to interact with the membrane core.  These transmembrane
domains usually take one of the two forms depicted in figures 8 and 14: alpha helices
- either individually or in a set with other alpha helices, or barrel-shaped insertions in
which the barrel walls are constructed of beta-pleated sheets.  The hydrophobic insertions are bounded by a short series of polar or charged residues that interact with the
aqueous environment and polar head groups to prevent the hydrophobic portion of the
protein from sliding out of place. Furthermore, proteins can have multiple membranespanning domains.
Integral membrane protein
Phospholipid

Peripheral membrane protein

GPI anchor

Cholesterol

Peripheral membrane protein

Figure 9. Integral (orange) and peripheral (blue) membrane proteins embedded
in a phospholipid bilayer.

Peripheral membrane proteins (also shown in figure 9) are less predictable in their
structure, but may be attached to the membrane either by interaction with integral
Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

Page 44

membrane proteins or by covalently attached lipids.  The most common such modifications to peripheral membrane proteins are fatty acylation, prenylation, and linkage to
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchors. Fatty acylation is most often a myristoylation (a 14:0 acyl chain) and palmitoylation (a 16:0 chain) of the protein.  A protein may be
acylated with more than one chain, although one or two acyl groups is most common.
These fatty acyl chains stably insert into the core of the phospholipid bilayer. While
myristoylated proteins are found in a variety of compartments, almost all palmitoylated proteins are located on the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane. Prenylated
proteins, on the other hand, are primarily found attached to intracellular membranes.
Prenylation is the covalent attachment of isoprenoids to the protein - most commonly
isoprene (a C5 hydrocarbon), farnesyl (C15), or geranylgeranyl (C20) groups (fig. 10). GPI
anchors (fig. 11) are found exclusively on proteins on the outer surface of the cell, but
there does not appear to be any other commonality in their structures or functions.

Isoprene

Farnesyl group

CH3
HC

C

C

CH3

HC

CH2

CH3

CH3

H

Geranylgeranyl group
CH3

HC

CH3

CH3

Figure 10. Prenylation

Peripheral Membrane
Protein

O
C

N

C-terminal peptide

HO

H

H

Of course, not all membrane proteins, or even all transmembrane proteins, are transporters, and the many other functions of membrane proteins - as receptors, adhesion
molecules, signaling molecules,  and structural molecules - will be discussed in subsequent chapers.  The focus here is on the role of membrane proteins in facilitating
transport of molecules across the cell membrane.

H

H

H2N C

C

H

H

O
O

P

Active Transport

O

O- H

O
H

CH2
H

H

HO

O

O CH2

HO

H
OH

HO
O
HO

H

O

H
OH
H

O
H

H

O
O

H

P

H

N

H

HO

C

H

NAc
O
H

CH2

HO
H

OH
H

H H O
H
O P

OH

O-

R3

O

H

H

H

C

C

C

H

O O

O

C

C

H
O

R2 R1

H

Peripheral Membrane
Protein

H

H

C-terminal peptide

HO

H

H

N

C

C

H

H

H

O

O

O-

CH2

H

CH2
H
OH

O

NH2

O
O

P

CH2

O

H
OH

O CH2

O- H

H
OH
H

H
O

H

CH2
H

HO

H
OH

HO
O
HO

H

O
HO

O
H

H

HO

Extracellular

CH2
H
OH
H

HO

Transport across the membrane may be either passive, requiring no external source of energy as solute travels from high to low concentration, or active, requiring energy expenditure as solute travels from low to high concentration (fig. 12). Passive transport can also
High Na+ Concentration

CH3
CH3

HO

Figure 12. For Na+ ions and animal
cells, passive transport is inward,
sending Na+ from the high concentration outside the cell to the low
concentration inside. Active transport requires energy such as ATP
hydrolysis to push a Na+ ion from
the low concentration inside the
cell to the higher concentration
outside.

CH3

H

H

O
O

H

O

P

CH2

O

H

H
OH

H

H

NAc

O-

O

O
CH2
CH2
NH2

H
HO
H

OH
H

H H O
H
O P

OH

O-

R3

O

H

H

H

C

C

C

H

O O

O

C

C

H
O

R2 R1
Intracellular

Passive Transport

ENERGY

Low Na+ Concentration

Figure 11. GPI-linked proteins are connected by the C-terminal carboxyl group to
phosphoethanolamine, which is linked to a core tetrasaccharide of three mannose
residues and one N-acetylglucoasmine, the latter of which is bound by glycosidic
linkage to a phosphatidylinositol.

be divided into nonmediated transport, in which the movement of solutes is determined
solely by diffusion, and the solute does not require a transport protein, and mediated passive transport (aka facilitated diffusion) in which a transport protein is required to help
a solute go from high to low concentration.  Even though this may sometimes involve a
change in conformation, no external energy is required for this process.  Nonmediated
passive transport applies only to membrane-soluble small nonpolar molecules, and the
kinetics of the movement is ruled by diffusion, thickness of the membrane, and the electrochemical membrane potential.  Active transport is always a mediated transport process.
Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

Page 45

All transporter proteins occupied

Mediated transport
Flux

Non-mediated transport

0

0

[A]out - [A]in

Figure 13. Non-mediated and Mediated transport: flux vs concentration.

Comparing the solute flux vs initial concentration in figure 13, we see that there is a
linear relationship for nonmediated transport, while mediated passive transport (and
for that matter, active transport) shows a saturation effect due to the limiting factor
of the number of available proteins to allow the solute through.  Once there is enough
solute to constantly occupy all transporters or channels, maximal flux will be reached,
and increases in concentration cannot overcome this limit.  This holds true regardless
of the type of transporter protein involved, even though some are more intimately involved in the transport than others.
Channels are essentially hands-off transport systems that, as the name implies, provides
a passage from one side of the cell to another.  Though channels may be gated - able
to open and close in response to changes in membrane potential or ligand binding,
for example - they allow solutes through at a high rate without tightly binding them
and without changes in conformation.  The solute can only move through channels
from high to low concentration.  The potassium channel depicted below (fig. 14A) is an
example: there is a selectivity filter (14B) of aligned carbonyl oxygens that transiently
A

B
K+

C
H

Extracellular

O

O

NH2
C
HO

O

O

H

O

Intracellular

H 3C
H3C

H2N
O

C
HC

H

NH2

O

O

C
CH

HC

CH

HC

C
HC

NH2

K+

OH

NH2

O

CH
C

C
HC

K+

NH2
C

H

NH2

CH

K+

C

C
HC

CH

H
C

NH2

K+
CH3

NH2 OH

H
H 3C

C

HO

C

H3C
H3C

O

CH
NH2

Figure 14. (A) Half of the tetrameric K+ channel showing two subunits. (B) Detail of the selectivity filter boxed
in A. (C) Top-down image generated from data from the RCSB Protein Data Bank.

positions the K+ ions for rapid passage through the channel, but it does not bind the K+
for any significant period, nor does the channel undergo any conformational changes
as a result of the interaction.  Smaller Na+ ions could (and on rare occasion do) make it
Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

In addition to protein transporters, there are other ways to facilitate the movement of ions through membranes. Ionophores are
small organic molecules, often (but not exclusively) made by bacteria, that help ions move through membranes. Many ionophores
are antibiotics that act by causing the membranes to become
leaky to particular ions, altering the electrochemical potential
of the membrane and the chemical composition inside the cell.
Ionophores are exclusively passive-transport mechanism, and fall
into two types.
The first type of ionophore is a small mostly-hydrophobic carrier almost completely embedded in the membrane, that binds to
and envelopes a specific ion, shielding it from the lipid, and then
moves it through the cell membrane. The most studied carriertype ionophore is valinomycin, which binds to K+. Valinomycin is
a 12-residue cyclic depsipeptide (contains amide and ester bonds)
with alternating d- and l- amino acids. The carbonyl groups
all face inward to interact with the ion, while the hydrophobic
side chains face outward to the lipid of the membrane. Carrier
ionophores are not necessarily peptides: the industrial chemical
2,4-dinitrophenol is an H+ carrier and important environmental
waste concern, and nystatin, an antifungal used to treat Candida
albicans infections in humans, is a K+ carrier.
The second type of carrier forms channels in the target membrane, but again, is not a protein. Gramicidin is a prototypical example, an anti-gram-positive antibacterial (except for the source
of gramicidins, the gram-positive Bacillus brevis) and ionophore
channel for monovalent cations such as Na+, K+, and H+. It is impermeable to anions, and can be blocked by the divalent cation
Ca++. Like valinomycin, gramicidin A is also a made of alternating d- and l- amino acids, all of which are hydrophobic (l-Val/
Ile-Gly-l-Ala-d-Leu-l-Ala-d-Val-l-Val-d-Val-l-Trp-d-Leu-l-Trp-d-Leul-Trp-d-Leu-l-Trp). Gramicidin A dimerizes in the membrane to
form a compressed b-sheet structure known as a b-helix. The
dimerization forms N-terminal to N-terminal, placing the Trp residues towards the outer edges of the membrane, with the polar
NH groups towards the extracellular and cytoplasmic surfaces,
anchoring the pore in place.

Page 46

through the K+ channel, but because they are too small to be properly positioned by the
K+ filter, they usually pop back out. It should be noted that this channel is a tetramer
(14C) and the cutaway diagram in (14A) only shows half of the channel for clarity.
While most proteins called “channels” are formed by multiple alpha-helices, the porins
are formed by a cylindrical beta sheet.  In both cases, solutes can only move down the
concentration gradient from high to low, and in both cases, the solutes do not make
significant contact with the pore or channel.  The interior of the pore is usually hydrophilic due to alternating hydrophilic/hydrophobic residues along the beta ribbon, which
places the hydrophobic side chains on the outside, interacting with the membrane
core.

Porin

Aquaporin

Figure 15.

Porins are primarily found in gram-negative bacteria, some gram-positive bacteria, and in
the mitochondria and chloroplasts of eukaryotes. They are not generally found in the plasma
membrane of eukaryotes. Also, despite the similarity in name, they are structurally unrelated
to aquaporins, which are channels that facilitate the diffusion of water in and out of cells.
Transport proteins work very differently from channels or pores.  Instead of allowing a
relatively fast flow of solutes through the membrane, transport proteins move solutes
across the membrane in discrete quanta by binding to the solute on one side of the
membrane, changing conformation so as to bring the solute to the other side of the
membrane, and then releasing the solute.  These transport proteins may work with individual solute molecules like the glucose transporters, or they may move multiple solutes.  The glucose transporters are passive transport proteins, so they only move glucose
from higher to lower concentrations, and do not require an external energy source. The
four isoforms are very similar structurally but differ in their tissue distribution within
the animal: for example, GLUT2 is found primarily in pancreatic b cells, while GLUT4 is
found mostly in muscle and fat cells.

2
ATP

1

ADP

3

Na+
Na+ Na+

Extracellular

Na+
Na+

Na+

P

Intracellular

P
Na+
Na+
Na+

4

6

K+

5

K+

K+

K+

P

P
K+ K+

P

On the other hand, the classic example of an active transport protein, the Na+/K+ ATPase, also known as the Na+/K+ antiport, utilizes the energy from ATP hydrolysis to
power the conformational changes needed to move both Na+ and K+ ions against the
gradient.  Referring to the figure 16, in its resting state, the Na+/K+ ATPase is open to
the cytoplasm and can bind three Na+ ions (1).  Once the three Na+ have bound, the
Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

Figure 16. Active Transport by Na+/K+ ATPase. This enzyme pushes three Na+
ions out of the cell and two K+ ions into the cell, going against the gradient
in both directions and using energy from ATP hydrolysis. [Note: some texts
diagram this enzyme activity with separate binding sites for Na+ and K+, but
recent crystallographic evidence shows that there is only one ion binding
site that changes conformation and specificity.]

Page 47

transporter can catalyze the hydrolysis of an ATP molecule, removing a phosphate
group and transferring it onto the ATPase itself (2).  This triggers a conformational
change that opens the protein to the extracellular space and also changes the ion
binding site so that Na+ no longer binds with high affinity and drops off (3).   However, the ion binding site specificity is also altered in this conformational change,
and these new sites have a high affinity for K+ ions (4).  Once the two K+ bind, the
attached phosphate group is released (5) and another conformational shift puts the
transporter protein back into its orginial conformation, altering the K+ binding sites
to allow release of the K+ into the cytoplasm (6), and revealing Na+ affinity once again.
The Na+/K+ ATPase is a member of the P-type family of ATPases. They are named because of the autophosphorylation that occurs when ATP is hydrolyzed to drive the
transport. Other prominent members of this family of ATPases are the Ca++ -ATPase
that pumps Ca++ out of the cytoplasm into organelles or out of the cell, and the H+/K+
ATPase, though there are also P-type H+ pumps in fungal and plant plasma membranes,
and in bacteria.
Unlike Na+ or K+, the Ca++ gradient is not very important with respect to the electrochemical membrane potential or the use of its energy. However, tight regulation of
Ca++ is important in a different way: it is used as an intracellular signal. To optimize
the effectiveness of Ca++ as a signal, its cytoplasmic levels are kept extremely low, with
Ca++ pumps pushing the ion into the ER (SR in muscles), Golgi, and out of the cell. These
pumps are themselves regulated by Ca++ levels through the protein calmodulin. At low
Ca++ levels, the pump is inactive, and an inhibitory domain of the pump itself prevents
its activity. However, as Ca++ levels rise, the ions bind to calmodulin, and the Ca++calmodulin complex can bind to the inhibitory region of the Ca++ pump, relieving the
inhibition and allowing the excess Ca++ to be pumped out of the cytoplasm.
There are three other families of ATPases: the F-type ATPases are proton pumps in
bacteria and mitochondria and chloroplasts that can also function to form ATP by running “backwards” with protons flowing through them down the concentration gradient. They will be discussed in the next chapter (Metabolism). Also, there are V-type
ATPases that regulate pH in acidic vesicles and plant vacuoles, and finally, there are
anion-transporting ATPases.
Hydrolysis of ATP, while a common source of energy for many biological processes, is
not the only source of energy for transport.  The active transport of one solute against
its gradient can be coupled with the energy from passive transport of another solute
down its gradient.  Two examples are shown in figure 17: even though one is a symport
(both solutes crossing the membrane in the same physical direction) and one is an
Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

Cardiac glycosides (also cardiac steroids) inhibit the Na+/K+ ATPase
by binding to the extracellular side of the enzyme. These drugs,
including digitalis (extracted from the purple foxglove plant) and
ouabain (extracted from ouabio tree) are commonly prescribed
cardiac medications that increase the intensity of heart contractions. The inhibition of Na+/K+ ATPase causes a rise in [Na+]in
which then activates cardiac Na+/Ca++ antiports, pumping excess
sodium out and Ca++ in. The increased [Ca++]cytoplasm is taken up by
the sarcoplasmic reticulum (see chap. XX), leading to extra Ca++
when it is released to trigger muscle contraction, causing stronger contractions.
Extracellular

Intracellular

A) Symport
Na+

Glc

Na+

Na+
Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+
Na+

Glc

Glc

Na+

Glc

Na+

Na+/Glucose
Cotransporter

Glc

Glc

Na+

Glc

Glc

Na+

Glc

Na+

Glc

B) Antiport
Na+
Na+
Na+

H+

Na+

Na+

H+

Na+

Na+
H+

Na+
H+

Na+/H+
Exchanger

H+

Na+

H+

Na+

H+

Na+

H+

Na+
H+
H+

Na+

H+

Na+

Na+
H+

Figure 17. Symport and Antiport. The terms refer only to direction of solutes in
or out of cell, not to energetics. In this symport, the energy release from passive
transport of Na+ into the cell is used to actively transport glucose in also. In the
antiport example, Na+ transport is again used, this time to provide energy for active transport of H+ out of the cell.

Acetylcholine receptors (AchR), which are found in some neurons
and on the muscle cells at neuromuscular junctions, are ligandgated ion channels. When the neurotransmitter (acetylcholine)
or an agonist such as nicotine (for nicotinic type receptors) or
muscarine (for muscarinic type receptors) binds to the receptor,
it opens a channel that allows the flow of small cations, primarily Na+ and K+, in opposite directions, of course. The Na+ rush is
much stronger and leads to the initial depolarization of the membrane that either initiates an action potential in a neuron, or in
muscle, initiates contraction.
Page 48

antiport (the two solutes cross the membrane in opposite physical directions), they
both have one solute traveling down its gradient, and one solute traveling up against
its concentration gradient.  As it happens, we have used Na+ movement as the driving
force behind both of these examples.  In fact, the Na+ gradient across the membrane
is an extremely important source of energy for most animal cells.  However this is not
universal for all cells, or even all eukaryotic cells.  In most plant cells and unicellular
organisms, the H+ (proton) gradient plays the role that Na+ does in animals.

The Action Potential in Neurons
The transport of solutes in and out of cells is critical to life.  However, in neurons, the
movement of ions has another crucial function in metazoan animals: production of
action potentials used for neurotransmission.  This specialization allows for extremely
rapid transmission of information across long distances.  An example my mentor would
use when teaching basic neuroscience to schoolchildren was a bipolar neuron that
extends from the toe to the brain.  For information from the toe to be useful, it must
reach the brain for processing very quickly.  This signal may have to travel several meters in a giraffe, far more in whales.  No chemical signal can move that quickly, and despite the popular simplification and dramatic depictions on television, electricity does
not flow through neurons as though they were copper wires. 
The reality does involve rapid changes to membrane potential. Since that is measured
in volts and is a difference in electrical charge across the membrane, it is sometimes
thought of colloquially as electrical transmission, but the mechanism is completely
different from electrons flowing through a wire.  Instead, there is a moving change
in membrane potential due to sequential opening of ion channels along the length
of the axon (the long thin part of the nerve cell). Generally, the signal starts with an

1

Na+
Neurotransmitter

Extracellular

+

(closed)

-

Na+
Na+

+

-

Intracellular

(closed)

+

NT

-

Na+

Na+

Acetylcholine spontaneously dissociates from AchR in about a
millisecond, closing the channel. It could then be reactivated
by the acetylcholine, but this is tightly regulated by the enzyme
acetylcholinesterase (AchE), which is a GPI-anchored protein on
the membrane of the target cell, and prevents overstimulation
by rapid degradation of the acetylcholine. The military nerve
gas sarin, which gained notoriety in a 1995 attack on the Tokyo
subway system, works by inactivating AchE, thus causing overstimulation of AchR.

Na+
Na+

Na+

+

-

Ligand-gated Na+ Channel

Na+

(closed)

+

(closed)

-

A number of potent toxins have been used in the study of the
AchR, including histrionicatoxin, an arrow poison extracted from
a South American tree frog, Dendrobates histrionicus, curare (dtubocurarine) isolated from certain plants, and a-bungarotoxin,
which is isolated from the Taiwanese snake, the banded krait. All
three act by competitive inhibition, blocking the opening of the
AchR channel.

+

-

Voltage-gated Na+ Channel

Na+

Figure 18.

Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

Page 49

excitatory chemical signal, or neurotransmitter (fig. 18), that binds to a receptor on the
neuron.  This receptor may be linked to an ion channel or it may itself be a ligand-gated
ion channel.  In either case, the channel opens and Na+ comes into the cell. 

2

Propagation
Na+

Na+
Na+

Extracellular

+

(closed)

-

(open)

+

(open)

+

+

+

+

Na+

+

+

Na+

Intracellular

Na+

Na+

Na+

+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

K+

K+

-

K+

K+

Na+

Na+

Na+

+

Voltage-gated K+ Channel

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

(closed)

+

Na+

Na+

+

(closed)

Na+

Na+

Figure 19.

The sudden influx of positive charges transiently and locally depolarizes the membrane
(more + charges along the inside of the membrane than outside). The depolarization of
the membrane near the channel causes all nearby voltage-gated Na+ channels to transiently open (fig. 19), thus allowing a new rush of Na+ ions into the cell that can then
depolarize another small section of membrane.  Although technically, channels open up
on either side of the receptor, normally, the receptor is located on the main cell body,
or soma, while most of the ion channels are lined up along the axon. Therefore, there
is a de facto directionality to the propagation of the depolarization.

3

K+

K+

K+

K+

Na+

K+

Extracellular

(open)

+

(closed)

Intracellular

Propagation

K+

K+

+

K+

+

-

-

K+

Na+

Na+

Na+
(open)

+

+

+

+
Na+

+

(closed)

+

-

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

+

K+

Na+

Na+
Na+

(inactivated) (open)

(inactivated)

+

Na+

Na+

Since neuronal transmission of information is critical to many systems, it is not surprising that a variety of organisms have evolved
toxins that can paralyze or kill an attacker or prey. Interestingly,
the primary target of the toxins is the voltage-gated Na+ channel,
and not the K+ channel.

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Figure 20.

The toxin most widely used in research, is tetrodotoxin (TTX),
which is derived from the skin and certain organs of the puffer
fish (Fugu rubripes). This fish is considered a delicacy (primarily in
Japan), and even when prepared by expert and specially-trained
chefs, the small amount of residual TTX in the flesh causes a
tingling numbing of the tongue as neural excitation is blocked.
Interestingly (but unrelated to ion channels) fugu has a highly
compressed genome - where most other eukaryotes have large
swaths of non-coding regions, fugu has little, and its genes are
very close together. In fact, it has almost as many predicted
genes as the human genome in only 1/8th the DNA!
Saxitoxin (STX) is another poison that acts on the voltage-gated
Na+ channel. It is produced by the plankton that cause “red tide”
(dinoflagellates of the genus Alexandrium, Gymnodium, and Pyrodinium) and is concentrated by filter-feeders such as mussels,
oysters, and other shellfish. Interestingly, STX was once investigated by the US military as a nerve agent for chemical warfare,
under the designation TZ. Both STX and TTX bind to the external
surface of the closed voltage-gated Na+ channel near the mouth of
the pore, preventing opening, and thereby blocking Na+ flow.
Batrachotoxin, on the other hand, binds to voltage-gated Na+
channels when they are open rather than closed, so there is a
massive continuous influx of Na+. A product of another South
American tree frog, Phyllobates aurotaenia, this toxin is used as a
hunting poison by aboriginal tribes in the area, and is the most
potent venom currently known. With a lethal dose of less than 2
mg/kg, batrachotoxin is roughly ten times more deadly than TTX.
However, to put this in perspective, botulinum toxin, used pharmacologically as Botox® and the cause of botulism, is well over a
hundred times more potent (though acting through a completely
different mechanism - prevention of neurotransmitter release).
Page 50

More voltage gated Na+ channels are opened up quickly after their neighboring channels
have opened and depolarized their section of the membrane, leading to a long chain
reaction of voltage-gated depolarizations all the way down the axon (fig. 20). Once the
signal is propagating down the axon, there are two questions that should come into
your head. First, neurons are not disposable cells, so how are all these opened channels
reset and the membrane re-polarized for the next action potential? And second, why
wouldn’t the depolarization wave become bidirectional since each little depolarization
area spreads out in both directions from the opened Na+ gate?
In fact, the answers to both questions are closely related, and has to do with the gating
mechanism of voltage-gated ion channels (fig. 21). Voltage-gated ion channels have two
gates: one that opens in response to an increase in membrane potential, and one that
closes the channel after a short period of time. This means that there are three potential states for most voltage-gated ion channels: closed, open, and inactivated.

Closed
Open
Inactivated
Figure 21. Three states of a voltage-gated K+ channel.

The inactivated state occurs when the second gate (more like a plug, really) closes,
because this is voltage-insensitive. The plug eventually comes out of the pore and the
voltage-sensitive gate is set back in place to the closed state. Voltage-sensitive K+ channels are tetramers, as shown here, and each subunit carries a potential inactivating domain. The choice of which domain appears to be random. Voltage-sensitive Na+ channels, on the other hand, also have four transmembrane regions, but they are all part of
a single protein, and the channel only has one inactivation gate/domain. However, the
three-state gating mechanism is still the same.
Back to the action potential: each new depolarization opens the next adjacent set of
voltage gated Na+ channels, and so on.  In a neuronal axon, which is where action
potentials occur, the movement of the depolarizations happens very quickly and unidirectionally.  It happens quickly because the axon is a very long thin projection of the
cell, so the volume is small and therefore the influx of Na+ can quickly depolarize a
long section of membrane.  It happens unidirectionally because the previously opened
voltage-sensitive Na+ channels go into a refractory inactivated state that cannot be
reopened immediately. 
Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

Page 51

Thus when the adjacent wave of depolarization hits, the previously opened channels
do not open again, and the opening of more voltage-gated channels continues unidirectionally away from the start. 
4
K+

K+
K+
K+

Propagation

K+

K+

K+

(open)

Na+

Extracellular

K+

(closed)

(closed)

(closed)

(inactivated) (inactivated)

+

+

+

+

+

-

-

-

-

-

(open)

Na+

Na+

(open)

+

+
Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

+

Intracellular

Na+

Na+

+
Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Na+

Figure 22.

But wait, there’s more! Just because the Na+ channels are locked closed doesn’t mean
that the membrane goes back to normal. What repolarizes the membrane behind the
action potential? The voltage-gated potassium channels, which are interspersed among
the Na+ channels (note purple ions and channels in figs. 20, 22).  They open more slowly
than the sodium channels (fig. 23) and thus reach peak flux shortly after the peak flux
of Na+.  Thus, the recovery phase, or repolarization back towards the resting potential,
is helped by both cessation of the inward Na+ movement and continued outward K+
movement. 
+60

30

20

10

K+ flux

Action potential

+20

n

Na+ flux

Depola
rizatio

Membrane potential (mV)

Ionic flux (m.mho/cm2)

+40

0
-20
-40

Resting potential

-60
Hyperpolarization

-80
0

0

1

2
Time (ms)

3

4

0

1

2
Time (ms)

3

4

Figure 23. The contributions of Na+ flux (depolarizing) and K+ flux (repolarizing) to the neuronal
action potential. Remember that the Na+ movement is into the cell, while K+ is moving out.

Chapter 4, Membranes, v. 1.2

Since all action potentials behave the same way from the standpoint of changes in membrane potential, the difference between
stronger and weaker nerve signals is in the frequency/rate of action potential firing, not in magnitude of the ion flux.
Page 52

Metabolism 1 :

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.

Catabolic Reactions of the Cell

Life requires energy. As our discussion of biomolecules pointed out, the major functional components of the cell are mostly polymers - long chains of smaller individual
molecular units. Each addition of a small link to the chain costs energy. Chemical
reactions that build up complex molecules from simple ones are known as anabolic
reactions. Conversely, heterotrophic organisms such as animals ingest food made up
of these large polymers, which, when broken down in the digestive process, release
energy for maintaining and building that organism. Such chemical reactions, in which
complex molecules are broken down to simpler components, are classified as catabolic
reactions. Taken as a group of reactions within a cell or even an organism, they can be
referred to as the cell’s or organism’s anabolism or catabolism. The sum total of both
types of reactions is the cell’s metabolism. Nearly all metabolic reactions are catalyzed
by enzymes in order to keep up with the energy and material demands of the cell. In
fact, the discussion of some of the metabolic processes in this chapter will almost seem
to be laundry lists of enzymes. We will begin with one such list in describing the catabolism of the simple sugar, glucose, through the process of glycolysis.

Glycolysis
Whether the cell is prokaryotic or eukaryotic, one of its basic methods for generating
usable energy is glycolysis. This process uses glucose, which is the most common energy source for most cells. However, glucose cannot be directly broken down to provide
energy for the cell: glycolysis is a process that breaks it down in a series of reactions to
create adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which is the most common energy “currency” of
the cell. That is, ATP can release usable energy in a single reaction.
Glucose, being a 6-carbon sugar, has a large amount of potential energy stored in its
bonds. However, since it is thermodynamically stable, it would take the investment
of a lot of external energy to release the energy of glucose in one step (e.g. lighting it
on fire to break it down into CO2 and H2O), and not only is it impossible for cells to
Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Page 53

generate that kind of energy at once, the cell has no mechanism to use all the energy
released at one instant in time. Most of it would be wasted as excess heat. Instead, the
cell uses enzymes to destabilize and break down the sugar through a series of conversions into intermediate compounds. The basic process and enzymes involved are as
follows.
1. Glucose is phosphorylated by hexokinase to make Glucose-6-Phosphate. The enzyme
is so named because it is a kinase (puts a phosphate group on) that acts on a hexose
(six-carbon sugar). In this case, it places the phosphate on the 6-carbon of glucose.
However, hexokinase can also phosphorylate other hexoses such as fructose and mannose (all in the D- conformation). There are two major reasons this is good for the cell.
Since glucose concentration is higher inside the cell than outside, there is pressure
for it to move back out of the cell. By converting it to G6P, it is no longer part of the
glucose concentration gradient, and it has a charged phosphate group making it nearly
impossible to leak out of the membrane. The addition of the phosphate also increases
the energy in the molecule, making it less thermodynamically stable, so that it can be
broken down. This reaction requires the use of ATP as a phosphate donor and the energy needed to attach it. That is, energy is used in this step, not produced. Consider it
an investment of energy though, since by the end of glycolysis, more ATP is produced
than used.
HO
H
HO

CH2

O

ATP ADP

H

H
OH

H

H

OH

-2O P
3

Hexokinase
Mg++

OH

CH2

O
H
HO

Glucose

O

Hexokinase requires ATP in the form of a complex (to the 2nd and
3rd phosphate groups) with a divalent cation, typically Mg++ in
vivo. ATP alone is actually a competitive inhibitor of hexokinase.
The product, G6P, also functions as an inhibitor, thus providing
some measure of feedback regulation. In fact, muscle cells using
glycogen stores convert the glycogen directly to G6P, so hexokinase activity is very low in those cells.

H

H
OH

H

H

OH

OH

Glucose-6-phosphate

2. Glucose-6-Phosphate is converted to Fructose-6-Phosphate by phosphoglucose
isomerase. As the name implies, the isomerase simply rearranges the existing atoms
within the G6P to make the F6P without removal or addition of any atoms.
-2O P
3

O
H
HO

CH2
H
OH
H

O
H

H
OH

OH

Glucose-6-phosphate

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

-2O P
3

Phosphoglucose
isomerase

O

CH2
H

O

CH2

H

HO

HO

H

OH

OH

Fructose-6-Phosphate

Page 54

H

H

CH2
HO

OH

OH

H

HO

-2O P
3

ATP ADP

O

HO

HO

H

PO32-

O

CH2

H

H

Phosphofructokinase
Mg++

O

CH2

OH

Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate

Fructose-6-Phosphate

4. The Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate is cut in half by aldolase, yielding a molecule of dihydroxyacetone phosphate and a molecule of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
-2O P
3

O

CH2
H

H

O

CH2
HO

O

OH

PO32Aldolase

H

HO

O
HO

CH2

C

O
CH2 O

C

+ H

2-

PO3

H

H

C

C O PO32-

HO H
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate

1.

Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate

Triose
phosphate
isomerase

CH2

CH2 O

O
C

H

PO32-

H

H

C

C O PO32-

2.

6. Each of the two molecules of G3P generated from the glucose molecule now undergo oxidation catalyzed by glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) in
the presence of NAD+ and inorganic phosphate (Pi). Each of these reactions produces
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate, which has a high-energy phosphate group, and NADH. NADH
is a high energy electron carrier (electron comes from G3P). In eukaryotes with an
aerobic environment, this NADH will likely be used to help generate ATP through the
tricarboxylic acid cycle (aka Krebs cycle or citric acid cycle). In anaerobic situations, the
NADH will participate in fermentation for reasons discussed in the next section.
O
HO

CH2

C

NAD+
CH2 O

PO32-

+ Pi

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

NADH

Glyceraldehyde3-phosphate
dehydrogenase

OH
-2O P
3

O

CH2 C
H

2.
Forms thiohemiacetal
that is oxidized by NAD+ to
thioester. Resulting NADH is
displaced by NAD+.

+

NAD

+

NAD

O-

H
S

C

NADH
O
S

+ - OPO32-

C
HC

HC
2CH2OPO3

2-

CH2OPO3

3.
NADH

+

NAD
SH

3. Soluble inorganic phosphate
attacks thioester to release
1,3-bisphosphoglycerate.

2-

O
C

OPO3

HC

O PO32+ H+

C

HC
2-

HO H
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate

+

CH2OPO3

Gl

HO

C

O
C

S H

Gl
yc
er
al
De deh
hy yd
dr e 3
og -P
en ho
as sp
e ha
te

O

H

+

Gl

5. The G3P can participate in the next reaction, but the dihydroxyacetone phosphate, despite its similarity, cannot. So, it needs to be rearranged by triose phosphate isomerase,
which converts it to another molecule of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.

NAD

1. Sulfhydryl of GAPDH initiates nucleophilic attack on
G3P aldehyde.

at
e

O

CH2

Gl
yc
er
al
De deh
hy yd
dr e 3
og -P
en ho
as sp
e h

O

yc
er
al
De deh
hy yd
dr e 3
og -P
en ho
as sp
e ha
te

-2O P
3

3. PFK is an important regulator of glycolysis. It is a tetrameric
protein, and each subunit has two binding sites for ATP: one is
the normal substrate site, the other is an inhibitory site such that
binding of ATP lowers the enzyme’s affinity for F6P. ATP is not
the only regulator of PFK activity: AMP is also a positive regulator
of PFK, and can increase it up to 5-fold.
4. There are two classes of aldolases: class I are found in animals
and plants, while class II are found in fungi and bacteria. Class I
require no cofactors, but class II require a divalent cation (physiologically usually Fe++ or Zn++).
5. Triose phosphate isomerase is a “perfect enzyme” that catalyzes
the formation of product as fast as the enzyme and substrate can
make contact in solution (i.e. rate is purely diffusion-limited).

yc
er
al
De deh
hy yd
dr e 3
og -P
en ho
as sp
e ha
te

3. Fructose-6-Phosphate is phosphorylated by phosphofructokinase (PFK) to Fructose1,6-bisphosphate. There is again an investment of an ATP to provide the phosphate
group and the energy to attach it.

2-

CH2OPO3

O

1,2-Bisphosphoglycerate

Figure 1. NAD+ is reduced by glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehtdrogenase to form
NADH. The NADH is released by substitution with another NAD+.

Page 55

7. The phosphate group on the 1-carbon of 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate is transferred to ADP
by phosphoglycerate kinase to make 3-phosphoglycerate and ATP (finally!). From the
two molecules of G3P entering step 6, we get two molecules of ATP to provide energy
for the cell in this step. Recalling the earlier investment of ATP (in steps 1 and 3), the
reaction has only “broken even” at this point. 2 in, 2 out.
OH
-2O P
3

O

CH2 C

O PO32-

ADP

OH

ATP
-2O P
3

C
O

H

CH2 C

O

Phosphoglycerate
kinase

OC

H

1,2-Bisphosphoglycerate

O

3-Phosphoglycerate

The name of the enzyme suggests that a phosphate is added to phosphoglycerate. This
is not a mistake: remember that enzymes can catalyze reactions in either direction,
depending on reaction conditions. Under conditions of high phosphoglycerate and ATP,
phosphorylation of phosphoglycerate would occur. However, the physiological conditions are a relatively high concentration of the 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate in comparison
to relatively low levels of phosphoglycerate thus driving the reaction “backwards” with
respect to the naming of the enzyme.
8. The 3-phosphoglycerate is then rearranged by phosphoglycerate mutase to make
2-phosphoglycerate. This molecule has a higher free energy of hydrolysis than when
the phosphate group is on the 3-carbon.
OH
-2O P
3

O

CH2 C

-2O P
3

OC

H

HO
O

Phosphoglycerate
mutase

3-Phosphoglycerate

O

O-

CH2 C

C
O

H

2-Phosphoglycerate

9. That energy is used to create ATP, as the 2-phosphoglycerate undergoes dehydration
by enolase to make phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP).
-2O P
3

HO

O

CH2 C

OC
O

H
2-Phosphoglycerate

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Enolase

The action of phosphoglycerate mutase is not just the intramolecular phosphate group transfer that it seems to be at first glance.
The enzyme must first be activated by phosphorylation, and it is
the enzyme’s phosphate that is added to the 2-carbon of 3PG. The
doubly-phosphorylated intermediate then transfers its 3-phosphate to the enzyme, and 2PG is released.

-2O P
3

O

CH2

C

OC
O

PEP is made because hydrolysis of the phosphate from 2PG does
not release enough energy to drive phosphorylation of ADP to
ATP. PEP hydrolysis, on the other hand, releases significantly
more than needed.

+ H2O

Phosphoenolpyruvate

Page 56

HO
H
HO

CH2

O

H
OH

H

H

O

3P

H

Hexokinase

OH

HO

1

OH

H

-2O

ATP ADP

CH2

O

H
OH

Glucose

H

H

OH

OH

H

-2O

3P

O

CH2
H

Phosphoglucose
isomerase

2

O

CH2

H

HO

OH

OH

ATP ADP

3P

O

H

3

O

CH2

H

HO

HO

H

O

OH

PO32Aldolase

4

Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate

Fructose-6-Phosphate

Glucose-6-phosphate

CH2

Phosphofructokinase

H

HO

-2O

O
HO

C

CH2

CH2 O

PO32-

Pi
NAD+
NADH + H+

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate

Aldolase

O

4
H

C

+

Triose
phosphate
isomerase

H

H

C

C O PO32-

5

*6

-2O

Glyceraldehyde3-phosphate
dehydrogenase

OH
3P

O

CH2 C
H

O PO32-

ATP

ADP

OH
-2O

C
O

3P

Phosphoglycerate
kinase

CH2 C

C

H
3-Phosphoglycerate

7

1,2-Bisphosphoglycerate

O

OO

Phosphoglycerate
mutase

8

HO H
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate

-2O

HO
Phosphoglycerate
mutase

8

3P

O

CH2 C
H

-2O

OC
O

2-Phosphoglycerate

Enolase

9

3P

O

CH2

C

O-

ATP

ADP

O

C
O

Phosphoenolpyruvate

Pyruvate kinase

10

CH3 C

OC
O

Pyruvate

Figure 2. Overview of Glycolysis.
Bidirectional arrows indicate enzymes used for both glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. Unidirectional arrows indicate enzymes that only function in glycolysis.
ring in duplicate (two G3P from one glucose).

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

*Note that reactions 6-10 are occur-

Page 57

10. Pyruvate kinase then transfers a high energy phosphate group from PEP to ADP,
producing an ATP for use by the cell, and pyruvate.
-2O P
3

O

CH2

C

O-

ADP

ATP

C
O

Phosphoenolpyruvate

Pyruvate kinase

O
CH3 C

OC
O

Pyruvate

Keeping in mind the doubling of reactions from steps 6-10 (splitting of fructose-1,6bisphosphate generates two G3P), the total usable energy production from glycolysis of
a single molecule of glucose is 4 ATP and 2 NADH. However, the net ATP production
is only 2 ATP if we remember the initial investment of two ATP in the early steps. Not
really anything to write home about. Furthermore, although the NADH and pyruvate can
participate in the tricarboxylic acid cycle in aerobic eukaryotic situations to generate a
significant amount of ATP, in anaerobic situations, they do not produce usable energy.
Thus anaerobic ATP production, i.e. glycolysis, is far less efficient at extracting energy
from a glucose molecule than aerobic ATP production, which can generate approximately 38 ATP per glucose. On the other hand, when a lot of ATP must be generated
quickly, glycolysis is the mechanism of choice, in cells such as the fast-twitch fibers of
skeletal muscle. These cells actually have very few mitochondria because glycolysis can
produce ATP at a much higher (up to 100 times) rate than oxidative phosphorylation.
What happens to the pyruvate and NADH? In aerobically metabolizing cells, they go to
the mitochondria for the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. In anaerobes, they
undergo fermentation.

Fermentation
When the average person hears the word “fermentation” he probably thinks about
alcohol. As you no doubt recall, glycolysis gave us some usable energy in the form of
ATP, and then there are the other products, NADH and pyruvate. As we shall see in the
next section, if the cell is eukaryotic and oxygen is available, then those molecules can
help make more ATP. If no oxygen is available or the cell is just a lowly prokaryote,
it undergoes fermentation to produce either lactate or ethyl alcohol. Why does the
cell need lactate or ethanol? It doesn’t, although the lactate can contribute to overall
metabolism. What the cells do need is NAD+, so that glycolysis can continue beyond
step 6. Without fermentation, continued glycolysis would convert all of the NAD+ to
NADH, and then be stuck, unable to continue. So the primary reason for fermentation,
whichever path it takes, is to regenerate NAD+ from the NADH.

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Pyruvate kinase requires not only divalent Mg++ as with most
other kinases, but also K+. The enzyme works in two steps: the
ADP attacks the PEP phosphorus to make ATP and enolpyruvate.
Enolpyruvate is then converted to its keto- tautomer.

Note that the NADH produced by glycolysis in the cytoplasm does
not directly participate in oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria since the inner mitochondrial membrane is impermeable to it, but it sends a “virtual equivalent” into the mitochondria
via one of two pathways: the aspartate-malate shuttle combines
malate-a-ketoglutarate antiports, aspartate-glutamate antiports,
and metabolite interconversion by transaminase with malate dehydrogenase to oxidize NADH cytoplasmically and use the energy
generated to reduce NAD+ in the mitochondrial matrix; the other
pathway is a DHAP shuttle system, in which NADH is used to
reduce dihydroxyacetone phosphate to glycerol-3-P using a cytoplasmic glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and the cycling the
DHAP to glycerol-3-P via a flavoprotein dehydrogenase embedded
in the inner mitochondrial membrane. This flavoprotein dehydrogenase takes the electrons from glycerol-3-P to make FADH2,
which can participate in the electron transport chain.
The DHAP or glycerophosphate shuttle is less efficient than the
malate-aspartate shuttle, generating approximately 2 ATP vs 2.7
ATP per NADH. However, it can operate even when the concentration of cytoplasmic NADH is low, as happens in tissues/
cells with a very high metabolic rate (including skeletal muscle
and brain), while the malate-aspartate shuttle (prevalent in liver
and heart) is sensitive to the relative concentration of NADH and
NAD+.

Page 58

In lactate fermentation, the pyruvate is converted to lactate by lactate dehydrogenase.
This reaction requires the oxidation of NADH, which thus provides NAD+ to the cell for
continued glycolysis.

O-

NADH

O

O
C

C

CH3

NAD+

OH

O

Lactate
Dehydrogenase

O-

Pyruvate

C

C

CH3

H
Lactate

For many cells, the lactate is a waste product and excreted. In fact, this is the case
with most muscles: the lactate is carried by the blood from the muscle cells to the
liver, where it can be converted to glucose. Thus, although lactate is formed at high
rates when muscles are overworked and become fatigued, it is not directly the cause of
muscle fatigue. As oxygen availability cannot keep up with aerobic ATP production, and
larger and larger proportions of the ATP generated come from glycolysis with fermentation. The current model of muscle fatigue posits that it is due to acidification of the
muscle cell as it undergoes rapid glycolysis.
However, in some tissues and cell types, particularly in the heart and brain of higher
animals, cell membranes are highly permeable to lactate, the cells can readily convert
the lactate to pyruvate, and since these are highly oxygenated tissues, the pyruvate is
then used for the TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation to generate ATP. In fact,
some non-neuronal support cells in the brain (astrocytes) generate and excrete copious
lactate which is taken up by the neighboring neurons to fuel ATP production.
In alcohol fermentation, pyruvate is first acted upon by pyruvate decarboxylase, which
liberates a CO2 molecule and produces acetaldehyde. Acetaldehyde is then acted upon
by alcohol dehydrogenase, using NADH, generating NAD+ and ethanol. Here, like with
lactate fermentation, the desired product is the regenerated NAD+. Ethanol is excreted,
and in most animals, is converted to acetaldehyde and then acetic acid, before finally
ending up as acetyl-CoA.
O-

O
C

C O

O
Pyruvate
Decarboxylase

H
C
CH3

+ CO2

CH3
Pyruvate

O
C
CH3

Acetaldehyde

H NADH

NAD+

Alcohol
Dehydrogenase

OH
H C

H

CH3
Ethanol

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Page 59

As with glycolysis, fermentation can and does take place in cells that are able to make
ATP by oxidative phosphorylation. The relative contribution of glycolysis and oxidative
phosphorylation to the cellular ATP pool is determined dynamically by physiological
conditions.

The TCA cycle
So you’re a hot young eukaryote sporting all kinds of fancy internal membranous organelles, with a need to prove yourself better than the old guard prokaryotes — what
do you do? Well, make scads of ATP, of course! And seemingly effortlessly at that, using
only the dregs left over after glycolysis has taken its pass at a glucose molecule: NADH
and pyruvate. Glycolysis in eukaryotes, as befits its prokaryotic origins, happens in the
cytoplasm. The TCA cycle happens inside the matrix of the mitochondria, a doublemembraned organelle.
The pyruvate needs to make its way from the cytoplasm, through both outer and inner
mitochondrial membranes, and into the mitochondrial matrix. How does this work?
The outer membrane is porous, being riddled with large relatively nonspecific anion
channels known as voltage-dependent anion channels (VDACs), and will readily admit
pyruvate. In contrast, the inner mitochondrial membrane is highly impermeable, and
entry of pyruvate is specifically regulated by a pyruvate transporter protein.
O
S

C CH3

CH2
CH2

Blue = Acetyl group
Green = β-Mercaptoethylamine
Red = Pantothenic acid (Vitamin B5)
Black = Adenosine - 3’ - phosphate

NH
C

O

CH2
CH2
NH2

NH
C

O

HO

C

H

H3C

C

CH3

CH2

N

N

O

N

N
O
P
O-

O
O

O

P

O

CH2

OH
-O

O

H

H

O

OH

H

P OO

Figure 3. Acetyl-Coenzyme A is composed of four distinct molecular parts.

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Page 60

1. Once the pyruvate enters the mitochondrial matrix, the pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex (consisting of three enzyme subunits E1, E2, and E3) converts it to acetyl-CoA
(fig. 3) for entry into the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA). This reaction generates NADH
and liberates CO2.
O
H3C

C

COO- +

NAD+

+ Coenzyme A

Pyruvate
Dehydrogenase

O
H3 C

C

S

CoA + NADH + CO2

Now consider the breakdown of glucose. Recall that the complete breakdown of that
six-carbon sugar should yield six single-carbon molecules of carbon dioxide. In glycolysis, the glucose is broken down into two molecules of three-carbon pyruvate. As the
pyruvate is converted to acetyl-CoA, one CO2 is generated per molecule of pyruvate.
That leaves just four carbons (in two 2-carbon molecules of acetyl-CoA) out of the original glucose 6. The TCA cycle will liberate each of those carbons as CO2 as well. Knowing
the reactions in which the remaining carbons are released is a good way to study the
first half of the TCA cycle.
As an integral part of coenzyme A, vitamin B5, or pantothenic acid, is needed for the
TCA cycle, and therefore, for normal efficient generation of ATP. However, unlike some
other vitamins, B5 deficiency is rare, and usually associated with deficiency in other vitamins or general malnourishment. On the other hand, deficiency in another B vitamin
involved in pyruvate dehydrogenase activity (fig. 4), thiamine (B1), can lead to disease
symptoms known as beriberi.
Arsenic, or more specifically arsenic-containing compounds such as arsenite and arsenate, are poisonous to cells by interfering with this reaction. The arsenic compound can
interact with dihydrolipoamide, resulting in cyclization by bonding of both sulfhydryl
sulfurs to the arsenic atom. This prevents E2 from working, and acetyl-CoA cannot be
generated for ATP production via TCA cycle and oxidative phosphorylation. It should
be noted that these arsenic compounds also affect other sulfhydryl-containing compounds, and within the context of the TCA cycle, it can also inactivate a-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase, which is similar to the pyruvate dehydrogenase.
Beriberi symptoms are classified in two groups: wet beriberi affects the cardiovascular
system with symptoms such as enlarged heart, lung congestion, shortness of breath,
swelling of lower legs, congestive heart failure; dry beriberi (also known as WernickeKorsakoff syndrome) affects the nervous system. Symptoms include polyneuritis in
both central and peripheral nervous system, leading to pain, tingling, loss of sensation
in extremities, loss of muscle function or paralysis of the lower legs, vomiting, nystagmus, and eventually mental confusion, speech difficulties, coma and death.
Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

1. Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (fig. 4) is actually an amalgamation of three enzymes. That is, there are three subunits to the
complex: pyruvate dehydrogenase (E1), dihydrolipoyl transacetylase (E2), and dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase (E3). These three
subunits are associated by noncovalent bonds. The pyruvate
dehydrogenase subunit E1 acts first, using the cofactor thiamine
pyrophosphate (TPP) to help remove a CO2 from the pyruvate to
generate hydroxyethyl-TPP.
This is immediately used as a substrate by E2, resulting in regeneration of TPP and reactivation of pyruvate dehydrogenase,
and also making the intermediate acetyl-dihydrolipoamide. Coenzyme A, which is also a substrate for E2, has a sulfhydryl group
that attacks the acetyl group of acetyl-dihydrolipoamide. The
acetyl group is immediately transferred to Coenzyme A to form
the Acetyl-CoA that enters the TCA cycle.
The final step is for the dihydrolipoamide to be oxidized back to
lipoamide by E3. It is this oxidation step that generates the NADH
from NAD+.
O
H3C

E1

COO- + Thiamine-PP

C

OH
C- TPP E1

H3 C

non-covalently
bound to E1

+ CO2

TPP E1

H3C

S

OH
C- TPP E1 +

HO

C

E1

S

O

CH3

E2

C

E1

S

TPP E1 +

HS

CH3

S
HS

E2

E2

O
CH3

C

O

E2

+ CoA

S

H3C

C

S

CoA +

HS
HS

HS

E2

E2
HS

+

HS

S

S
E3

E3

FAD

E3

SH HS

+

FAD

E3

S

E2
SH HS

S

E2

FAD

E3

S

S
E3

FADH2 + NAD+

E3

S

S
E3

FAD + NADH + H+

Figure 4. Pyruvate dehydrogenase is a complex of three enzymatic subunits, E1, E2,
and E3, which work in sequence as depicted here.

Page 61

Genetic deficiencies in the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex lead to similar, but more
immediately severe problems. The most common mutation is an X-linked dominant
mutation in the a subunit of E1. PDC loss-of-function mutations as well as mutations
in pyruvate carboxylase and mutations in cytochrome oxidase, are considered causes of
Leigh’s disease, which is often neonatally fatal, though exceptions have survived a little
over a decade. Severe lactic acidosis and the inability to generate sufficient energy,
especially in neurons (which would normally be able to metabolize fat - see section of
fatty acid catabolism - but cannot in these patients) and muscle cells, is the underlying
cause of the symptoms.

2. Citrate synthase is a dimeric enzyme that in its native form has
a binding cleft for oxaloacetate. Binding of oxaloacetate causes a
conformational shift closing the oxaloacetate binding site, locks
it in and simultaneously reveals the acetyl-CoA binding site. The
current model for this reaction involves three steps: Acetyl-CoA
is converted to an enol intermediate, which attacks the oxaloacetate to form citronyl-CoA (S-citryl-CoA), which is then hydrolyzed
to citrate and Coenzyme A.
HO

2. Acetyl-CoA enters the tricarboxylic acid cycle as a substrate of citrate synthase,
which adds it to oxaloacetate to make citrate. This is the reason that this cycle is also
called the citric acid cycle. Citrate, having three carboxyl groups, is a tricarboxylic acid,
leading to the name that this text will use. The other common name for this is the
Krebs cycle, as it was first proposed by Hans Krebs in 1937.

C
H 3C

S

CoA

C

+

O

CH2

Citrate Synthase

HO

CH2

C

COO-

+ CoA

CH2

COO-

COO-

3. In the next step, aconitase rearranges citrate to make isocitrate.
COO-

COOCH2
HO
H

C

COO-

C

H

COO-

C

C

CH2

CoA

Citronyl-CoA

CH2
COO-

Aconitase

CH2
H
HO

C

COO-

C

H

COO-

3. Aconitase pushes citrate into a cis-aconitate intermediate,
which is then converted to isocitrate. Interestingly, while aconitase contains an Fe-S cluster, it does not appear to participate in
redox reactions as is usually the case for such groups. Instead, its
purpose is to hold the cis-aconitate in its place within the enzyme
as it [the cis-aconitate] undergoes a bizarre molecular flip on its
way to isocitrate.

HO
H

COO-

COO-

COO-

CH2

CH2

CH2

C

COO-

C

H

COO-

Sodium fluoroacetate, also known as compound 1080, is a common pesticide that is
used primarily against rodent and other mammalian pests, and can act in humans if
ingested. Once introduced to the organism, it can be converted to fluoroacetyl-CoA and
then to fluorocitrate, which then acts as a competitive inhibitor of aconitase. As such,
the poisoning most severely and quickly affects tissues with high energy needs. No effective antidotes are recognized for lethal doses of fluoroacetate poisoning.

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

O

COO-

COO-

O

COO-

Aconitase

H

C

COO-

C

H

COOcis-aconitate
intermediate

Aconitase

H

C

COO-

HO

C

H

COO-

Page 62

4. Isocitrate is a substrate for isocitrate dehydrogenase, which transfers a high energy
electron from the isocitrate onto NAD+ to make NADH and a-ketoglutarate. This reaction also liberates one CO2. For those keeping track at home, that leaves two more
carbons from the six in glucose.
COO-

COOCH2
H

C

COO-

HO

C

H

NAD+

NADH

CH2

CO2

CH2
C

Isocitrate
dehydrogenase

COO-

5. Alpha-ketoglutarate is also oxidized (by a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase) generating
NADH and succinyl-CoA. Like acetyl-CoA, this CoA-associated compound contains a
high energy thioester bond. This reaction liberates the final CO2 from the glucose.
COO-

CH2

+ CoA +

CH2

NAD+

CH2

α-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase

+ NADH + CO2

CH2

O

C

O

COO-

S

CoA

C

6. The CoA is regenerated by succinyl-CoA synthetase, which also forms succinate and
GTP or ATP. This GTP is energetically an ATP equivalent, and made in animal cells. Bacterial and plant homologues of this enzyme use ADP and make ATP. Formation of this
ATP/GTP is possible because the high-energy thioester bond of succinyl-CoA is broken.
COOCH2

+ GDP + Pi

CH2
C

O

S

CoA

Succinyl-CoA
synthetase

COOCH2
CH2

+ GTP + CoA

COO-

7. Next, the succinate is oxidized. The enzyme that does this, succinate dehydrogenase,
is a little different from the other dehydrogenases because this one happens to be embedded in the inner mitochondrial membrane, and instead of transferring the electron
to NAD+, the electron is transferred to FAD, making FADH2, and fumarate. The energy
in FADH2 can also be used to power ATP production similar to the energy in NADH.
COOCH2
CH2
COO-

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Succinate
dehydrogenase

FAD

FADH2

COOHC
CH
COO-

NAD+

CH2
H

C

COO-

HO

C

H

COO-

Isocitrate

COO-

COO-

COO-

O

COO-

COO-

4. The NAD+-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase is actually found
in two isoforms in mammals: an NAD+-utilizing isoform in the mitochondrial matrix, and an isoform that uses NADP+ that is found
in the cytosol as well as the mitochondria. The reaction starts
with NADH-generating oxidation of isocitrate to oxoalosuccinate,
which is then decarboxylated with the help of a Mn++ or Mg++ cofactor to release the carbon dioxide and form a-ketoglutarate.
NADH + H+

CO2

CH2
H

CH2

C

COO-

CH2

C

O

C

COO-

Oxalosuccinate

O

COO-

α-ketoglutarate

5. a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase is very similar to pyruvate dehydrogenase complex structurally and mechanistically. There are
three enzymes: the a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase, a dihydrolipoyl transsuccinylase, and dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase. Also
similar to pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, the end product is a
molecule containing a high energy thioester bond.

6. Succinyl-CoA synthetase first brings together the succinyl-CoA
and inorganic phosphate (in solution within the mitochondrial
matrix as well as the cytosol) to produce succinyl phosphate and
liberate the CoA. Then the phosphate is transferred from the
succinyl phosphate, to the enzyme itself temporarily, which then
drops the succinate. And finally, the phosphate is transferred to
GDP/ADP.
7. Even though the usual intro-class simplification is that FADH2
is roughly an equivalent to NADH, the situation is actually more
complicated. Unlike NAD+, and for that matter, unlike most occurences of FAD, the FAD is covalently bound to the succinate
dehydrogenase. Therefore, it is not a soluble metabolite, nor is
it available to be reoxidized quite like NADH. It is, of course,
reoxidized. But, this occurs within the context of the electron
transport chain (where it is known as Complex II), with the help
of Coenzyme Q.
Page 63

8. Fumarase catalyzes the addition of water to the fumarate to generate malate.
COO-

COOFumarase

HC
CH

HO

H

CH2

H2O

COO-

C

COO-

9. Malate is oxidized by malate dehydrogenase in the final reaction of the TCA cycle
to generate more NADH, and oxaloacetate, the latter of which can then be added to
COOHO

C

NAD+

NADH

C

H

CH2
COO-

COO-

Malate
Dehydrogenase

O

CH2

8. The carbon double bond of fumarate is attacked by a hydroxyl
(OH-) to form a carbanion transition, which then takes on a proton (H+) from the enzyme to form the malate. The fumarase enzyme is protonated at the same time that it binds fumarate, and
is deprotonated at the end to form the malate.

9. Malate dehydrogenase is similar in structure to the lactate
dehydrogenase and the alcohol dehydrogenase mentioned in the
fermentation section. Energetically, the standard free energy
change of this reaction is very highly positive (29.7 kJ/mol) but the
oxaloacetate is quickly converted to citrate, so that more formation of oxaloactetate is favored over malate formation.

COO-

acetyl-CoA to start the cycle all over again. Now that the complete cycle has been
described, it should be noted that the regulation of this cycle is primarily through
acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate availability, as well as NADH concentration. As respiration
rate increases, NADH levels drop as they are oxidized to make ATP (see next section).
This drop in [NADH] then causes an increase in oxaloactetate, which is then used by
citrate synthase. [Acetyl-CoA] is regulated by its synthesis by pyruvate dehydrogenase.
On the reverse side of regulation, both NADH and succinyl-CoA are strong inhibitors of
a-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase. Thus as NADH is used up, the enzyme is disinhibited
and increases its production of more NADH.
Having taken the 2 pyruvates created during glycolysis through the TCA cycle to complete oxidation into CO2, what is our intrepid eukaryotic hero left with? Two ATPequivalents (GTPs) six NADH, and two FADH2. This hardly seems to be a treasure trove
of usable energy worth boasting about. Fortunately, the mitochondrion is not finished.
Next, the high energy electrons will take a ride on the electron transport chain, and via
the magic of oxidative phosphorylation, produce ATP by the bucket.

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Page 64

H3 C

C

CH2

COOH

C

COO-

HO

C

H

Pyruvate (3C)
NAD+

Coenzyme A
Pyruvate
dehydrogenase

COO-

1
Aconitase

CO2

NADH

C

Isocitrate (6C)

NAD+ NADH

CO2

CH2
C

Isocitrate
dehydrogenase

4

CH2

O

CO2

α-ketoglutarate (5C)

NAD+

α-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase

COOS

Coenzyme A

COO-

3

O
H3 C

COO-

COO-

O

Acetyl CoA (2C)

HO

COO-

5

CH2

CoA

NADH

CH2
CH2

COO-

C
CH2

C

O

COO-

S

CoA

Succinyl-CoA (4C)

Citrate (6C)

CoA-SH

TCA
CYCLE

Citrate synthase

2

GDP + Pi

Succinyl-CoA
synthetase

GTP

6

CoA-SH

COOC

O

ADP
ATP

COO-

CH2

CH2

COO-

CH2

Oxaloacetate (4C)

COOSuccinate (4C)
Malate
dehydrogenase

Succinate
dehydrogenase

9

NADH
NAD+

COOHO

C

COOMalate (4C)

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

HC

H

CH2

Figure 5. The Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle

COO-

8

Fumarase

H2O

7

FAD
FADH2
(to Complex II)

CH
COOFumarate (4C)

Page 65

Oxidative Phosphorylation
Oxidative phosphorylation denotes the phosphorylation of ADP into ATP, utilizing the
energy from successive electron transports (hence the “oxidative”). The basic concept
is that oxidation of NADH, being highly exergonic, can generate the energy needed to
phosphorylate ADP. Since oxidation of NADH by oxygen can potentially release 52 kCal/
mol (218 kJ/mol), and the energy needed to phosphorylate ATP is approximately 7.5 kCal/
mol (30.5 kJ/mol), we should be able to expect the formation of several ATP per oxidized
NADH. Indeed, this is what happens, although not directly. As noted with the breakdown of glucose, a one-step oxidation would generate too much energy for cellular
processes to handle, and most would be wasted. So instead of oxidizing NADH directly
with O2, the electrons are transferred to a series of gradually lower-energy carriers until
finally reaching oxygen. This sequence is the electron transport chain.
The electron transport chain is based on the activity of four major enzyme complexes
(conveniently called complexes I-IV) embedded in the inner mitochondrial membrane,
along with some small easily diffusible electron carriers to move the electrons from
one complex to the next. These complexes are present in extremely high numbers as
befits their necessity in generating energy, comprising nearly 75% of the inner membrane mass (in comparison, the plasma membrane of an average eukaryotic cell has a
protein concentration closer to 50%). An overview of the process is shown in figure 6:
as previously noted, electrons are stripped from NADH, and eventually end up on oxygen. As the electrons are moved to lower-energy carriers, energy is released and used
to pump protons from the mitochondrial matrix into the intermembrane space.
Complex I is an NADH dehydrogenase. Shown in yellow in figure 6, its purpose is to
remove a pair of electrons from NADH and transfer them onto ubiquinone (Coenzyme
Q or CoQ), a small hydrophobic electron carrier that can then carry the electrons to
complex III. This is a multistep process that involves first transferring the electrons
onto an associated flavin mononucleotide (FMN) molecule, which then transfers the
electrons to a set of iron-sulfur moieties connected to the enzyme complex itself (structure in fig. 7). Finally, the electrons are moved onto ubiquinone. As these transfers
occur, the energy that is released during these transfers powers the pumping of 4 H+
ions across the inner mitochondrial membrane. Complex I is inhibited by rotenone, a
pesticide used primarily against insects and fishes.
We’ll take a mental pass on complex II for now, and hit it at the end of this roll call.
The reasons will be apparent then.

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

e-

4 H+

e-

2 H

+

Complex I

Fe-S

FMN
2e-

e-

Cyt c

CoQ
CoQH2

2 H+

2 H+

Cyt c

Cyt c
Cua

Cyt c1

Fe-S
2e-

2 H+

Cyt a

Fe-S

Cub - Cyt a3

Complex IV

Cyt b

Complex III

2 H+
NADH

NAD+ + H+

2 H

+

1/2 02 + 2H+

H2O

4 H+

Figure 6. The primary electron transport pathway in mitochondria. Complexes I,
III, and IV are shown. Complex II is pictured in fig. 10. The complexes are all buried in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Protons are being pumped from the
matrix to the intermembrane space utilizing energy sapped from the high energy
electrons as they move from a higher-energy carrier to a lower-energy carrier.

Figure 7. Although the size of complex I varies somewhat across species, the
rough L-shaped three-dimensional conformation is constant. The FMN is located
in the larger portion of the complex, while the ubiquinone docking site is located
in the short branch. In the figure above, which depicts two aspects (rotated 90°)
of NADH dehydrogenase complex, the FMN is shown in grey and red, while Fe-S
centers are shown in orange and yellow. The figure was generated from data in
the RCSB Protein Data Bank.

Page 66

Complex III is also known as the cytochrome bc1 complex (fig. 6, purple). The purpose
of this complex is to pass the electrons from ubiquinone onto cytochrome c. The use
of ubiquinone is important here, because it is stable with either two, or just one, extra
electron. Cytochrome c, on the other hand, can only carry one electron. So, this complex docks ubiquinone, and holds it until it has passed its first electron onto cytochome
c, which then moves onto complex IV, and then its second electron onto another cytochrome c. With each transfer, two protons are pumped across the membrane.
Finally, cytochrome c drops the electron off to complex IV, cytochrome c oxidase (fig.
6, red). Cytochrome c oxidase accomplishes the final step: transferring electrons onto
oxygen atoms to make water. The really interesting thing about this process is that
the enzyme must hold onto the electrons as they are transferred one at a time from
cytochrome c, until it holds four electrons. Then, it can transfer one pair to each of
the oxygen atoms in molecular oxygen (O2). It is very important to do this because
transferring any less than all four electrons would lead to the creation of reactive
oxygen species (ROS) that could cause damage to the enzymes and membranes of the
mitochondria.
Oxygen is absolutely required. If oxygen is not available, there is no place to transfer
the electrons, and very quickly, the electron transport chain is halted and carriers such
as cytochrome c and CoQ cannot release their electrons and eventually there are no
more available carriers. Similarly, when that happens, NAD+ is not regenerated, so the
TCA cycle is also stuck. This leaves only the anaerobic non-oxygen-requiring glycolysisfermentation cycle for generating ATP.

In fact, some well known poisons act at exactly this point. Both
cyanide and carbon monoxide can bind with higher affinity than
oxygen at the heme in complex IV. Since neither can accept electrons, the effect is just as though no oxygen was available.
Although cytochrome c oxidase is sometimes abbreviated COX, it
is not the target of the COX-2 inhibitors that are used pharmaceutically in pain management, e.g. Bextra, Celebrex, or Vioxx. That
refers to a family of enzymes known as the cyclooxygenases.

We now return to complex II (see fig. 10). We mentioned complex II as succinate dehydrogenase when discussing the TCA cycle. It also participates in the electron transport
chain by passing electrons to ubiquinone. However, rather than transferring electrons
that originated from NADH like the other three complexes of the electron transport
chain, the electrons originate from the covalently bound electron carrier FADH2 (flavin
adenine dinucleotide), which received the electrons from succinate, as described in the
TCA cycle section. Once the electrons have been passed to ubiquinone, it then moves
on to complex III to drop off those electrons to cytochrome c, and the rest of the
electron transport chain continues. FAD, the oxidized form of FADH2, is then ready to
participate in the next redox cycle.
The purpose of this electron transport chain, with respect to ATP generation, is the
pumping of H+ from the mitochondrial matrix into the intermembranous space. Since
the concentration of protons is higher in the intermembrane space, it will take energy
to move them against the concentration gradient, which is where our high-energy
Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Page 67

CYTOSOL
Pyruvate

OUTER
MEMBRANE

H+

Pyruvate

e-

INTERMEMBRANE SPACE

4 H

+

2 H+

eCyt c

2 H+

Complex I

Fe-S

2e-

Cyt c

CoQ
CoQH2

FMN
2e-

CoQH2

Cyt b

Complex III

2 H+

2 H+

H+
Pyruvate (3C)

NADH

NAD+

NAD+ + H+

Cua

Cub - Cyt a3

Fe-S

Complex IV
c

FADH2

c

c

INNER
MEMBRANE

ε

c

c

γ

H+

H2O

4 H+

b

CO2
NADH

H+

2 H+

1/2 02 + 2H+

2 H+

H+

H+

H+

2e-

FAD

H

H+

+

a

Cyt a

Fe-S

CoQ

Fe-S

H

H+

+

H+

Fe-S

Cyt c1

Fe-S

2 H+

Complex II

2 H+

H+

H+

H+

e-

Cyt c

α

Coenzyme A

β
NAD+ NADH

Acetyl CoA (2C)

Isocitrate (6C)
Aconitase

CO2
α-ketoglutarate (5C)

Isocitrate
dehydrogenase

CoA

Citrate (6C)
CoA-SH

TCA
CYCLE

Citrate synthase

Oxaloacetate (4C)

NADH

Malate (4C)

Fumarase

H2O

α β α

NADH

α-ketoglutarate
dehydrogenase

δ

CO2
ADP + Pi
Succinyl-CoA (4C)
GDP + Pi

Succinyl-CoA
synthetase

ATP

ADP

GTP
CoA-SH

Succinate
dehydrogenase

Malate
dehydrogenase

NAD+

NAD+

β

ATP

Succinate (4C)
FAD

Fumarate (4C)
FADH2

(to Complex II)

MATRIX

Figure 10. Catabolic reactions of the mitochondria.

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Page 68

electrons come into the picture. As they move from one carrier to the next, they are
moving from a higher to a lower energy state. This implies that some energy is lost
from the electron, and some of that energy is tapped by the enzymes of the electron
transport chain to move protons from the matrix to the intermembrane space.

H+

H+

H+

H+

H+
H+

H+

H+
H+

H+

a

There are two methods by which the protons are moved: the redox loop, and the proton pump. The proton pump, which is the method by which complex IV moves protons, is the easier to understand: H+ is bound on the matrix side of the enzyme in its
reduced state (after it has received an electron), and a conformational shift occurs upon
reoxidation to open the enzyme up to the intermembrane side, and the H+ is released.
The redox loop, which occurs in complex I, and in complex III in a variation called the
Q cycle, essentially posits that an initial redox center requires the binding of both the
high energy electron and a proton from the matrix side of the membrane. When the
electron is transferred to the next redox center in the chain, a proton is released to the
intermembrane space.

c

INNER
MEMBRANE

H+

H+

c

c

ε

c

c

γ

H+

b
α
β

β
α β α

δ

Whatever the mechanism, what is the point of all this proton pumping? As you might
suspect, using up energy to pump an ion against its concentration gradient isn’t done
for the fun of it. Rather, this generates significant potential energy across the inner
mitochondrial membrane. And, it so happens that there is an enzyme that can convert
that energy into the physiologically useful chemical form of ATP. This enzyme is, not
surprisingly, named ATP synthase (fig. 8). It is also referred to in some texts as the
F1F0-ATPase, based on its reverse activity (at the expense of ATP, it can pump protons),
and the fact that it can be broken down into two major functional units: F1 which can
hydrolyze but not synthesize ATP and is a soluble protein, and F0 which is an insoluble
transmembrane protein.

ADP + Pi

ATP

Figure 8. ATP synthase. As protons pass through the ATP synthase, they
release energy by going from high concentration to low. This energy
drives the rotational movement of the shaft and the generation of ATP.

ADP

+

Pi
ADP

L

L

The ATP synthase is an extraordinary example of an enzyme that transforms the energy
inherent in a concentration gradient across a membrane into mechanical energy, and
finally into chemical bond energy. It is descriptively called a “rotary engine” because
the very generalized sequence of events is as follows: protons flow down their gradient
through a proton channel subunit of the ATP synthase, in flowing down the gradient,
energy is released, this energy causes rotation of a multisubunit “wheel”-like subunit
attached to a spindle/axle (g subunit) which also spins. The spinning of this asymmetrically shaped spindle unit causes conformational changes in the catalytic subunit (made
of the a and b subunits) it is attached to, changing an ADP+Pi binding site to a catalytic
site that can “squeeze” the molecules together into an ATP, and then finally open up to
release the ATP (fig. 9).

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

T

O

T

O

ATP

ATP

ADP Pi

ATP

T

T
L

Pi

L

O

O

ATP

ATP

Figure 9. ATP synthase head rotation. The rotating spindle causes asymmetric changes to the shape of the three potential binding sites, cycling
them through the loose (L) conformation that binds ADP and Pi, the tight
(T) conformation that literally squeezes the two sustrates together into
ATP, and the open (O) conformation that allows ATP.

Page 69

Of course, it isn’t quite that simple (fig. 8). Starting with the initial movement of protons, as they move from the intermembrane space into the ATP synthase, they enter a
small hydrophilic channel (a) and then bind onto one of the c-subunits of the “water
wheel” c-ring. Binding of the H+ to the c-subunit causes it to lose affinity for the asubunit, allowing it to spin, and simultaneously causes a conformational change that
essentially pushes off against the a-subunit, initiating the movement. Once it has spun
around almost a complete turn, the H+ is positioned by another channel (b), which funnels it from the c-subunit into the matrix. The c-subunit structure is connected to an
asymmetric spindle that is itself connected to the catalytic subunits.

Uncoupling Electron Transport from ATP Synthesis
So, that is oxidative phosphorylation. It productively utilizes the energy of the proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial membrane (created by oxidation-powered
pumps) to drive ATP formation at an approximate rate of 3 protons to 1 ATP. The system is normally highly self-regulated due to impermeability of the inner mitochondrial
membrane to H+. If the ATP is not used up quickly, then its concentration slows the action of ATP synthases, which slow the movement of protons out of the intermembrane
space. This buildup of protons will eventually be enough that the free energy needed
to transfer a proton into the intermembrane space (from the electron transport chain)
will not be sufficient to overcome the concentration gradient. Electron transport is
slowed, and working backwards, the chain reaction slows respiration rates in general.
As the cell/organism requires more energy and uses up the ATP more quickly, protons
flow more quickly and the electron transport chain is disinhibited. Thus there is a direct association between respiration rate and physiological energy need.
Interestingly, there is an exception to this tight coupling of the electron transport
chain and formation of ATP. The purpose of brown fat (aka brown adipose tissue),
which is most often found in newborn and hibernating mammals, is to generate nonshivering (non-movement-based) heat to keep the animal warm. This is accomplished
by uncoupling the electron transport chain from the ATP synthesis. This uncoupling
is a hormonally controlled process based on the presence of a mitochondrial proton
channel called thermogenin. The hormone norepinephrine increases production of free
fatty acids, which open the thermogenin channel. This allows protons to flow from the
intermembrane space back into the matrix without having to go through ATP synthase.
Because of this, the electron transport chain can keep chugging away, ATP levels do not
build up, there is no reduction in respiration rate, and the excess energy not being used
in ATP production is released as heat.

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

In fact, 2,4-dinitrophenol, which is used in a variety of research
and industrial applications today, was at one time used as dieting
drug (in the 1930’s) because through a different mechanism, it too
uncoupled electron transport from ATP synthesis. Its mechanism
of action derived from its ability to carry and release protons as it
freely diffused through the mitochondrial membrane (since it is a
small hydrophobic molecule). As this continues, cells catabolize
more and more stores of carbohydrates and fats, which is the reason for the interest by dieters. Unfortunately for some of those
dieters, this pharmacological means of uncoupling the electron
transport chain from the ATP synthesis had no regulation other
than the amount of DNP taken. In cases of overdose, respiration
rates could rise dramatically while producing little ATP and a
great deal of heat. In fact, overdose illness and death are generally due to the spike in body temperature rather than lowered
ATP availability. Unfortunately, there are still some dieters and
bodybuilders who self-medicate with DNP despite the dangers.

Page 70

Structure of Electron Carriers
Though they have been mentioned frequently in the earlier parts of this chapter, the
structures of the electron transport chain participants, and particularly of the moieties
that temporarily hold extra electrons, have not been addressed. So, now is the time to
do so. The major players are the flavin mononucleotide (FMN) that plays a role in complex I, ubiquinone (Coenzyme Q), the lipid-soluble electron carrier, the heme groups of
the cytochromes, and iron-sulfur clusters, found in complexes I, II, and III.
Flavin mononucleotide (FMN) or flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), are pictured in figure 11. Note the triple-ring structure and the three possible oxidation states. All three
states are stable - the semiquinone state is not merely a transient form. This stability
allows the conversion from carriers that can only handle one electron to carriers that
can handle two electrons, and vice versa. The same holds true for ubiquinone - stable
as ubiquinone (fully oxidized), semiubiquinone (radical state), and ubiquinol (fully reduced). Alternative nomenclature for these molecules is Coenzyme Q, CoQH+, and
CoQH2. Note the aromaticity gained by ubiquinone when it is reduced. This enhances
its stability and its suitability as a receiver of electrons from NADH.
Heme groups (figure 12) are considerably larger, encompassing a porphyrin ring with
an iron ion held in its center. This iron ion alternates between ferric (Fe3+) and ferrous
(Fe2+) states as the heme group is oxidized and reduced, respectively. In the case of
complex IV, the iron ion can form a complex with O2, which can then receive the electrons being held by the ring structure. This large structure is particularly important
because it needs to be able to transfer a total of 4 electrons to reduce O2 to 2 H2O.
Finally, Fe-S clusters (figure 12) can also act as electron carrying moieties. Like in the
heme group, the iron atom can readily switch between the ferric and ferrous states.

CH2

PO32-

O

HO

C

H

HO

C

H

HO

C

H
R

CH2
N

H3C
H3C

N
N

N

H

O

O

H3C
H3C

H

Flavin mononucleotide (FMN)
[oxidized (quinone) form]

N

N

R
N

O
N

H

H3C

H

O

N

H3C

N

N
H

FMNH
[radical (semiquinone) form]

FMNH2
[reduced (hydroquinone) form]

O
CH3

H3C O

(CH2

H

CH3

C

C

H3C O

H
CH2)10

H

O

H

O
H3C O

O
N

H 3C O

H

OH
CH3

H3C O

H

R

CH3

H 3C O

R

OH

O

Coenzyme Q
(oxidized form)

OH

Coenzyme QH
(radical form)

Coenzyme QH2
(reduced form)

Figure 11. Flavin mononucleotide and Ubiquinone are electron carriers.

H2C

C

H

Cys

CH3
H

H3C

C

Cys

N

N
Fe3+
N

S2-

CH2
Fe

Fe

Cys

S2-

N

[2Fe-2S] Cluster

Cys

CH3

H3C
CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2

COO-

COO-

Figure 12. Left: The heme group shows one of the possible combinations of the
groups attached to the outside of the porphyrin ring. Right: The Fe-S centers also
have variations, such as 4 Fe and 4 S, or even just 1 Fe surrounded by the S atoms
of the four cysteines.

Other Catabolic Reactions
Of course, for many organisms, the food used by cells is not in the form of simple
glucose solutions, but made up of various polymeric biomolecules. The breakdown of
those molecules is described in the next sections.

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Page 71

Starch and Glycogen Depolymerization
Glycogen and starch are long branched polymers of glucose that provide a rapidly
available source of glucose molecules for glycolysis. In omnivores and herbivores, the
primary source of carbohydrates (and thus glucose) is dietary starch. The catabolism of
the amylose and amylopectin in humans begins in the mouth with salivary a-amylase.
This enzyme breaks a(1-4) bonds of both starch molecules except at the ends and near
branch points (in the case of amylopectin). Though the salivary enzyme is inactivated
by the acidity of the stomach, a pancreatic a-amylase goes to work on starch that has
reached the small intestine. The product of these digestions includes maltose, maltotriose, and dextrins. These are acted upon by other intestinal enzymes: a-glucosidase
removes individual glucoses from oligosaccharides, and a-dextrinase, also known as
debranching enzyme, can break a(1-6) bonds as well as the a(1-4) bonds.
Glycogen breakdown is different since most glycogen breakdown is occuring internal
to the cells of an organism rather than in the digestive tract. The primary enzyme is
phosphorylase (also known as glycogen phosphorylase), which breaks the bond of a
terminal glucose to its neighbor by substituting a phosphate group. This generates
glucose-1-phosphate, which can be converted to glucose-6-phosphate by phosphoglucomutase. The G6P, of course, can enter the glycolytic pathway. A glycogen debranching
enzyme is also important, as the phosphorylase is unable to work closer than five glucose residues to a branch site.
The use of glycogen presents an interesting question: why use it as an energy storage
molecule when fats are more abundant in most animals, and more efficient at packaging potential energy? As described in the next section, fatty acids can only be metabolized aerobically, so they cannot serve as a backup fuel source in anaerobic conditions.
Furthermore, even in aerobic conditions, fatty acid catabolism cannot generate glucose,
which is not only needed for cellular fuel, but in the bloodstream for feedback control
mechanisms regulating organismic metabolism.

Fatty Acid Breakdown
Hormone-sensitive lipase in adipose tissue hydrolyzes the stored fat in those cells into
glycerol and fatty acids. Glycerol can enter the glycolytic cycle via conversion to dihydroxyacetone phosphate (a two-step conversion using glycerol kinase and glycerol3-phosphate dehydrogenase). The fatty acids are secreted from the adipose cells into
the bloodstream where they bind to a carrier protein, albumin. This complex can then
be brought inside of other cells by endocytosis, where they can be broken down as an
energy source.

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

CH2

HO
H

H

HO

O

H

H

HO

H

H

HO
O

H

H

O

OH

H

CH2

H

O

H

CH2

HO
H

H

H

O

OH

H

CH2

H

OH

H

H

OH

H
α(1

O
H

O

6) linkage
Branching
enzyme

O
HO
H
Glycogen
synthase

CH2
H

HO
H

HO
H
HO

CH2
H

O
H

H

O

O

P
O-

OH
H
Glucose-1-phosphate

O
H
OH

HO
H

H

CH2
H

O
H

HO
O

H

H
OH
α(1

H

CH2
H

O
H
4) linkage

O
H
OH

CH2
H

H

H

O
H

HO
O

H

H
OH

H

CH2
H

O
H

O

H

H

HO
H

O-

Glycogen
phosphorylase

OH

OH

HO

CH2
H

O
H

H

O

O

P

O-

OOH
H
Glucose-1-phosphate

Figure 13. Glycogen is a storage form of glucose that is broken down by glycogen
phosphorylase (linear a(1-4) bonds) and debranching enzyme (branchpoint a(1-6)
bonds).

Phosphorylase is a homodimer that is allosterically controlled by
glucose, G6P, and ATP negatively, and by AMP positively. In addition to allosteric binding sites for these molecules and a substrate
binding site, phosphorylase also binds pyridoxal-5-phosphate as
an essential cofactor. P5P is derived from pyridoxine, or vitamin
B6.
Much like the phosphoglycerate mutase in step 8 of glycolysis,
phosphoglucomutase is a phosphorylated enzyme that temporarily transfers is phosphate group to the substrate to form a
glucose-1,6-bisphosphate intermediate.
Debranching enzyme actually has two functions: it transfers a
trisaccharide from a 4-sugar branch on the “1” side of an a(1-6)
branching linkage to the end of a branch connected to the “6”
side of the branchpoint. It then hydrolyzes the a(1-6) connecting
the final glucose of the branch, leaving an unbranched chain of
glucose for phosphorylase to attack.

Page 72

The breakdown of fatty acids occurs by b oxidation inside the mitochondrial matrix (fig.
14). Since the inner mitochondrial membrane is impermeable to long-chain free fatty
acids, they must first be activated to fatty acyl-CoA and linked to carnitine, an amino
acid derivative synthesized from methionine and lysine (see Fig. 15). The first step is
O

TCA
CYCLE

H3C

O
C

Acetyl-CoA

+ H3C (CH2)n-2

C

H

CH3 H

H

H

C

O-

Acyl-Carnitine

Acyl - CoA

Fatty Acid + Acetyl-CoA

Acyl-CoA
Synthetase

O

C C SCoA
β α
H
2
trans-∆ -Enoyl-CoA
C

2

4

H2O

CoA

Translocase

O

3-L-hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenase

O
CH2

β-Ketoacyl-CoA

C

SCoA

3
NADH + H+

H
H3C

NAD+

(CH2)n-2

C

Acyl-Carnitine

O
CH2

C

SCoA

OH
3-L-Hydroxyacyl-CoA

Figure 14. b oxidation of fatty acids happens in the mitochondrial matrix.

performed by one of a family of enzymes known as acyl-CoA synthetases or thiokinases,
and requires Coenzyme A and ATP hydrolysis. These reactions occur either on the cytoplasmic surface of the mitochondrial outer membrane or the endoplasmic reticulum,
where acyl-CoA synthetases are embedded. In the second reaction, carnitine palmitoyltransferase I on the outside of the inner mitochondrial membrane links the acyl chain
to carnitine, releasing CoA. The acyl-carnitine is transported into the mitochondrial
matrix where carnitine palmitoyltransferase II releases the fatty acyl chain from the
carnitine and reattaches it to an molecule of CoA.
In the mitochondrial matrix, b oxidation occurs in four steps to yield an acyl-CoA chain
that is shortened by two carbons, and an acetyl-CoA that can then enter the TCA. .
The b refers to the second closest carbon to the one attached to CoA. The bond that
will be broken is the bond between the a and b carbons. All even-numbered, fully saturated, fatty acids can thus be completely oxidized. The presence of double bonds in unsaturated fatty acids introduces complications to this process that must be addressed
using additional enzymes that either move the double bond or remove it.
Most animals and plants generate even-numbered fatty acids; however, some marine
animals (e.g. smelt, mullet) and some plants and bacteria synthesize odd-chain fatty
acids as well. The same enzymes responsible for b oxidation of even-numbered fatty
acids can handle odd-numbered fatty acids as well, except that the final degradation
yields propionyl-CoA instead of acetyl-CoA.
Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

C

enoyl-CoA
hydratase

β-ketoacyl-CoA
thiolase

C

C

Carnitine
Palmitoyltransferase I

(CH2)n-2

H3C

SCoA

(CH2)n-2

N+ C

O

L-Carnitine

FADH2

1

Fatty acyl-CoA

H3C

H OH H

FAD

O
SCoA

H 3C

Carnitine

(CH2)n C SCoA
Fatty acyl-CoA

acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase

H3C

CH3

Carnitine

Carnitine
Palmitoyltransferase II

Acyl - CoA
+
Carnitine

β-oxidation

Figure 15. Fatty acid breakdown by Carnitine Palmitoyl Transferases.

Carnitine deficiency syndromes can occur when there is either
a dysfunctional mutation of carnitine palmitoyltransferase or a
severe deficiency of intracellular carnitine. Since most of the carnitine in the body is found in cardiac and voluntary muscle, the
usual symptoms are muscle weakness and cardiac arrhythmias,
as well as hypoketosis. In neonates, the arrythmias can lead to
death. Carnitine supplementation is a successful treatment in
systemic carnitine deficiency due to either low carnitine intake
or defects in the carnitine transporter embedded in the cell membranes. However, if the defect is in the palmitoyltransferase, supplementation will be unsuccessful.
Carnitine is widely sold as a dietary supplement for increasing
weight loss by enhancing fat catabolism. The basic idea is obvious: carnitine is needed for long-chain fatty acid breakdown,
so more carnitine = more fat burned. However, that only holds
true if carnitine levels are below saturation levels for the palmitoyltransferases. Because 75% of the carnitine in the body must
be ingested (only 25% is synthesized), this is a mild possibility,
depending on diet. Currently, the biomedical community has not
reached a consensus on the efficacy of carnitine supplementation
on fatty acid oxidation in carnitine-sufficient persons.
Page 73

Propionyl-CoA carboxylase

O
H3C

H2C

C

S

H

O

OOC C

C

ADP + Pi

ATP
CoA

-

CoA

CH3

CO2

Propionyl CoA

S

(S)-Methylmalonyl CoA
Methymalonyl-CoA
Racemase

O
OOC CH3 CH3

-

C

S

CoA

Methylmalonyl-CoA
mutase

H3C

H

O

C

C

S

CoA

COOSuccinyl-CoA

(R)-Methylmalonyl CoA

Propionyl-CoA is converted to succinyl-CoA through a series of three enzymes: propionyl-CoA carboxylase, methylmalonyl-CoA racemase, and methylmalonyl-CoA mutase.
The succinyl-CoA could theoretically enter the TCA cycle, but recall that the succinylCoA is simply recycled and never actually consumed by the TCA cycle. Thus, in order
for the succinyl-CoA to contribute to the energy needs of the cell, it must first be converted to malate (steps 6-8 of TCA cycle), which is then converted to pyruvate by malic
enzyme, also known as decarboxylating malate dehydrogenase. Pyruvate can then
enter and be consumed by the TCA cycle.
In addition to oxidation in the mitochondria, fatty acids also undergo b oxidation in
peroxisomes. However, generally, the oxidation in peroxisomes is limited, and the
purpose is to shorten long fatty acids in preparation for final degradation in the mitochondria.
In addition to the more common single-chain fatty acids, cells will also encounter
branched fatty acids, which block b oxidation is alkyl group is on the b carbon. In these
cases, phytanic acid for example, a oxidation is necessary to generate an intermediate
with the alkyl group on the a carbon. This is then followed by b oxidation to completion.
Finally (with respect to fatty acid catabolism), it must be noted that in liver especially,
a large part of the acetyl-CoA generated by oxidation of fatty acids does not enter the
TCA cycle. Instead, it is converted into acetoacetate or D-b-hydroxybutyrate, which
along with acetone, are known, somewhat bizarrely, as ketone bodies. These molecules
are water soluble, and transported through the bloodstream as energy sources for a
variety of tissues, even including brain, which typically only uses glucose as fuel since
fatty acids cannot pass through the blood-brain barrier. However, ketone bodies can
penetrate and are used by brain cells under starvation conditions.
Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Vitamin B12, or 5’-deoxyadenosylcobalamin, is a coenzyme component of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase, but it is not made by either
plants or animals. It is only made by certain bacteria, some of
which live in the intestinal tracts of herbivores. Herbivores thus
absorb the B12 for their use, and carnivores obtain their B12 from
eating herbivores. Defects in methylmalonyl-CoA mutase or severe deficiency in vitamin B12 (most often in vegetarians) can lead
to methymalonyl aciduria/acidemia, that can be fatal in untreated
infants due to acidosis. However, depending on the cause, it can
be treated with high doses of B12 and/or by avoiding dietary oddchain fats and proteins rich in isoleucine, leucine, or methionine,
which also catabolize to propionyl-CoA. Pernicious anemia, in
which usually elderly patients have very low levels of red blood
cells and hemoglobin, as well as neurodegeneration, is also related to B12. However, it is usually not due to a vitamin deficiency,
but rather to the insufficient secretion of intrinsic factor, which
binds B12 in the stomach and then is taken into intestinal cells by
receptor-mediated endocytosis.

Ketoacidosis is a condition in which ketone bodies are being produced much faster than they are used. This leads to a buildup
of the molecules in the bloodstream, which lowers the pH, since
the molecules are acidic. An easy diagnostic of ketoacidosis is a
sweet somewhat fruity smell (of acetone) on the breath. This
condition can be an indication of diabetes, but may also occur
when a person is consuming a high-fat/low-carb diet. When the
body’s metabolism is not using glucose/carbohydrates as the primary food source for either reason, fat is used instead, increasing
production of ketone bodies. Left untreated, severe ketoacidosis
can lead to cell damage as the blood acidifies, and compensation
by increased exhalation of carbon dioxide and lead to respiratory
failure in susceptible individuals.
Page 74

Amino Acid Degradation
Proteins are broken down by a variety of proteases that hydrolyze the peptide bonds
to generate smaller peptides and amino acids. Those amino acids that are not used for
building new proteins may be broken down further to enter the metabolic processes
discussed in this chapter. In their conversion to metabolic intermediates, the amino
acids first undergo deamination. The primary goal of deamination is to excrete excess
nitrogen (as urea) and then use or convert (to glucose) the remaining carbon skeleton. This deamination is a two-part process: the first step to deamination is usually
a transamination catalyzed by an aminotransferase, in which the amino group of the
amino acid is transferred to a-ketoglutarate which then yields a new a-keto acid of the
COO-

COOH

CH2

R

+

CH2
C

H

C

NH2

transaminase

COO-

O

CH2

α-Ketoglutarate

C

O

COO-

NH2

HC

α-Amino acid

COO-

R

+

CH2

α-Keto acid

COOGlutamate

amino acid and glutamate.
The amino group of glutamate could then transferred to oxaloacetate to form a-ketoglutarate and aspartate. That series of transaminations transforms the original amino
acid, but does not get rid of the amino group nitrogen. The alternative pathway is
deamination of the glutamate by glutamate dehydrogenase, which generates a-ketoglCOO-

COOCH2
CH2
HC

NH3+

glutamate
dehydrogenase

NAD+ NADH H2O

CH2

Although cleavage is often thought of as a way of destroying the
activity of a protein, in fact, specific cleavage of inhibitory parts
of a protein can activate it. A prominent example of this (the
caspase cascade) is discussed in the apoptosis section of the cell
cycle chapter.
Some proteases are secreted and do their work extracellularly.
These include digestive enzymes such as pepsin, trypsin, and chymotrypsin, as well as bloodstream proteases like thrombin and
plasmin that help control clotting. The immune system also uses
proteases to destroy invading cells and viruses.

+ NH3+

CH2
C

There is a large variety of proteases, classified into one of six
groups (as of 2008): serine proteases, metalloproteases, aspartic
acid proteases, cysteine proteases, threonine proteases, and glutamic acid proteases. All of them work by forming a nucleophile
at their active site to attack the peptide carbonyl group. They differ in the construction of their active sites, and the specificity of
the target sequences to be cleaved. The MEROPS database (http://
merops.sanger.ac.uk/) lists hundreds of enzymes and their specific
recognition sites. As with other enzymes, recognition is based on
formation of stabilizing hydrogen bonds between enzyme and
target. In the case of proteases, many of the important stabilizing
bonds must be formed right around the cleavage site, thus leading to specific recognition sequences.

O

COO-

COO-

Glutamate

α-Ketoglutarate

utarate and ammonia, using either NAD+ or NADP as the oxidizing agent.
The amino acids break down into one of the following seven metabolic intermediates:
pyruvate, acetyl-CoA, acetoacetate, a-ketoglutarate, succinyl-CoA, fumarate, and oxaloacetate as follows: 1) Ala, Cys, Gly, Ser, Thr, Trp break down to pyruvate; 2) Ile, Leu, Lys,
Thr to acetyl-CoA; 3) Leu, Lys, Phe, Trp, Tyr to acetoacetate; 4) Arg, Glu, Gln, His, Pro to
a-ketoglutarate; 5) Ile, Met, Val to succinyl-CoA; 6) Asp, Phe, Tyr to fumarate; 7) Asn,
Asp to oxaloacetate.

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Page 75

Brain
Glucose
Ketone bodies

Kidney

Liver

Ketone bodies

Ketone bodies
Adipose Tissue
Triacylglycerols

Fatty acids
+
Glycerol

Acetyl CoA
Fatty acids

Lactate
Pyruvate

Urea

Urea

Amino acids

Glutamine

Proteins

Ammonia

Glucose
Glucose

Triacylglycerols

α-Ketoglutarate
Glycogen

Glycerol

Muscle

Glucose

Alanine
+
Glutamine

Lactate

Amino acids

Pyruvate

Fatty acids
Ketone bodies
Proteins

Glucose

Glycogen

Figure 16. Overview of human major metabolites. Although most cells in the body carry out many
of the metabolic activities described in this chapter and the next, the advantage of multicellular
organisms is that certain cell types, tissues, or organs may become specialized to process particular
metabolic reactions more efficiently than other cells, and thus take on a lot of that burden for the
organism.

Chapter 5, Metabolism 1, version 1.5

Page 76

Metabolism 2 :

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.

Anabolic Reactions of the Cell

Anabolic Reactions
As pointed out at the beginning of this book, most of the energy for life on this planet
originates from the sun. In the last chapter, the discussion was on the breakdown
of complex molecules such as sugars and fats that hold great, but difficult to access,
potential energy to produce molecules like ATP that can act as more readily accessible
sources of cellular energy. This energy is then used to synthesize the more complex
biomolecules necessary to build living cells. That synthesis, the formation of sugars,
fatty acids, and amino acids, is the focus of this chapter. Although technically the polymerization of nucleic acids and proteins are anabolic processes, they are not included
in this chapter and are examined in detail separately.

Photosynthesis
In one way or another, the energy of sugar and fat fuel molecules is derived from photosynthesis - the conversion of solar light energy into chemical bond energy, whether
directly in photosynthetic plant cells and certain photosynthetic bacteria, or indirectly
by the ingestion of those plants and bacteria. Photosynthesis is a simple idea: atmospheric carbon dioxide molecules are joined with water molecules to form sugars and
oxygen:
CO2 + H2O

light

CH2O + O2

The production of usable energy from sunlight and the fixation of atmospheric carbon
dioxide are two separate sets of reactions. In plants, photosynthesis takes place only in
cells containing chloroplasts. Chloroplasts are organelles with an evolutionary origin
suspected to be similar to that of mitochondria, and like mitochondria, chloroplasts
generate ATP and use a nicotinamide-based high-energy electron carrier. There are
further similarities: they both have highly folded inner membranes, though in chloroplasts, there are three membranes in all, while mitochondria only have two. Finally,
Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

Page 77

an electron transport chain is embedded in the thylakoid membrane of chloroplasts,
functioning very similarly to electron transport in the mitochondria. In addition to the
electron transport components and ATP synthase (structurally and functionally almost
identical to mitochondrial ATP synthase), the thylakoid membrane is also rich in a set
of molecules that are not found in the inner mitochondrial membrane: light-absorbing
pigment molecules.
In plants, these pigment molecules fall into two classes: the chlorophylls and the carotenoids (fig. 1) but only the chlorophylls can mediate photosynthesis. Photosynthetic
bacteria do not contain chlorophyll, but do have carotenoid pigments that can carry
out photosynthesis. Both are hydrophobic hydrocarbons that are held in place within
the plane of the membrane by transmembrane proteins. Chlorophylls are easily recognizable by the very large Mg++-containing porphyrin ring, while the carotenoids are
long hydrocarbon chains that may or may not have small ring structures on the ends
(e.g. b-carotene). While there is variation in the chlorophyll family, they all impart a
green color to the leaf. Carotenoids, on the other hand have a much wider range of
colors from yellows to reds. Both chlorophylls and carotenoids are able to absorb light
energy of a particular wavelength/energy range and enter an unstable excited state.
When the molecule returns to its ground state, the energy would be emitted as heat
or light in an isolated situation. However within the context of the pigment arrays
(antenna complex) in a living cell, most of the energy is shuttled to another pigment
molecule of lower energy by resonance transfer. As described below, only one pair of
chlorophyll molecules in an antenna complex will actually eject an electron as it drops
from an excited state back to ground state. It is the transfer of that high-energy electron that powers photosynthesis.
Photosynthesis can be divided into two mechanisms: the light reactions, which use light
energy to excite the electrons of certain chlorophylls, and participate in the electron
transport chain to generate ATP and NADPH, and the dark reactions, which use that
ATP and NADPH to fix carbon from CO2 into organic molecules (carbohydrates). As
the name implies, the light reactions require light energy to excite the chlorophyll and
begin electron transport. Dark reactions, however, do not require darkness. They are
technically light-independent, but in some plants, the dark reactions run better in the
light for reasons to be discussed.
The light reactions are intimately tied to the anatomy of the thylakoid membrane;
specifically, the arrangement of light-absorbing pigment molecules in antenna complexes, also called light-harvesting complexes (sometimes abbreviated LHC, not to be
confused with the Large Hadron Collider). These pigments are held by proteins in
ordered three-dimensional groups so that the pigments that absorb the highest energy
Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

H2C

CH

CH3
H

H3C

CH3

C
H

N

N
Mg
N
H3C
H

N
CH3

H

CH2
CH2

H

C

C

O

H
O

C

O

O

O
CH3

H

CH3
CH3

CH3

CH3

H3C

CH3
CH3

CH3

CH3

CH3

Figure 1. Chlorophyll (top) and b-carotene (bottom)

Chlorophyll molecules are made up of a phytol hydrocarbon tail
that anchors the molecule within a membrane, and an electroncarrying porphyrin ring containing a magnesium cation. Note
that the phytol tail is not drawn to scale with the porphyrin ring
in figure 1. Among different types of chlorophyll, the chemical
groups attached to the ring may vary, and this variation is responsible for differences in the absorption spectrum from one
type of chlorophyll to the next. For example, chlorophyll a has
absorption peaks at approximately 430 and 662 nm, whereas chlorophyll b has peaks at 453 and 642 nm. The difference between
the two is small: at C7, there is a —CH3 group on chlorophyll a, but
a —CHO group on chlorophyll b. Presently, there are five known
chlorophylls: chlorophyll a is found in all photosynthetic organisms, chlorophyll b is only found in plants, chlorophylls c1 and c2
are found in photosynthetic algae, and chlorophyll d is found in
cyanobacteria.
Carotenoids have two functions. As noted in the primary text at
left, they can participate in energy transfer in toward the reaction center chlorophylls. They are also a protectant molecule,
preventing reaction center auto-oxidation. Carotenoids can be
highly efficient free radical scavengers due to the conjugation of
alternating single-double carbon bond structures.
Page 78

light are toward the periphery, and the lowest-energy-absorbing chlorophylls are in the
center (fig. 2). Sunlight is composed of a broad range of wavelengths, some of which
are transiently absorbed by the pigments. After a pigment molecule absorbs a photon,
the energy is released and passed on to a pigment tuned to a slightly lower energy
level (longer wavelength), and from there to an even lower-energy pigment, and so on
until it reaches the reaction center chlorophylls. In this way, energy from a wide range
of light wavelengths/energies can all contribute to the ATP and NADPH production
by the light reactions. The antenna complex is crucial because it allows the use of a
greater portion of the solar light spectrum. And, as a tightly-packed three-dimensional
array, photons that pass by one pigment molecule may well hit another one on its way
through the array. All of these characteristics combine to increase the efficiency of
light use for photosynthesis. The reaction center chlorophylls (P680 for photosystem II,
P700 for photosystem I) are the only chlorophylls that actually send excited electrons
into the electron transport chain. The other chlorophylls and pigments only act to
transfer the energy to the reaction center.

PHOTON

4 H+

PQH2

PQB
PQA
Pheophytin
P680
2e-

Mn-Ca

O2 4 H+

2 H2O

Figure 3. Photosystem II (which feeds electrons into photosystem I).

LIGHT

-1.5
Thylakoid
Membrane

P700

REACTION
CENTER

A0

-1.0

A1

Figure 2. Pigment molecules are arranged in an antenna complex
in the thylakoid membrane.

P680

When excited, the reaction center chlorophyll of photosystem II (figure 3) begins the
process of electron transport. This chlorophyll is part of a protein complex that also
includes a Mn-based oxygen-evolving complex (OEC), pheophytin, and a docking site
for plastoquinone. Although the chlorophyll electron is the one excited by the solar
energy, the origin of the electrons to keep the chlorophyll replenished comes from the
splitting (oxidation) of water to O2 and 4 H+.

Fe-S

2ePlastoquinone

0

2ePlastocyanin

+0.5

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

2e-

H2O

1/2 O2 + 2H+

Fe-S
Ferredoxin
eFerredoxin-NADP+
Reductase

Photon

H+ + NADP+

Photon

NADPH

Antenna
Array

2ePhotosystem I
Antenna
Array

2e-

The question of how a cell could generate the energy needed to split water was long
a thorny issue because water is an exceptionally stable molecule. The current model
suggests that the energy comes from an extremely strong oxidizer in the form of P680+.
After P680 is energized by light, an excited electron has enough energy to break away
from the chlorophyll and jumps to pheophytin. Pheophytin becomes Pheo- temporari-

Electron
Transport
Chain

2eCytochrome b6f
Complex

2e-

+1.0

Electron
Transport
Chain
Fe-S

-0.5
Energy of Electrons (volts)

Antenna Complex

Chlorophyll Pigment
Molecule

Photosystem II
+1.5

Figure 4. Change in electron energy moving through photosystems II and I. Light
energy is needed in both photosystems to boost the electron energy high enough
to move to the next electron carrier.

Page 79

ly, and the charge separation in the complex between P680+ and Pheo- helps to enhance
the oxidative power of P680+. That extraordinarily strong attraction for electrons is
what allows the P680 chlorophyll to tear them away from H2O and split the water. In
fact, P680+ is one of the strongest biological oxidizers known. Since four electrons must
be taken to fully oxidize two water molecules and generate molecular oxygen, four
photoexcitation events are needed. While the exact mechanism is still to be elucidated,
it appears that the OEC helps to stabilize the water molecule during this process as well
as holding onto each electron as it comes off.
The excited electrons, moving from the OEC to P680+ to pheophytin, next move to the
lipid-soluble carrier, plastoquinone. The similarity of the name with the mitochondrial
carrier ubiquinone is not a coincidence. They function similarly, and as the plastoquinone takes on the electrons, it also takes on protons from the stromal side of the thylakoid membrane. The PQ moves within the membrane from pheophytin to cytochrome
b6f. As the electrons are transferred to cytochrome b6f, the protons are then dropped
off on the lumenal side of the membrane, increasing their concentration in the chloroplast lumen, and building a proton gradient to power ATP synthase. Cytochrome b6f
passes the electrons on to plastocyanin, an aqueous-phase carrier, which shuttles the
electrons to the P700 reaction center chlorophyll of photosystem I. However, after all
the transfers, the energy level of the electrons is now fairly low (fig. 4) and unable to
power the upcoming reactions. Since it is now on a reaction center chlorophyll, the obvious answer is to re-energize it with a bit of sunlight. This raises the electron energy
sufficiently to reduce ferredoxin. Now things get a little complicated.
This part of photosynthesis can take one of two directions, the linear pathway, which
generates both NADPH and ATP, and the cyclic pathway which mostly generates ATP.
Most of the time, the linear pathway is taken, with the electrons on ferredoxin transferred via ferredoxin-NADPH reductase (FNR) onto NADPH. However, sometimes the
cell requires significantly more ATP than NADPH, in which case, the electrons from ferredoxin are transferred back to plastoquinone via ferredoxin-plastoquinone reductase.
This acts just as described above, and pumps more protons across the membrane to
power the ATP synthase. ATP synthesis goes up and NADPH synthesis goes down.

The OEC, or oxygen-evolving complex (also WOC, water oxidizing
complex) is a metalloenzyme with a Mn4OXCa catalytic cluster,
where X is the number of m-oxo-bridges connecting the metal
atoms, with surrounding amino acids, especially crucial tyrosines,
also playing a role in the coordination sphere of the active site.
The overall complex undergoes a series of 4 oxidation state changes as the P680 chlorophylls are excited by the light energy and
transfer electrons, but at present it is not known what the exact
oxidation state of any given Mn atom is through this series of
state changes. The crucial reaction is the formation of the O-O
bond to form O2. There are two proposed models for this mechanism. One is that the O-O bond is formed when the OEC has
reached its fully oxidized state, and an oxygen in a m-oxo-bridge
radical state interacts with a water molecule. The other proposed
mechanism is that the O-O bond forms earlier as a complexed
peroxide held by the OEC center.

Linear
Pathway
2 H+

Cyclic
1e- Pathway

2 NADPH

2 NADP+
1e-

FD
PHOTON

PQH2

FNR

8 H+

Fe-S
Fe-S
Fe-S

The ATP and NADPH generated by the chloroplast are almost exclusively used by the
chloroplast itself (and not distributed to the rest of the cell) to power the dark reactions, which are energetically expensive. In fact, when the light reactions are not running due to darkness, some plant cells have mechanisms to prevent the dark reactions
from using the limited resources of cellular, non-chloroplastic, respiration. The simplest method of such limitation is the pH sensitivity of rubisco (ribulose bis-phosphate
carboxylase), at least in C3 plants (see below). Rubisco has a very sharp pH optimum
Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

Fe-S

THYLAKOID
MEMBRANE

A1
A0
P700
PC

8 H+

1e-

Photosystem I

Figure 5. Photosystem I initiates electron movement through two pathways.

Page 80

at about pH 8.0, so while the light reactions are running and the protons are being
pumped, the pH rises to about 8 and rubisco works, but in the dark, the pH drops back
to its basal level close to 7.0, inhibiting rubisco activity.

The Calvin Cycle
CH2
HO
H
6 CO2

C

O

PO32-

COO-

C

O

C

OH

CH2

O

PO32-

O-

6 Carboxylase intermediate
CH2
C

O

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

CH2

H

Ribulose
bisphosphate
carboxylase

PO32-

O

12 ADP + 12 Pi

CALVIN
CYCLE

O

H
H

C

OH

O

C

OH
O

PO32-

12 1,3-Bisphosphoglycerate
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase

O PO3210 Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
CH2

la s

m

3

H
H

C

O

C

OH

To
c

12 NADPH

12 NADP+

CH2 O PO3212 Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate

yto

p

PO32-

C

CH2
O

PO32-

12 ATP

2

H
C

O

Phosphoglycerate
kinase

PO32-

Transketolase
Ribose phosphate isomerase
Phosphoribulokinase

6 ATP

OH

12 3-Phosphoglycerate

6 Ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate
6 ADP + 6 Pi

O

C

CH2

1

O

C

12 Pi

H
H

C

O

C

OH

Sugars

O PO322 Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
CH2

Figure 6. The Calvin cycle fixes atmospheric carbon to ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate to form the organic 3-carbon intermediate 3-phosphoglycerate for the formation of sugars.

The dark (carbon fixation) reactions vary depending on the type of plant. The most
common set of carbon fixation reactions is found in C3-type plants, which are so named
because the major stable intermediate is the 3-carbon molecule, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. These reactions, best known as the Calvin cycle (fig. 6), fix CO2 onto the pentose,
ribulose 1,5-bis-phosphate (RuBP). The production part of the cycle begins with formation of RuBP from glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate. Then, the rate-limiting step occurs:

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

Page 81

Ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate and CO2 are joined together by rubisco. Carboxylases are
relatively slow enzymes as a family, and rubisco is one of the slowest. A 6-carbon intermediate is formed but it is unstable, and quickly breaks down to yield two molecules of
3-phosphoglycerate. Some familiar enzymes (from glycolysis, although this is happening
in the stroma, not the cytoplasm) now come into play.
Phosphoglycerate kinase phosphorylates 3-PG to 1,3-bisphosphoglycerate. 1,3-BPG is
then reduced by glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase to form glyceraldehyde3-P. This step requires the energy released from oxidation of NADPH. A small portion
(1/6th) of the GAP that is made is then exported from the chloroplast and will be used
to form more complex carbohydrates. However, the majority is recycled through the
recovery phase of the Calvin cycle to regenerate NADP.
As if having a central enzyme that moves at a snail’s pace and needing to recycle the
majority of its potential product was not bad enough, C3 plants also have to contend
with the hijacking of rubisco for a competing, and energy-wasting, set of reactions
known as photorespiration. Under conditions of low CO2 and high O2 in the local
atmosphere, oxygen, instead of carbon dioxide, binds to rubisco and forms 3-PG and
2-phosphoglycolate from its reaction with RuBP. As detailed in figure 7, the 2-phosphoglycolate is dephosphorylated to glycolate and transported out of the chloroplast.
From there, it undergoes a series of reactions in the peroxisomes and mitochondria to
transform it to 3-PG, which can then go in the chloroplast and participate in the Calvin
cycle. Unfortunately for the cell, in the course of these reactions, NADH and ATP are
used, thus lowering the energy availability inside the cell.
This is a particular problem in hot climates, because the oxygenase activity of rubisco
increases more than the carboxylase activity as the temperature increases. This leads
to an interesting side effect: in C3 plants, as the temperature rises and CO2 is outcompeted by O2 for rubisco binding, the stomata of the leaves need to remain open for
longer in order to allow for acquisition of enough CO2 from the atmosphere. This in
turn allows more water vapor from inside the cell to escape, leading to dehydration.
C3 plants are thus at a competitive disadvantage in hot dry climates in comparison to
plants that do not use rubisco for carbon fixation.
What about plants adapted to such climates? C4 plants, which include some grasses,
corn, sugarcane, and weeds, utilize PEP carboxylase (which does not have the annoying photorespiratory capabilities of rubisco and a higher affinity for CO2) to fix carbon
dioxide to PEP, making oxaloacetate. In an interesting twist, the oxaloactetate, after
conversion to malate, is decarboxylated to yield CO2 again, which is fed to rubisco and
the calvin cycle. The C4 mechanism, also called the Hatch-Slack pathway, utilizes two
Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

OH
CH2

O

C

O

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

CH2

O

PO32-

C

O

C

H

H2O

O-

PO32H

O PO322-Phosphoglycolate

O2

+

Rubisco

Ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate

H

H

O H
Glycolate
O2
H2O2

C

O

C

OH

CH2

Calvin Cycle

O

C

Transported to
peroxisome

O-

PO32-

C

O

O-

PO32-

C

3-Phosphoglycerate
H

O

C
O
Glyoxylate

ADP + Pi
ATP

Transported to
chloroplast

O-

OH

H

C

O

C

OH

C

O

C

H

NH2
Glycine

Transported to
mitochondria

CH2OH
Glycerate
NAD+

NADH

NADH

NAD+
O-

OC

O

C

O

CH2OH
Pyruvate

Transported to
peroxisome

H

C

O

C

CH2OH

NH2
Serine

Figure 7. Photorespiration. Rubisco can catalyze the addition of O2 to RuBP,
producing 3PG, which can be used by the Calvin cycle, and 2-phosphoglycolate,
which is converted to glycolate, transported out of the chloroplast, converted
to glycerate over several steps in the peroxisome and mitochondria, and shipped
back to the chloroplast. This is an energetically expensive process (note NADH
and ATP used).

PEP carboxylase actually fixes HCO3- to PEP rather than CO2 directly. The atmospheric CO2 is converted to the bicarbonate by
carbonic anhydrase.

Page 82

sets of cells, an outer layer (mesophyll) that takes in air and fixes the CO2 to PEP and
produces malate, and an inner layer of cells (bundle sheath) that takes the malate, and
decarboxylates it for its rubisco enzyme. The two cells are connected via plasmodesmata (see Cell-cell Interactions chapter). Although energetically more expensive than
carbon fixation by C3 plants in cooler climates, the C4 pathway overtakes C3 in efficiency as temperatures rise and photorespiration increases.
Desert plants go one step further than C4 plants. Living in environments that are extremely hot and dry during the day, but relatively cool at night, many desert succulents
(like cacti) are diurnal, and only open their stomata at night (when temperatures are
significantly lower and water evaporates far more slowly) for CO2 gathering, which is
then fixed via the CAM pathway to malate. Then in the daylight hours, CO2 is released
from the malate and used in the Calvin cycle to generate carbohydrates.

Pentose Phosphate Pathway
NADPH is found not only in plants, but in animal cells as well. Although our first discussion of NADPH was in the context of photosynthesis, it is also a general reducing
agent in any cell. It is also crucial to note that though introductory texts often consider
NAD+/NADH and NADP/NADPH similarly as high energy electron carriers, and although
they are structurally differentiated only by a phosphate group (on the 2’-OH of adenosine), they are not interchangeable in the metabolic pathways of a cell. NADP/NADPH is
used in reductive metabolic pathways, whereas NAD+/NADH is used in oxidative pathways. With such an important role in biosynthesis, it is no surprise that its production
is part of a major metabolic pathway, the pentose phosphate pathway (figure 7), also
called the phosphogluconate pathway, and the hexose monophosphate shunt.

Variations of this pathway have been found in which aspartate is
transported to the bundle-sheath cells instead of malate.
After decarboxylation of the malate by malic enzyme (NAD-dependent in some species, NADP-dependent in others) to release
the CO2 for rubisco, the resulting pyruvate is shuttled back to the
mesophyll cell where it is phosphorylated by pyruvate-phosphate
dikinase to generate PEP for re-entry into the C4 cycle.

The crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) pathway is named for
a carbon fixation pathway discovered in the Crassulaceae family
of succulent plants including pineapples as well as various cactus species. It utilizes a similar biochemical mechanism as the
C4 pathway, but occurs within a single photosynthetic cell. The
major difference is that the CO2 is only taken in at night, and it
quickly turned into malate, which is stored in vacuoles until daytime. The malate is then released and decarboxylated to provide
the RuBP carboxylase (rubisco) with a steady stream of CO2 for
fixation. Because there is such a rush of PEP carboxylase activity
at night to fix the atmospheric CO2 to PEP, there is a high rate of
starch breakdown to provide the glucose for glycolytic generation of PEP. Interestingly, as the malate is decarboxylated in the
day, its product, pyruvate, can then be used to re-synthesize glucose (see gluconeogenesis below) and then starch.

In step 1 of this pathway, glucose-6-phosphate and NADP+ are bound to glucose-6phosphate dehydrogenase, which transfers a hydride ion from glucose-6-phosphate to
NADP+ to form 6-phosphoglucono-d-lactone and NADPH.
-2O

3P

O
H
HO

CH2

-2O

O

H
OH

H

H

OH

H
OH

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

NADP+

NADPH + H+

Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase

3P

O
H
HO

CH2

O

H
OH

H

H

OH

O

Page 83

In step 2, the 6-phosphoglucono-d-lactone is hydrolyzed to 6-phosphogluconate using
6-phosphogluconolactonase. This reaction actually proceeds fairly quickly even without the enzyme.
O-

O
-2O P
3

CH2

O
H
HO

C
H2O

O

H
OH

H

H

OH

H+

O
6-phosphogluconolactonase

H

C

HO

C

H

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

OH

CH2

O

PO32-

In step 3, the 6-phosphogluconate is decarboxylated by 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase, in the process producing more NADPH, as well as the five-carbon sugar, ribulose5-phosphate. This metabolite is used by the cell as the basis for nucleotide synbthesis.
This concludes the NADPH-producing portion of the pentose phosphate pathway.
O-

O
C
H

C

OH

HO

C

H

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

CH2

NADP+

O

6-phosphogluconate
dehydrogenase

PO32-

CH2

NADPH + H+

OH

C

O

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

CH2

O

A metabolic disorder known as G6PD deficiency manifests itself in
erythrocytes, or red blood cells. NADPH in this case, is needed not
for biosynthetic pathways, but to regenerate reduced glutathione
(GSH). GSH is needed to detoxify peroxides through the action of
glutathione peroxidase. Since the NADPH is in short supply (due
to defect in G6PD), peroxides build up and cause damage to the
membrane lipids. Extensive damage can lead to premature cell
death by autolysis.

PO32-

However, it is useful, in the context of this chapter, to also consider the fate the Ru5P,
which is converted to ribose-5-P by ribulose-5-P isomerase or it is converted to xylulose5-phosphate using ribulose-5-P epimerase. The ribose-5-phosphate is used in nucleotide
synthesis, so plays an important role in not only nucleic acid production, but general
metabolism (e.g. for ATP).
Ribulose-5-phosphate and NADPH are the most significant products of this pathway.
As mentioned earlier, NADPH is important as a general reducing agent. The mechanism for this involves glutathione and glutathione reductase. Glutathione is the primary scavenger of reactive oxygen species such as oxides and peroxides, and the key
regulator of cellular oxidative stress. The reduced form of the glutathione tripeptide
(Glu-Cys-Gly) dimerizes with another glutathione via disulfide bond as they donate
electrons to oxidizers, and is regenerated by glutathione reductase. NADPH is a necessary cofactor for glutathione reductase activity, providing the electrons to reduce the
G-S-S-G dimer.

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

Page 84

O-

O
C
-2O

3P

O
H
HO

-2O

CH2

O

H
OH

H

OH

H
HO

Glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase

OH
H
Glucose-6-phosphate

H

NADPH + H+

NADP+

H

O

3P

CH2

H2O

O

H
OH

C

OH

CH2

C

H

C

O

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

O

H

OH
H
6-Phosphoglucono-δ-lactone

1

H+

H
HO

6-phosphogluconolactonase

CH2

2

O

NADPH + H+

NADP+

6-phosphogluconate
dehydrogenase

2-

PO3

CH2

3

6-Phosphogluconate

OH

PO32-

O

Ribulose-5-phosphate

O
C

Ribulose-5-phosphate
isomerase

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

CH2
C

O

CH2

2-

OH

C

H

C

O

Ribose-5-phosphate

H

C

OH

OH

C

H

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

CH2

O

PO3

+
CH2

Ribulose-5-phosphate
epimerase

OH

OH
O

OH

C

H

H

C

OH

+

H
PO32-

O

C

Transaldolase

OH

CH2

O

PO32-

CH2

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate

Sedoheptulose-7-phosphate

O

H
C

OH

C

CH2

C

CH2

H

Transketolase

O

OH
O

H
C

+

O

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

PO32-

Fructose-6-phosphate

CH2

O

PO32-

Erythrose-4-phosphate

PO32-

Xylulose-5-phosphate

CH2
CH2

OH

C

O

OH

C

H

H

C

OH

CH2

O

H
C

+
O

2-

PO3

Xylulose-5-phosphate

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

CH2

O

Transketolase
2-

PO3

Erythrose-4-phosphate

OH

C

O

OH

C

H

H

C

OH

H

C

OH

CH2

O

+

O
H

2-

PO3

Fructose-6-phosphate

H
C
C

OH

CH2

O

PO32-

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate

Figure 7. The pentose phosphate pathway. The first three reactions generate the energy carrier NADPH in the process of converting glucose-6-phosphate to ribulose-5-phosphate. The Ru5P is
important as a precursor to nucleotide synthesis, as well as for production of other sugars and important metabolic intermediates, such as fructose-6-phosphate and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate.
Transketolase then transfers the terminal two carbons of ribulose-5-P to xylulose-5-P, making sedoheptulose-7-phosphate and G3P. Transaldolase comes up next. It transfers a 3-carbon unit from
sedoheptulose-7-P to the G3P, forming erythrose-4-phosphate and fructose-6-phosphate.Transketolase is used again at this point, transferring a 2-carbon unit from xylulose-5-phosphate - to erythrose-4-phosphate and generating more G3P and fructose-6-P.

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

Page 85

Gluconeogenesis
Having considered the initial anabolic reaction of life - carbon fixation by photosynthesis, we now turn our attention to utilizing the smaller metabolites to generate
glucose and other sugars and carbohydrates. Glucose is the most important fuel for
most organisms, and the only fuel for some cell types, such as brain neurons. Potential
building blocks of glucose include many of the products and intermediates of glycolysis
and the TCA cycle, as well as most amino acids. The key reaction is conversion of any
of these compounds into oxaloactetate before using them to make glucose. In animals,
the amino acids leucine and isoleucine, as well as any fatty acids, cannot be used to
build glucose because they convert first to acetyl-CoA, and animals have no pathway for
acetyl-CoA to oxaloacetate conversion. Plants, on the other hand, can push acetyl-CoA
to oxaloacetate through the glyoxylate cycle, which will be discussed shortly.
The process of gluconeogenesis is in many ways the simple opposite of glycolysis, so
it is not surprising that some of the enzymes used in glycolysis are the same as those
used for gluconeogenesis. However, there are a few exceptions. These arose (and have
probably evolved) for two major reasons - (1) the thermodynamics of the reaction are
prohibitive, and (2) the need for independent control of the catabolic and anabolic
processes. Since there is this parallel, we will explore gluconeogenesis first by starting with one of the major products of glycolysis, pyruvate. Pyruvate can be converted
to oxaloacetate by pyruvate carboxylase, in a reaction requiring ATP hydrolysis. The
oaxaloacetate is then converted to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) by PEP carboxykinase,
which also uses nucleotide triphosphate hydrolysis for energy, though this time it is
GTP.
As shown in the summary/comparison (figure 8), from the formation of PEP to the formation of fructose-1,6-bisphosphate the enzymes used in gluconeogenesis are exactly
the same enzymes used in glycolysis. This works because the free energy change in
those reactions is relatively small. However, in the dephosphorylation of fructose-1,6bisphosphate to to fructose-6-phosphate, and subsequently in the dephosphorylation of
glucose-6-phosphate to glucose, there is a large free energy change that works against
the gluconeogenic reactions. Thus, the enzymes that drive these reactions are different from the enzymes that drive the reverse reactions in glycolysis (i.e. hexokinase,
phosphofructokinase). These two hydrolytic reactions are catalyzed by fructose bisphosphatase and glucose-6-phosphatase, respectively. Full reversal of glycolysis in animals
is limited, however, to liver and kidney, since they are the only tissues that express
glucose-6-phosphatase. Other tissues use different mechanisms for generating glucose
(e.g. glycogenolysis).

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

Interestingly, PEP carboxykinase (PEPCK) is unregulated at the
protein level. There are no known activators or inhibitors of its
activity. The only regulation of PEPCK appears to be at the level
of transcription: glucagon can stimulate it (as can gluocorticoids
and thyroid hormone), while insulin can inhibit it. The other
gluconeogenic enzymes, though, do have direct activators and
inhibitors. They are allosteric modulators, binding away from,
but influencing the shape and efficacy of the substrate binding
site. In examining the regulation of these enzymes, one important regulator stands out because it is not a metabolite of either
glycolysis or gluconeogenesis. Fructose-2,6-bisphosphate (F2,6P)
is an activator of phosphofructokinase, and an inhibitor of fructose bis-phosphatase. F2,6P levels are controlled by fructose-bisphosphatase-2 and phosphofructokinase-2, which are themselves
controlled by levels of fructose-6-phosphate, as well as through
a hormone-driven signaling cascade shown in the figure on the
next page.

Page 86

H2O

Pi

Glucose-6-phosphatase

Fructose bisphosphatase

10
HO
H

CH2

O

H

H

HO

-2O

O

3P

H

Hexokinase

OH

CH2

O

H

H

HO

1

OH

H

8

ATP ADP

H

H2O

Pi

OH

OH

H

Glucose

-2O

H

3P

O

H

Phosphoglucose
isomerase

2

O

CH2

CH2

H

HO

OH

OH

ATP ADP

3P

O

3

O

CH2

H

HO

HO

H

O

OH

PO32Aldolase

4

Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate

Fructose-6-Phosphate

Glucose-6-phosphate

CH2
H

Phosphofructokinase

H

HO

-2O

O
HO

C

CH2

CH2 O

PO32-

Pi
NAD+
NADH + H+

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate

Aldolase

O

4
H

C

+

Triose
phosphate
isomerase

H

H

C

C O PO32-

5

6

-2O

Glyceraldehyde3-phosphate
dehydrogenase

OH
3P

O

CH2 C

O PO32-

ATP

ADP

OH
-2O

C
O

H

3P

Phosphoglycerate
kinase

CH2 C

OC

H
3-Phosphoglycerate

7

1,2-Bisphosphoglycerate

O

O

Phosphoglycerate
mutase

8

HO H
Dihydroxyacetone phosphate

O
C CH2 COOOxaloacetate

-OOC

CO2 + GDP
PEPCK

GTP
-2O

HO
Phosphoglycerate
mutase

8

3P

O

CH2 C
H

-2O

OC
O

2-Phosphoglycerate

Enolase

9

3P

O

CH2

C

O-

1

Phosphoenolpyruvate

ATP + CO2

ATP

ADP

O

C
O

ADP + Pi

Pyruvate
carboxylase

Pyruvate kinase

10

CH3 C

OC
O

Pyruvate

Figure 8. Gluconeogenesis (shown in green arrows) shares some, but not all enzymes with the reverse process, glycolysis (black arrows).

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

Page 87

The glyoxylate cycle provides a mechanism for plants to convert acetyl-CoA into oxaloacetate, and therefore contribute to gluconeogenesis. This allows them to convert fatty
acids and the hydrophobic amino acids leucine and isoleucine into glucose when necessary. The ability to do this comes from a plant-specific organelle called the glyoxysome,
as well as some mitochondrial enzymes. The glyoxysomal part of the cycle consists of
five steps, of which the first three contribute to the conversion, while the last two steps
regenerate the glyoxysomal oxaloacetate (figure 9).
Once the macromolecules have been broken down to acetyl-CoA, they enter the glyoxysome and combine with oxaloacetate to make citrate. This is catalyzed by citrate
synthase just as in the mitochondrial TCA cycle. The next reaction also uses a familiar
enzyme: aconitase catalyzes the conversion of citrate to isocitrate. However, the aconitase is a cytosolic enzyme, so the citrate is transported out of the glyoxysome and
then the isocitrate transported back in.

COOCH2

The glyoxylate is acted upon by another glyoxysomal enzyme, malate synthase, which
adds it to acetyl-CoA to form malate.

C

COO-

C

H

COOIsocitrate
Aconitase

Glyoxysome

HO

COO-

COO-

CH2

CH2
COO-

C
CH2

C

COO-

HO

C

H

COOIsocitrate

Citrate
CoA
Citrate synthase

Isocitrate
lyase

COOC

O

CH2

COO-

COO-

CH2

Oxaloacetate

CH2

NADH
NAD+

Succinate

+

COOHO

C

H

CH2
COO-

Mitochondrion/
TCA Cycle

COO-

Malate
dehydrogenase

Malate

The final step of the glyoxysomal portion of the glyoxylate cycle is oxidation of the
malate to oxaloacetate by glyoxysomal malate dehydrogenase.

H

COO-

Acetyl CoA

At this point, the glyoxysomal-specific enzyme, isocitrate lyase, hydrolyzes isocitrate
to yield succinate and glyoxylate. The succinate is transported to the mitochondrion,
where TCA cycle enzymes convert it to fumarate and then malate, which is transported
out to the cytosol. In the cytosol, the malate is converted to oxaloactetate through
malate dehydrogenase, and gluconeogenesis can proceed.

H
HO

Malate
synthase

CoA

O
HC COOGlyoxylate

O

H3C

C

S

CoA

Acetyl CoA

Figure 9. The glyoxylate cycle.

So, to summarize, the pool of oxaloacetate within the glyoxysome is used and regenerated within the glyoxysome. Acetyl-CoA is converted to succinate within the glyoxysome, but then goes to the mitochondrion for conversion to malate, and finally the
cytosol for conversion to a separate pool of oxaloacetate that is then used in gluconeogenesis.

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

Page 88

Glycogen synthesis

CH2

HO
H

H

H

H

HO

Although glucose is the primary fuel for cells, it is not an efficient molecule for longterm storage in complex (i.e. greater than single-celled) organisms. Therefore, in both
plants and animals, the glucose molecules are linked together to form polysaccharides
known as glucans. In animals, the glucan formed is glycogen, which consists of glucose
molecules linked by a(1->4) glycosidic bonds, and branching a(1->6) bonds approximately
between 8 to 14 residues apart. The average size of a glycogen unit is a cytoplasmic
granule containing over 100000 glucose molecules. The addition of a glucose-1-phosphate to another (or to a glycogen chain) is energetically unfavorable, so it must be
coupled with a sufficiently exergonic reaction to proceed.

HO

O

H

H

HO
O

H

H

O

OH

H

CH2

H

O

H

CH2

HO
H

H

H

O

OH

H

CH2

H

OH

H

H

OH

H
α(1

O
H

O

6) linkage
Branching
enzyme

O
HO
H
Glycogen
synthase

CH2
H

HO
H

HO
H
HO

CH2
H

O
H

H

O

O

P

OH
H
UDP-glucose

O-

O
H
OH

HO
H

H

CH2
H

O
H

P

H

H
OH
α(1

H

CH2
H

O
H
4) linkage

O
H
OH

CH2
H

H

H

O
H

HO
O

H

H
OH

H

CH2
H

O
H

O

H

H

O

Uridine

O-

Glycogen
phosphorylase

OH

OH
HO
H

O
O

HO
O

HO

CH2
H

O
H

H

O

O

P

O-

O
OH
H
Glucose-1-phosphate

Figure 10. Glycogen synthesis

Glycogen synthesis begins with UDP-glucose phosphorylase, which combines the nucleotide uridine triphosphate (UTP) with glucose-1-phosphate to release pyrophosphate
(PPi) and form UDP-glucose.
The phosphoanhydride exchange reaction catalyzed by UDP-glucose phosphorylase is
minimally exergonic. However, the pyrophosphate released is quickly hydrolyzed by inorganic pyrophosphatase, a ubiquitous cytosolic enzyme, in a highly exergonic reaction.
This pyrophosphate hydrolysis is a mechanism utilized in many biosynthetic pathways
to provide energy for otherwise endergonic reactions.
In the next step, glycogen synthase attaches the UDP-glucose to the pre-existing glycogen chain with an a(1->4) linkage. It cannot join two individual glucoses together, only
add to a pre-existing chain. This means that there must be some workaround for the
frst two glucoses: glycogenin is an enzyme that catalyzes the addition of UDP-glucose
to itself, and can do so for up to seven UDP-glucose molecules, thus forming a short
primer for glycogen synthase to work with. Furthermore, glycogen synthase can only
add glucoses with an a(1->4) link. For branching to occur, a branching enzyme (specifically, amylo-(1,4->1,6)-transglycosylase is needed. This enzyme can transfer terminal
chain segments to the 6-carbon hydroxyl of any glucose in a glycogen chain. However,
the branches can only be added if there are at least 4 glucose residues between them,
and if the originating chain was at least 11 residues in length.
Oligosaccharide synthesis
Like glycogen synthesis, oligosaccharide synthesis also requires the initial step of coupling the sugar with a nucleotide. In mammals, a major disaccharide is lactose, which
is the linkage of a galactose and a glucose, and the formation is catalyzed by lactose

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

Page 89

synthase. However, before the lactose synthase is able to act, the galactose must first
be in the form of a UDP-galactose. Similarly, in plants, the major disaccharide is sucrose, formed by the linkage of UDP-glucose and fructose-6-phosphate. This results in
sucrose-6-phosphate, which is then readily dephosphorylated to sucrose. These kinds
of mechanisms are also used in the glycosylation of proteins and lipids, which will be
discussed primarily in the protein processing and trafficking chapter.
The major hexose species besides glucose are fructose, mannose, and galactose. Interconversion between these hexoses can occur via intermediates, as demonstrated in
glycolysis (glucose-6-P to fructose-6-P). Mannose-6-P can be converted to fructose-6-P
by phosphomannose isomerase. Galactose can be converted similarly, to galactose-1-P
and then to glucose-1-P. The galactose to glucose conversion can also take place by
epimerization of UDP-Glucose to UDP-galactose via intermediate redox using NAD+/
NADH.

Mutation of galactose-1-phosphate uridylyltransferase or mutations of other enzymes in this pathway (uridylyl transferase
mutations are most common and usually most severe) can lead
to galactosemia, a human genetic disease whose symptoms begin in infancy and may include mental retardation, liver damage,
jaundice, vomiting, and lethargy. The cause of these symptoms
is generally a buildup of galactose-1-phosphate, especially in the
liver and nervous tissue. Fortunately, with early diagnosis, the
symptoms can be prevented by avoiding milk products (lactose).

Fatty acid synthesis
This anabolic process is accomplished using a different set of enzymes than the catabolism of fatty acids discussed earlier. Fatty acid synthesis (fig. 11) starts with the formation of palmitic acid (C16) from acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA (which is itself a 3-carbon
molecule formed from acetyl-CoA). Another difference between the catabolic and anabolic reactions for fatty acids is the location: whereas we saw that catabolism occurs
largely in the mitochondria, fatty acid synthesis is run from a single large cytoplasmic
enzyme complex. The fatty acid synthase system is comprised of seven enzymes linked
together with an acyl carrier protein (ACP). As mentioned, this complex is found in the
cytoplasm, so its substrates must be as well. The acetyl-CoA in the cytoplasm is primarily derived from the mitochondrial acetyl-CoA via a citrate-malate shuttle that couples
deacetylation in the mitochondrion with acetylation in the cytosol.
The acetyl-CoA and malonyl-CoA are linked to the synthase and ACP, then there is a
sequence of acetyl group transfers that runs a total of seven times to form palmitoylACP, from which the palmitic acid is finally released. Palmitic acid is the precursor for
variety of long-chain fatty acids such as stearic acid, palmitoleic acid, and oleic acid.
Generally, there is either an elongation or sometimes a desaturation step. However,
desaturation is a tricky process for vertebrates. The desaturation at C9 to form oleic
acid from stearic acid can occur; however, other desaturations such as desaturation at
C-12 to generate linoleic acid are not possible in vertebrates. Interestingly, they can be
carried out in plant species. Furthermore, even though linoleic acid cannot be synthesized by vertebrates, it is nevertheless needed by vertebrates, which build arachidonic

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

CO2- O
H

O
H3C

C

S

C

C

S

CoA

H

CoA

Acetyl-CoA

Malonyl-CoA

CO2- O
O
H3C

C

H C

+

S ACP

C

S

ACP

H

Acetyl-ACP

Malonyl-ACP

CO2

NADPH + H+
NADP+

Repeat 7x

H2O

NADPH + H+
NADP+

H H O
H3C

C

C

C

S ACP

After 7 Cycles

H H
Butyryl-ACP

C

H2O

O

H
H3C

(CH2)13

C

H

S

ACP

H

S ACP

O

H
H3C

C

(CH2)13

C

O-

H
Palmitoyl-ACP

Palmitate

Figure 11. Fatty Acid Synthesis

Page 90

acid, prostaglandins, and other molecules from it. Linoleic acid is therefore considered
an essential fatty acid, since it must be ingested by the animal.
These fatty acids are then used to form the triacylglycerols that form the bulk of the
energy storage molecules in most animals. Triacylglycerols are synthesized by the reaction of fatty acyl-CoA chains with glycerol-3-phosphate. Two rounds of this reaction
yields diacylglygerol-3-phosphate (phosphatidic acid). After the action of phosphatidate
phosphatase, the phosphatidic acid is converted to 1,2-diacylglycerol. This reacts with
fatty acyl-CoA to form the final triacyglycerol.

O

C

C

C

O-

C

3N

O
+

CH2
C

O-

+H N
3

Glutamine synthase

O
ATP + H+ + NADPH

C

C

O-

O
Glutamate
(Glu, E)

C

H

C

i

H2O

C

O-

C

O
Semialdehyde

C

C

O-

+

C

O-

+

O
Glutamate
(Glu, E)

C

COO-

CH2

C

CH2

O-

3N

C

Proline
(Pro, P)

Oxaloacetate

α-ketoglutarate

ADP + Pi + H+

Asparagine synthetase

C

O-

C

CH2

+

COO-

C

+H

C

3N

C

O-

H

O
Aspartate
(Asp, D)

NH2

CH2
+H N
3

C

C

H

O

O-

NH2

O

CH2
C

O
Alanine
(Ala, A)

O

C

O-

H O
Aspartate
(Asp, D)

O-

C

Asparagine
(Asn, N)

CH2
+H

C

3N

O

CH2

O
C

O

O

H O
Aspartate
(Asp, D)

O

C C OHO
H

H

COO-

ATP + NH4+
C

+H

α-ketoglutarate

O-

CH2
3N

H

N
+

COO-

H

+H

H2C

CH2

+

O

COO-

O-

C

C

C

COO-

C

Pyruvate

CH2

O

CH2

O
H3C

CH2
3N

CH2

H2C

COO-

O
Glutamate
(Glu, E)

+H

NADP+

Pyrroline carboxylate
reductase

CH2

H

C

C C OHO

H
∆-pyrroline-5-carboxylate

CH2
3N

+

N

H

O-

CH2
+H

H C

Spontaneous

H+ + NADPH

CH2

H 2C

CH2

+H N
3

Glutamate kinase
dehydrogenase

H

O

O-

C

CH2

ADP + NADP+ + P

CH2
3N

C

H O
Glutamine
(Gln, Q)

O-

CH2

Alanine and Aspartate are the products of glutamate-based transamination of pyruvate
and oxaloacetate, respectively.

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

ADP + Pi

ATP + NH4

NH2

C

CH2

+ H+

H O
Glutamate
(Glu, E)

C

O-

C

O
Glutamate
(Glu, E)

CH2
+H

O

Asparagine is synthesized through one of two known pathways. In bacteria, an asparagine synthetase combines aspartate and ammonia. However, in mammals, the aspartate gets its amino group from glutamine.

C
H

CH2

+H

Proline is synthesized from glutamate in a two-step process that begins with the reduction of glutamate to a semialdehyde form that spontaneously cyclizes to D-pyrroline-5carboxylate. This is reduced by pyrroline carboxylate reductase to proline.

CH2
+H N
3

Glutamate dehydrogenase

α-ketoglutarate

Amino acid synthesis

Glutamine synthetase catalyzes the formation of glutamine from glutamate and ammonia. This is an important biochemical reaction for a completely different reason: it
is the primary route for ammonia detoxification.

O-

C

O-

C

CH2

NADP+

O

O

In humans, only half of the standard amino acids (Glu, Gln, Pro, Asp, Asn, Ala, Gly, Ser,
Tyr, Cys) can be synthesized (fig. 12 and 13), and are thus classified the nonessential
amino acids. Within this group, the first three, glutamate, glutamine, and proline, have
a shared anabolic pathway. It begins with glutamate dehydrogenase, which adds ammonia to a-ketoglutarate in the presence of NADPH to form glutamate. This is a key
reaction for all amino acid synthesis: glutamate is a nitrogen (amino group) donor for
the production of all the other amino acids.

O
H+ + NADPH + NH4+

CH2
O

O

Each of the fatty acyl chain additions generates an ester bond, which requires a significant energy input: that energy comes from a linked ATP hydrolysis reaction for each
chain addition.

O-

CH2

O-

+

ATP + H2O

CH2
+H

3N

C

C

H O
Glutamine
(Gln, Q)

O-

C

OO

CH2

AMP + PPi

CH2
Asparagine synthetase

+H

3N

C
H

C

O
Glutamate
(Glu, E)

O-

+

C

NH2

CH2
+H

3N

C

C

H

O

O-

Asparagine
(Asn, N)

Figure 12. Synthetic reaction for amino acids: Glutamate, Glutamine, Proline, Alanine, Aspartate, Asparagine.

Page 91

The synthesis of serine begins with the metabolic intermediate 3-phosphoglycerate
(glycolysis). Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase oxidizes it to 3-phosphohydroxypyruvate.
An amino group is donated by glutamate in a reaction catalyzed by phosphoserine
transaminase, forming 3-phosphoserine, and finally the phosphate is removed by phosphoserine phosphatase to produce serine.

PO32-

PO32-

O
CH2
C

HO

O-

C

H O
3-Phosphoglycerate

OH

THF

CH2

Serine is the immediate precursor to glycine, which is formed by serine hydroxymethyltransferase. This enzyme requires the coenzyme tetrahydrofolate (THF), which is a
derivative of vitamin B9 (folic acid).
Serine is also a precursor for cysteine, although the synthesis of cysteine actually begins with the essential amino acid methionine. Methionine is converted to S-adenosylmethionine by methionine adenosyltransferase. This is then converted to S-adenosylhomocysteine by a member of the SAM-dependent methylase family. The sugar is
removed by adenosylhomocysteinase, and the resultant homocysteine is connected by
cystathionine synthase to the serine molecule to form cystathionine. Finally, cystathionine-g-lyase catalyzes the production of cysteine.

+H N
3

C

C

H2O

C

O-

C

OH

Pi

CH2
+H N
3

Phosphoserine
transaminase

O
3-Phosphohydroxypyruvate

CH2
+H

Phosphoserine
phosphatase

H O
3-Phosphoserine

C

3N

C

O-

H O
Serine
(Ser, S)

H2O

H
+H

3N

C

O-

C

H O
Glycine
(Gly, G)
OH

NADP+ + H2O

NADPH + H+ + O2

CH2

CH2
+H

3N

C

+H N
3

O-

C

C

C

O-

H O
Tyrosine
(Tyr, Y)

H O
Phenylalanine
(Phe, F)

NH2

NH2
N

N

H2O + ATP

C

O-

C

H O
Methionine
(Met, M)

H

CH2
+H

Methionine
adenosyltransferase

3N

C

C

O-

H
OH

H

Phosphatidylethanolamine

OH
SAM-dependent
methylase

H O
S-adenosylmethionine

+H N
3

H

O

C

C

CH2

Phosphatidylcholine

H

CH2
+H

C

3N

O

CH2

S
H

N

N

O

CH2

CH2

PPi + Pi

C H

N

N

+S

S
CH2

N

N

C H

CH3

CH3

C

O-

H

H

OH

OH

H2O

H

Adenosine

Adenosylhomocysteinase

H O
S-adenosylhomocysteine

O-

CH2
H2O

SH

Adenosine

Adenosylhomocysteinase

Serine

CH2
CH2
+H

3N

C

C

O-

H O
Homocysteine

Figure 13.
Cysteine.

Chapter 6, Metabolism 2, version 1.0

C

Serine
hydroxymethyltransferase

H O
Serine
(Ser, S)

+H N
3

In general, the synthesis of essential amino acids, usually in microorganisms, is much
more complex than for the nonessential amino acids and is best left to a full-fledged
biochemistry course.

O

O-

O

α-Ketoglutarate

Glutamate

CH2

N5,N10Methylene-THF

O-

C

CH2

Tyrosine is another amino acid that depends on an essential amino acid as a precursor.
In this case, phenylalanine oxygenase reduces phenylalanine to produce the tyrosine.

Phosphoglycerate
dehydrogenase

PO32-

O

H+ + NADH

NAD+

S

H2O

Cystathionine
synthase

α-ketobutyrate + NH4+

CH2
CH2
+H N
3

C

C

H O
Cystathionine

O-

Cystathionineγ-lyase

SH
CH2
+H N
3

C

C

H

O

O-

Cysteine
(Cys, C)

Synthetic reactions for amino acids: Serine, Glycine, Tyrosine, and

Page 92

DNA:

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the
vertical divider, and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced
course are printed in blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally,
additional biomedically relevant information can be found in red print on either
side of the divider.

Structure and Replication

H

H

CH2

H
O

2

1

O-

O

H
H

O

OH

N

H

3

H

3’

H

O

P

H

4

H

T

O

O

5

H

N

N

CH3

O

N

H N

O

A

O
H2C

H

O

H

P

O

NH2
N

O-

CH2

O

-O

H

H

O

N

N

P

H

H

H 2N

H

H

H

O

N

O

H2C

N

G

H

C

O

H N

N

O

O

CH2

O

P

N

O

NH2

H

O
-O

H

O-

O

H

O

NH2

H

H

N

P

O

O

C

H

H

N

N

H

H

G

O

N

H

O

H2C

O
N

H

P

CH2

H2N

H

H

3’

OH

O

H

O
-O

N

N

H

H

H

O

N

O

H

O

O
H2C

A

O

T

O

N

N

O

P

H

N

H

H 3C

O-

H

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

-O

H2N

O

H

In randomly constructing a single strand of nucleic acid in vitro, there are no particular
rules regarding the ordering of the nucleotides with respect to their bases. The identities of their nitrogenous bases are irrelevant because the nucleotides are attached by
phosphodiester bonds through the phosphate group and the pentose. It is therefore
often referred to as the sugar-phosphate backbone. If we break down the word “phosphodiester”, we see that it quite handily describes the connection: the sugars are connected by two ester bonds ( —O—) with a phosphorous in between. One of the ideas
that often confuses students, is the directionality of this bond, and therefore, of nucleic
acids in general. For example, when we talk about DNA polymerase, the enzyme that
catalyzes the addition of nucleotides in living cells, we say that it works in a 5-prime
(5’) to 3-prime (3’) direction. This may seem like arcane molecular-biologist-speak, but
it is actually very simple. Take another look at two of the nucleotides joined together
by the phosphodiester bond (fig. 1, bottom left). An adenine nucleotide is joined to a

5’

H

DNA: the stuff of life. Well, not really, despite the hype. DNA does contain the instructions to make a lot of the stuff of life (proteins), although again, not all the stuff of life.
At least not directly. Deoxyribonucleic acid (and its very close cousin ribonucleic acid,
or RNA) is a very long chain polymer. You may recall that a polymer is just a really big
molecule made by connecting many small similar molecules together). In this polymer,
the small (monomer) molecules are known as nucleotides, and are composed of a pentose (5-carbon sugar either deoxyribose or ribose), a nitrogenous base, and a phosphate
group. As you can see in the figure, the nucleotides only vary slightly, and only in the
nitrogenous base. In the case of DNA, those bases are adenine, guanine, cytosine, and
thymine. Note the similarity of the shapes of adenine and guanine, and also the similarity between cytosine and thymine. A and G are classified as purines, while C and T
are classified as pyrimidines. As long as we’re naming things, notice “deoxyribose” and
“ribose”. As the name implies, deoxyribose is just a ribose without an oxygen. More
specifically, where there is a hydroxyl group attached to the 2-carbon of ribose, there
is only a hydrogen attached to the 2-carbon of deoxyribose. That is the only difference
between the two sugars.

P
O-

O-

5’

Figure 1. DNA. Deoxyribonucleic acid is a polymer chain of nucleotides connected by 5’ to 3’ phosphodiester bonds. DNA normally exists as a two antiparallel
complementary strands held together by hydrogen bonds between adenines (A)
and thymines (T), and between guanines (G) and cytosines (C).

Page 93

cytosine nucleotide. The phosphodiester bond will always link the 5-carbon of one
deoxyribose (or ribose in RNA) to the 3-carbon of the next sugar. This also means that
on one end of a chain of linked nucleotides, there will be a free 5’ phosphate (-PO4)
group, and on the other end, a free 3’ hydroxyl (-OH). These define the directionality of
a strand of DNA or RNA.
DNA is normally found as a double-stranded molecule in the cell whereas RNA is mostly
single-stranded. It is important to understand though, that under the appropriate conditions, DNA could be made single-stranded, and RNA can be double-stranded. In fact,
the molecules are so similar that it is even possible to create double-stranded hybrid
molecules with one strand of DNA and one of RNA. Interestingly, RNA-RNA double
helices and RNA-DNA double helices are actually slightly more stable than the more
conventional DNA-DNA double helix.
The basis of the double-stranded nature of DNA, and in fact the basis of nucleic acids
as the medium for storage and transfer of genetic information, is base-pairing. Basepairing refers to the formation of hydrogen bonds between adenines and thymines, and
between guanines and cytosines. These pairs are significantly more stable than any
association formed with the other possible bases. Furthermore, when these base-pair
associations form in the context of two strands of nucleic acids, their spacing is also
uniform and highly stable. You may recall that hydrogen bonds are relatively weak
bonds. However, in the context of DNA, the hydrogen bonding is what makes DNA extremely stable and therefore well suited as a long-term storage medium for genetic information. Since even in simple prokaryotes, DNA double helices are at least thousands
of nucleotides long, this means that there are several thousand hydrogen bonds holding
the two strands together. Although any individual nucleotide-to-nucleotide hydrogen
bonding interaction could easily be temporarily disrupted by a slight increase in temperature, or a miniscule change in the ionic strength of the solution, a full double-helix
of DNA requires very high temperatures (generally over 90 ºC) to completely denature
the double helix into individual strands.
Because there is an exact one-to-one pairing of nucleotides, it turns out that the two
strands are essentially backup copies of each other - a safety net in the event that nucleotides are lost from one strand. In fact, even if parts of both strands are damaged, as
long as the other strand is intact in the area of damage, then the essential information
is still there in the complementary sequence of the opposite strand and can be written into place. Keep in mind though, that while one strand of DNA can thus act as a
“backup” of the other, the two strands are not identical - they are complementary. An
intereresting consequence of this system of complementary and antiparallel strands is
that the two strands can each carry unique information.
Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Bi-directional gene pairs are two genes on opposite strands of
DNA, but sharing a promoter, which lies in between them. Since
DNA can only be made in one direction, 5’ to 3’, this bi-directional
promoter, often a CpG island (see next chapter), thus sends the
RNA polymerase for each gene in opposite physical directions.
This has been shown for a number of genes involved in cancers
(breast, ovarian), and is a mechanism for coordinating the expression of networks of gene products.
Page 94

The strands of a DNA double-helix are antiparallel. This means that if we looked at a
double-helix of DNA from left to right, one strand would be constructed in the 5’ to 3’
direction, while the complementary strand is constructed in the 3’ to 5’ direction. This
is important to the function of enzymes that create and repair DNA, as we will be discussing soon. In fig. 1, the left strand is 5’ to 3’ from top to bottom, and the other is 5’
to 3’ from bottom to top.
From a physical standpoint, DNA molecules are negatively charged (all those phosphates), and normally a double-helix with a right-handed twist. In this normal (also
called the “B” conformation) state, one full twist of the molecule encompasses 11 base
pairs, with 0.34 nm between each nucleotide base. Each of the nitrogenous bases are
planar, and when paired with the complementary base, forms a flat planar “rung” on
Figure 2. Three conformations
of DNA. B-DNA is most common, A-DNA is likely an artifact
of crystallization in vitro, and
Z-DNA may form transiently in
parts of the chromosome.

One helical turn
(10 bp, 34 A )

R

B-DNA form:

One helical turn
(11.6 bp, 25 A )

R

A-DNA form:

One helical turn
(12 bp, 47 A )

Z-DNA form:

L

the “ladder” of DNA. These are perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the DNA. Most
of the free-floating DNA in a cell, and most DNA in any aqueous solution of near-physiological osmolarity and pH, is found in this B conformation. However, other conformations have been found, usually under very specific environmental circumstances. A
compressed conformation, A-DNA, was observed as an artifact of in vitro crystallization,
with slightly more bases per turn, shorter turn length, and base-pairs that are not perpendicular to the longitudinal axis. Another, Z-DNA, appears to form transiently in GCrich stretches of DNA in which, interestingly, the DNA twists the opposite direction.
In prokaryotes, the DNA is found in the cytoplasm (rather obvious since there is no
other choice in those simple organisms), while in eukaryotes, the DNA is found inside
the nucleus. Despite the differences in their locations, the level of protection from
external forces, and most of all, their sizes, both prokaryotic and eukaryotic DNA is
packaged with proteins that help to organize and stabilize the overall chromosome
structure. Relatively little is understood with regard to prokaryotic chromosomal packChapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

It has been suggested that both the A and Z forms of DNA are, in
fact, physiologically relevant. There is evidence to suggest that
the A form may occur in RNA-DNA hybrid double helices as well
as when DNA is complexed to some enzymes. The Z conformation may occur in response to methylation of the DNA. Furthermore, the “normal” B-DNA conformation is something of a idealized structure based on being fully hydrated, as is certainly very
likely inside a cell. However, that hydration state is constantly
changing, albeit minutely, so the DNA conformation will often
vary slightly from the B-conformation parameters in figure 2.

Page 95

aging although there are structural similarities between some of the proteins found in
prokaryotic and eukaryotic chromosomes. Therefore, most introductory cell biology
courses stick to eukaryotic chromosomal packaging.
Naked DNA, whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic, is an extremely thin strand of material, roughly 11 nm in diameter. However, given the size of eukaryotic genomes, if the
DNA was stored that way inside the nucleus, it would become unmanageably tangled.
Picture a bucket into which you have tossed a hundred meters of yarn without any
attempt whatsoever to organize it by coiling it or bunching it. Now consider whether
you would be able to reach into that bucket pull on one strand, and expect to pull up
only one strand, or if instead you are likely to pull up at least a small tangle of yarn. The
cell does essentially what you would do with the yarn to keep it organized: it is packaged neatly into smaller, manageable skeins. In the case of DNA, each chromosome is
looped around a histone complex to form the first order of chromosomal organization:
the nucleosome.
Figure 4. The nucleosome is composed of slightly over
two turns of DNA around a histone core containing two
copies each of H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 histones. The H1
histone is not part of the core unit and functions in coordinating interaction between nucleosomes.

2 nm

B

11 nm

C
30 nm

D

700 nm

E

H4
H2B

A

H3
H2A

H1

H2B

H3

1400 nm

H2A
DNA

Histones are a family of basic (positively-charged) proteins. They all function primarily
in organizing DNA, and the nucleosome is formed when DNA wraps (a little over 2 times)
around a core of eight histones - two each of H2A, H2B, H3, and H4. The number and
position of the positive charges (mostly from lysines and arginines) are crucial to their
ability to tightly bind DNA, which as previously pointed out, is very negatively charged.
That “opposites attract” idea is not just a dating tip from the advice columns.
Figure 5. Nucleosomes. (left) Core histone
complex - the nitrogens indicative of positively-charged side chains are in blue. (right) DNA
wraps around the histone. The red oxygens surrounding the yellow phosphorus atoms are the
negatively-charged phosphate groups. Figure from
RCSB Protein Data Bank (http://www.rcsb.org).

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Figure 3. DNA packaging. (A) A naked strand of DNA is approximately 2nm in diameter. (B) Histones, which are octameric proteins depicted here as a roughly cylindrical protein, have positive charges distributed on the outer surface to interact
with the negatively-charged DNA backbone. (C) Even the organization afforded by
histone binding can leave an unmanageable tangle of DNA, especially with longer
eukaryotic genomes, and therefore the histone-bound DNA is packaged into the
“30-nm strand”. This is held together, in part, by histone interactions. (D) The
30-nm fibers are looped into 700-nm fibers, which are themselves formed into the
typical eukaryotic chromosome (E).

The 30-nm fiber is held together by two sets of interactions. First,
the linker histone, H1, brings the nucleosomes together into an
approximate 30-nm structure. This structure is then stabilized
by disulfide bonds that form between the H2A histone of one
nucleosome and the H4 histone of its neighbor.

Page 96

Upon examination of the 3D structure of the histone core complex, we see that while
relatively uncharged protein interaction domains hold the histones together in the
center, the positively charged residues are found around the outside of the complex,
available to interact with the negatively charged phosphates of DNA.
In a later chapter, we will discuss how enzymes read the DNA to transcribe its information onto smaller, more manageable pieces of RNA. For now, we only need to be aware
that at any given time, much of the DNA is packaged tightly away, while some parts
of the DNA are not. Because the parts that are available for use can vary depending
on what is happening to/in the cell at any given time, the packaging of DNA must be
dynamic. There must be a mechanism to quickly loosen the binding of DNA to histones
when that DNA is needed for gene expression, and to tighten the binding when it is
not. As it turns out, this process involves acetylation and deacetylation of the histones.
A

B
O
C

CH3

O
C

CH3

O
CH2

CH2

CH2

Lysine

CH2 NH3+

CH2

CH2

CH2

CH2 NH2

C

CH3

(

OC

CH3

)

Lysine + Acetate

Figure 6. (A) Deacetylated histone allows interaction between
the negatively charged phosphates of the DNA and the positively
charged lysines of the histone. (B) When the histone is acetylated,
not only is the positive charge on the lysine lost, the acetyl group
also imparts a negative charge, repelling the DNA phosphates.

Histone Acetyltransferases (HATs) are enzymes that place an acetyl group on a lysine
of a histone protein. The acetyl groups are negatively charged, and the acetylation
not only adds a negatively charged group, it also removes the positive charge from the
lysine. This has the effect of not only neutralizing a point of attraction between the
protein and the DNA, but even slightly repelling it (with like charges). On the other side
of the mechanism, Histone Deactylases (HDACs) are enzymes that remove the acetylation, and thereby restore the interaction between histone protein and DNA. Since these
are such important enzymes, it stands to reason that they are not allowed to operate
willy-nilly on any available histone, and in fact, they are often found in a complex with
other proteins that control and coordinate their activation with other processes such
as activation of transcription.
Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Page 97

Semi-Conservative DNA Replication
DNA replication is similar to transcription in its most general idea: a polymerase enzyme reads a strand of DNA one nucleotide at a time, it takes a random nucleotide
from the nucleoplasm, and if it is complementary to the nucleotide in the DNA, the
polymerase adds it to the new strand it is creating. Of course, there are significant
differences between replication and transcription too, not the least of which is that
both strands of DNA are being read simultaneously in order to create two new complementary strands that will eventually result in a complete and nearly perfect copy of an
entire organismal genome.
One of the most important concepts of DNA replication is that it is a semi-conservative
process (fig. 7). This means that every double helix in the new generation of an organism
consists of one complete “old” strand and one complete “new” strand wrapped around
each other. This is in contrast to the two other possible models of DNA replication, the
conservative model, and the dispersive model. A conservative mechanism of replication proposes that the old DNA is used as a template only and is not incorporated into
the new double-helix. Thus the new cell has one completely new double-helix and one
completely old double-helix. The dispersive model of replication posits a final product
in which each double helix of DNA is a mixture of fragments of old and new DNA. In
light of current knowledge, it is difficult to imagine a dispersive mechanism, but at the
time, there were no mechanistic models at all. The Meselson-Stahl experiments (1958)
clearly demonstrated that the mechanism must be semi-conservative, and this was confirmed once the key enzymes were discovered and their mechanisms elucidated.

In the Meselson-Stahl experiments, E. coli were first incubated
with 15N, a heavy isotope of nitrogen. Although it is only a difference in mass of one neutron per atom, there is a great enough
difference in mass between heavy nitrogen-containing DNA (in
the purine and pyrimidine bases) and light/normal nitrogen-containing DNA that they can be separated from one another by ultracentrifugation through a CsCl concentration gradient (fig. 7).
Over 14 generations, this led to a population of E. coli that had
heavy nitrogen incorporated into all of the DNA (shown in blue
below). Then, the bacteria are grown for one or two divisions in
“light” nitrogen, 14N. When the DNA from the bacterial populations was examined by centrifugation, it was found that instead
of light DNA and heavy DNA, as would be expected if DNA replications was conservative, there was a single band in and intermediate position on the gradient. This supports a semi-conservative
model in which each strand of original DNA not only acts as a
template for making new DNA, it is itself incorporated into the
new double-helix.

1
Conservative

2
Semi-conservative

3
Dispersive

Prokaryotic Replication
DNA replication begins at an origin of replication. There is only one origin in prokaryotes (in E. coli, oriC) and it is characterized by arrays of repeated sequences. These
sequences wrap around a DNA-binding protein, and in doing so, exert pressure on the
H-bonds between the strands of DNA, and the chromosome begins to unzip in an ATrich area wrapped around this protein. Remember that A-T pairs are 33% weaker than
G-C pairs due to fewer hydrogen bonds. The use of AT-rich stretches of DNA as points
of strand separation is a recurring theme through a variety of DNA operations. The
separation of the two strands is bidirectional, and DNA polymerases will act in both
directions in order to finish the process as quickly as possible. Speed is important here
because while replication is happening, the DNA is vulnerable to breakage, and most
metabolic processes are shut down to devote the energy to the replication. Even in
prokaryotes, where DNA molecules are orders of magnitude smaller than in eukaryotes,
Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

CsCl ultracentrifugation

Figure 7. DNA replication. Prior to the discovery of the enzymes involved in replication, three general mechanisms were proposed. In conservative replication, the
original DNA strands stay associated with each other, while the newly made DNA
forms its own double-helix. Semi-conservative replication posits the creation of
hybrid old-new double helices. Dispersive replication proposed molecules composed of randomized fragments of double-old and double-new DNA.

Page 98

the size of the DNA molecule when it is unraveled from protective packaging proteins
makes it highly susceptible to physical damage just from movements of the cell.
The first OriC binding protein, DnaA, binds to DnaA boxes, which are 9 base pair segments with a consensus sequence of TTATCCACA. OriC has five of these repeats, and
one DnaA protein binds to each of them. HU and IHF are histone-like proteins that associate with DnaA and together bend that part of the DNA into a circular loop, situating
it just over the other major feature of oriC, the 13-bp AT-rich repeats (GATCTNTTNTTTT).
DnaA hydrolyzes ATP and breaks the H-bonds between strands in the 13mer repeats,
also known as melting the DNA. This allows complexes of DnaB [and DnaC, which is a
loading protein that helps attach DnaB(6) to the strand with accompanying hydrolysis
of ATP. Also, five more DnaA are recruited to stabilize the loop.] to bind to each singlestranded region of the DNA on opposite sides of the newly opened replication bubble.
DnaB is a helicase; its enzymatic activity is to unzip/unwind the DNA ahead of the DNA
polymerase, to give it single-stranded DNA to read and copy. It does so in association
with single-stranded-DNA binding proteins (SSBs), and DNA gyrase. The function of SSB
is nearly self-explanatory: single-stranded DNA is like RNA in its ability to form complex
secondary structures by internal base-pairing, so SSB prevents that. DNA gyrase is a
type II topoisomerase, and is tasked with introducing negative supercoiling to the DNA.
This is necessary because the unzipping of the DNA by helicase also unwinds it (since
it is a double helix) and causes the introduction of positive supercoiling. This means
that the entire circular molecule twists on itself: imagine holding a rubber band in two
hands and twisting it. As the supercoiling accumulates, the DNA becomes more tightly
coiled, to the point that it would be impossible for helicase to unzip it. DnaB/gyrase can
relieve this stress by temporarily cutting the double-stranded DNA, passing a loop of
the molecule through the gap, and resealing it. This (hopefully) makes a lot more sense
A

B

Figure 9. Detail of DNA topoiA
somerase type II action. (A) First,
the enzyme binds to the DNA and
initiates an endonuclease activity, cutting both strands of the
DNA at that point. (B) This complete transection of the DNA (as
opposed to the single-strand cut
by type I topoisomerases) allows
another part of the same DNA
molecule to slip through the gap.
(C) Finally, the two temporarily
broken ends of the DNA, which
had been held closely in place by B
the enzyme.

double strand break
Topo II

C

Topo II

C

Topo II

Figure 8. Type II DNA topoisomerases like DNA gyrase relieve supercoiling by
making temporary double-strand cut.

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Page 99

looking at the diagram. Or, going back to our rubber band, give the rubber band a twist
or two, then tape down the two ends. If you snip the rubber band, and pass an adjacent
portion of the rubber band through that snip, then reconnect the cut ends, you will find
that there is one less twist. Nifty, eh? At this point, some of you are going to say, but
if you twist a free-floating rubber band, as one might imagine a free-floating circular
DNA chromosome in E. coli, you would expect it to naturally untwist. Technically, yes,
but due to the large mass of the chromosome, its association with various proteins and
the cell membrane, and the viscosity of its environment, it does not behave as though
it were completely free.
Once oriC has been opened and the helicases have attached to the two sides of the replication fork, the replication machine, aka the replisome can begin to form. However,
before the DNA polymerases take positions, they need to be primed. DNA polymerases
are unable to join two individual free nucleotides together to begin forming a nucleic acid;
they can only add onto a pre-existing strand of at least two nucleotides. Therefore, a
specialized RNA polymerase (RNAP’s do not have this limitation) known as primase is a
part of the replisome, and reads creates a short RNA strand termed the primer for the
DNA polymerase to add onto. Although only a few nucleotides are needed, the prokaryotic primers may be as long as 60 nt depending on the species.
At least five prokaryotic DNA polymerases have been discovered to date. The primary
DNA polymerase for replication in E. coli is DNA Polymerase III (Pol III). Pol I is also
involved in the basic mechanism of DNA replication, primarily to fill in gaps created
during lagging strand synthesis (defined 3 pages ahead) or through error-correcting
mechanisms. DNA polymerase II and the recently discovered Pol IV and Pol V do not
participate in chromosomal replication, but rather are used to synthesize DNA when
certain types of repair is needed at other times in the cellular life cycle.
DNA polymerase III is a multi-subunit holoenzyme, with a, e, and q subunits comprising
the core polymerase, and t, g, d, d’, c, y, and b coming together to form the complete
holoenzyme. The core polymerase has two activities: the a subunit is the polymerase
function, reading a strand of DNA and synthesizing a complementary strand with great
speed, around 150 nt/sec; the e subunit is a 3’-5’ “proofreading” exonuclease and acts as
an immediate proofreader, removing the last nucleotide if it is incorrect. This proofreading does not reach any further back: it only acts on the most recently added nucleotide to correct misincorporation. Other mechanisms and enzymes are used to correct
DNA lesions that arise at other times. [As a matter of nomenclature, exonucleases only
cut off nucleotides from DNA or RNA from either end, but not in the middle. Endonucleases cleave phosphodiester bonds located deeper within a nucleic acid strand.] The
q subunit has no enzymatic activity and regulates the exonuclease function. Although
Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Page 100

it has polymerase activity, the Pol III core polymerase has poor processivity - that is,
it can only add up to 15 nucleotides before dissociating from the template DNA. Since
genomes of E. coli strains average near 5 million base pairs, replication in little 15 nt
segments would be extraordinarily inefficient.

Leading Strand
3’ 5’

β

DNA polymerase III

The clamp loader complex is an ATPase assembly that binds to
the b-clamp unit upon binding of ATP (but the ATPase activity
is not turned on). When the complex then binds to DNA, it activates the ATPase, and the resulting hydrolysis of ATP leads to
conformational changes that open up the clamp temporarily (to
encircle or to move off of the DNA strand), and then dissociation
of the clamp loader from the clamp assembly.

5’
3’
3’

Figure 10. The dimeric b clamp holds DNA Polymerase III on the template,
allowing it polymerize more nucleotides before dissociating.

This is where the b subunit is needed. Also known as the b clamp, it is a dimer of semicircular subunits that has a central hole through which the DNA is threaded. The core
polymerase, via an a-b interaction, is attached to this b clamp so that it stays on the
DNA longer, increasing the processivity of Pol III to over 5000nt. The b clamp is loaded
onto (and unloaded off of) the DNA by a clamp loader complex (also called g complex)
consisting of g (x3), d, d’, c, and y subunits.
The replication bubble has two replication forks - once the DNA is opened up (unzipped)
at the origin, a replication machine can form on each end, with the helicases heading
in opposite directions. For simplification, we will consider just one fork — opening left
to right — in this discussion with the understanding that the same thing is happening
with the other fork, but in the opposite direction.
The first thing to notice when looking at a diagram of a replication fork (fig. 11) is that
the two single-stranded portions of template DNA are anti-parallel. This should come
as no surprise at this point in the course, but it does introduce an interesting mechanical problem. Helicase opens up the double stranded DNA and leads the rest of the
replication machine along. So, in the single-stranded region trailing the helicase, if we
look left to right, one template strand is 3’ to 5’ (in blue), while the other is 5’ to 3’ (in
red). Since we know that nucleic acids are polymerized by adding the 5’ phosphate of
a new nucleotide to the 3’ hydroxyl of the previous nucleotide (5’ to 3’, in green), this
means that one of the strands, called the leading strand, is being synthesized in the same
direction that the replication machine moves. No problem there.

Understanding the mechanics of DNA replication is a highly visual process, and it is recommended that students frequently
flip back and forth between Figure 11 and the text description of
replication. In fact, with the extra space around Figure 11, we
recommend writing you own description of the process to help
understand the mechanism step by step.

The other strand is problematic: looked at linearly, the newly synthesized strand would
be going 3’ to 5’ from left to right but DNA polymerases cannot add nucleotides that
way. How do cells resolve this problem? A number of possibilities have been proposed,
Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Page 101

Direction of Replication Machine Movement

3’

5’

DNA polymerase III

Leading Strand

Template Strand

3’ 5’

3’

Primase

3’

B

RNA primer

τ2

DNA helicase

5’

SSB’s

3’
5’

5’

C

A

Lagging Strand

3’

5’

Okazaki Fragment

Figure 11. DNA Replication in prokaryotes.

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Page 102

but the current model is depicted here. The replication machine consists of the helicase, primases, and two DNA polymerase III holoenzymes moving in the same physical
direction (following the helicase). In fact, the pol III complexes are physically linked
through t subunits.
In order for the template strand that is 5’ to 3’ from left to right to be replicated, the
strand must be fed into the polymerase backwards. This can be accomplished either
by turning the polymerase around or by looping the DNA around. As the figure shows,
the current model is that the primase is also moving along left to right, so it has just
a short time to quickly synthesize a short primer before having to move forward with
the replisome and starting up again, leaving intermittent primers in its wake. Because
of this, Pol III is forced to synthesize only short fragments of the chromosome at a time,
called Okazaki fragments after their discoverer. Pol III begins synthesizing by adding
nucleotides onto the 3’ end of a primer and continues until it hits the 5’ end of the
next primer. It does not (and can not) connect the strand it is synthesizing with the 5’
primer end.
DNA replication is called a semi-discontinuous process because while the leading strand
is being synthesized continuously, the lagging strand is synthesized in fragments. This
leads to two major problems: first, there are little bits of RNA left behind in the newly
made strands (just at the 5’ end for the leading strand, in many places for the lagging);
and second, Pol III can only add free nucleotides to a fragment of single stranded DNA;
it cannot connect another fragment. Therefore, the new “strand” is not whole, but
riddled with missing phosphodiester bonds.
The first problem is resolved by DNA polymerase I. Unlike Pol III, Pol I is a monomeric
protein and acts alone, without additional proteins. There are also 10-20 times as many
Pol I molecules as there are Pol III molecules, since they are needed for so many Okazaki fragments. DNA Polymerase I has three activities: (1) like Pol III, it can synthesize
a DNA strand based on a DNA template, (2) also like Pol III, it is a 3’-5’ proofreading exonuclease, but unlike Pol III, (3) it is also a 5’-3’ exonuclease. The 5’-3’ exonuclease activity
is crucial in removing the RNA primer (fig. 12). The 5’-3’ exonuclease binds to doublestranded DNA that has a single-stranded break in the phosphodiester backbone such as
what happens after Okazaki fragments have been synthesized from one primer to the
next, but cannot be connected. This 5’-3’ exonuclease then removes the RNA primer.
The polymerase activity then adds new DNA nucleotides to the upstream Okazaki fragment, filling in the gap created by the removal of the RNA primer. The proofreading
exonuclease acts just like it does for Pol III, immediately removing a newly incorporated
incorrect nucleotide. After proofreading, the overall error rate of nucleotide incorporation is approximately 1 in 107.
Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Technically, the 5’-3’ exonuclease cleaves the DNA at a doublestranded region downstream of the nick, and may then remove
anywhere from 1-10nt at a time. Experimentally, the 5’-3’ exonuclease activity can be cleaved from the rest of Pol I by the protease trypsin. This generates the “Klenow fragment” containing
the polymerase and 3’-5’ proofreading exonuclease.

Page 103

A

5’

3’

3’

5’

B

DNA polymerase I

5’

3’

3’

5’

C
DNA ligase

5’

3’

3’

5’

D
DNA ligase
5’

3’

3’

5’

= DNA

= RNA primer

Figure 12. Lagging Strand Synthesis. After DNA polymerase III has extended the primers
(yellow), DNA polymerase I removes the primer and replaces it by adding onto the previous
fragment. When it finishes removing RNA, and replacing it with DNA, it leaves the DNA
with a missing phosphodiester bond between the pol III-synthesized DNA downstream
and the pol I-synthesized DNA upstream. This break in the sugar-phosphate backbone is
repaired by DNA ligase.

Even though the RNA has been replaced with DNA, this still leaves a fragmented strand.
The last major player in the DNA replication story finally appears: DNA ligase. This
enzyme has one simple but crucial task: it catalyzes the attack of the 3’-OH from one
fragment on the 5’ phosphate of the next fragment, generating a phosphodiester bond.
This reaction requires energy in the form of hydrolysis of either ATP or NAD+ depending
on the species ( E. coli uses NAD+) generating AMP and either PPi or NMN+.

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Page 104

Eukaryotic Replication
Given the crucial nature of chromosomal
replication for life to exist, it is not surprising to find that eukaryotic DNA replication is
very similar to the prokaryotic process. This
section will highlight some of the differences, which are generally elaborations on the
prokaryotic version.
Unlike prokaryotes, eukaryotic chromosomes
often have multiple origins of replication.
Considering the size of eukaryotic chromosomes, this is necessary to finish complete
replication in a timely manner. Each of these
origins defines a replicon, or the stretch of
the DNA that is replicated from a particular
origin. The replicons do not replicate at exactly the same time (although all within the
same phase of the cell cycle, see chapter 15),
so it is important to make sure that replicons
are used only once during a cell cycle.

A

Conserved origin sequence

B

Origin Recognition
Complex (ORC)

C

Cdc6/Cdc18

Cdt1

D

Licensing factors
(Mcm2 - Mcm7)

E

Open replication fork

Figure 13. Eukaryotic Origin of Replication

This requires a “licensing” mechanism. During the cell cycle phase before DNA replication is initiated, a pre-replicative complex is assembled at each origin (Fig. 13). The
origins are highly variable in composition and length, ranging from ~100 to well over
10000 base pairs. The pre-RC proteins, on the other hand, are very highly conserved.
The pre-RC begins by making the ORC (origin recognition complex, not a creature battling Frodo and Aragorn), which is comprised of six subunits (Orc1-Orc6). Although
there is not significant sequence homology, the ORC approximates the function of the
DnaA protein in E. coli. To complete the pre-RC, the ORC recruits a pair of proteins,
Cdc6 and Cdt1 to each side, and they bind the MCM complex (a hexamer of Mcm2Mcm6 that has an inactive helicase activity), leading to the fully licensed pre-RC. The
origin is now ready for activation.
Activation of the pre-RC at an origin of replication requires first Mcm10, which facilitates protein kinases that phosphorylate the MCM complex, activating the helicase activity, and making the replication fork ready to accept the replication machine.

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Page 105

The components of the eukaryotic replication machine may have different names from
the prokaryotic, but the functions should be very familiar (Fig. 14). There is a primase to
make RNA primers, and tightly associated with the primase is DNA polymerase a. Pol a
has neither a 5’-3’ exonuclease nor a 3’-5’ proofreading exonuclease, but it can synthesize
DNA. However, this is not the primary DNA polymerase. The primase/pol a complex
is essentially a fancy primase that begins with a short <10nt RNA primer and then adds
another short ~15nt DNA fragment, making a hybrid primer.

3’

5’

PCNA

Leading Strand

DNA polymerase δ

Template Strand

3’

5’

3’

3’ RNA+DNA primer

5’

DNA polymerase α

DNA helicase activity
(activated Mcm2-6)

Replication Protein A

Replication factor C (RFC), acting like the prokaryotic clamp loader complex, then replaces pol a with PCNA, the eukaryotic version of the b clamp. This then recruits DNA
polymerase d, which is the primary replicative DNA polymerase, equivalent to prokaryotic Pol III in function, and necessary for both leading and lagging strand synthesis.
Finally, instead of SSB, eukaryotic cells use replication protein A (RPA) to organize and
control single-stranded DNA as it is generated during the replicative process.

Figure 14. The eukaryotic replication machine is very similar to the prokaryotic
machine.

You may have noticed that none of the eukaryotic DNA polymerases discussed so far
have a 5’ to 3’ exonuclease activity as used by prokaryotic DNA polymerase I to remove
primers. In place of that, RNaseH1 and and FEN-1 remove the RNA primers (all but
one ribonucleotide, and the last ribonucleotide, respectively). Interestingly, FEN-1 also
excises chunks of lagging strand DNA within about 15 base pairs of the RNA if they
contain mistakes. This seems to help alleviate the problem of lower fidelity of replication by pol a, which has no proofreading capability. After RNaseH1 and FEN-1 have
removed primers and near-primer mistakes, pol d fills in the missing nucleotides, and
a ligase enzyme joins the fragments. Pol e does have a 3’-5’ exonuclease activity that
chops single-stranded DNA into small oligonucleotide fragments and is also associated
with the replication machine. The function of Pol e is not clearly understood.

DNA Lesions
The robust nature of DNA due to its complementary double strands has been noted
several times already. We now consider in more detail the repair processes that rescue
damaged DNA. DNA is not nearly as robust as popular media makes it out to be. In
fact, to take the blockbuster book and film, Jurassic Park, as an example, Although there
is unquestionably some DNA to be found either embedded in amber-bound parasites,
or pehaps in preserved soft tissue (found deep in a fossilized femur, Schweitzer et al,
2007.). It is likely to be heavily degraded, and accurate reproduction is impossible without many samples to work from.

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Page 106

The most common insult to the DNA of living organisms is depurination, in which the
b-N-glycosidic bond between an adenine or guanine and the deoxyribose is hydrolyzed.
In mammalian cells, it is estimated at nearly 10000 purines per cell generation, and
generally, the average rate of loss at physiological pH and ionic strength, and at 37 °C, is
approximately 3 x 10-11 /sec. Depyrimidination of cytosine and thymine residues can also
occur, but do so at a much slower rate than depurination. Despite the high rate of loss
of these bases, they are generally remediated easily by base excision repair (BER), which
is discussed later in this section. Therefore it is rare for depurination or depyrimidination to lead to mutation.
O

Guanine

5’

O

O
-O

N

P

O

O

N
H
N

O

H2C
H

H

N

H

H

H

N

H

5’
O

N

H2O

NH2

N

H

-O

N

P

O

H2C

OH

H

H

H

H

3’

O

O

NH2

H

Thymine good, Uracil bad. Why is thymine found in DNA rather
than uracil? It turns out that the frequency of cytosine deamination may yield a clue as to why cells have gone the extra step
(literally, since uracil is a precursor in thymine biosynthesis) to
make a new “standard” nucleotide for DNA when uracil worked
just fine for RNA, presumably the older genetic molecule. Consider this: if uracil was standard for DNA, then the very frequent
deamination conversions of C to U would not be caught by errorchecking for non-DNA bases, and the mutation rate would skyrocket. Fortunately, since T has evolved to be the standard basepairing partner of adenine in DNA, uracil is quickly recognized
and removed by multiple uracil DNA glycosylases (more on that
later in this chapter), and the integrity of our DNA sequences is
much safer.

H

H

3’

Figure 15. Depurination of guanines (or adenines) is a common DNA lesion.

Three of the four DNA bases, adenine, guanine, and cytosine, contain amine groups
that can be lost in a variety of pH and temperature-dependent reactions that convert
Adenine

5’
P

N

O

N

O

H2C
H

H

H

P

O

H

3’

Cytosine

-O

P

O

O

H
O

H2C
H

H

N
H

N

H

H2O

NH3

Xanthine
O

P

N

O

NH3

H

H

H

P

O

O

N

H
O

H2C
H

H

H

N
H

H

H
O

P
O

H

H2C

O

H

H

N
H

H

-O

O

H2O

Thymine

5’

N

O

NH3

O
O

H3C

P

O

O

H

H2C

O

H

H

H

3’

H

NH2

H3C

O
-O

O

5-methyl cytosine

5’

O

N

H

H

3’

Uracil

N

O

H2C

N

H

O

H

H

3’

H2O

N

H

H

-O

O

-O

H

H

O

H
NH2

N

O
N

H

5’
N

H

H

H

H

N

N

3’

5’

NH2
H

H

N
H
O

H2C
H

N

O

H2C

O

O

NH3

O

O

O

N

H2O

Guanine
O

5’

H

P

H

5’
-O

-O

H

3’

O

O
N

H

O

Hypoxanthine

5’

NH2

O
-O

3’

H

N
N
H

H
O

H

H

3’

Figure 16. Deamination of adenine, guanine, cytosine, and methylcytosine can lead to mutations upon replication if unrepaired.

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Page 107

the bases to hypoxanthine, xanthine, and uracil, respectively. This can sometimes lead
to permanent mutations since during replication, they serve as a template for the
synthesis of a complementary strand, and where a guanine should go, for example
(complementary to cytosine), an adenine may be inserted (because it complements uracil, the deamination product of cytosine). Another deamination, of the modified base
methylcytosine, can also lead to a mutation upon replication. Some cytosines may be
methylated as part of a regulatory process to inactivate certain genes in eukaryotes,
or in prokaryotes as protection against restriction endonucleases. When the methylated cytosine is deaminated, it produces a thymine, which changes the complementary
nucleotide (upon replication) from a guanine to an adenine. Deamination of cytosines
occurs at nearly the same rate as depurination, but deamination of other bases are not
as pervasive: deamination of adenines, for example, is 50 times less likely than deamination of cytosine.
All DNA bases can spontaneously shift to a tautomeric isomer (amino to imino, keto
to enol, etc), although equilibrium leans heavily toward one than the other. When a
rare tautomer occurs, it base-pairs differently than its more common structural form:
guanines with thymines and adenines with cytosines. Here again, a mutation can be
propagated during replication of the DNA.
DNA inside a cell must also contend with reactive oxidative species (ROS) generated
by the cell’s metabolic processes. These include singlet oxygen, peroxide and peroxide
radicals, as well as hydroxyl radicals. although it is thought that the hydrogen peroxide and peroxide radicals do not directly attack the DNA but rather generate hydroxyl
radicals that do. Most of these ROS are generated in the mitochondria during oxidative
phosphorylation and leak out, although some may be generated in peroxisomes, or in
some cytosolic reactions. Depending on what part of the DNA is targeted, ROS can
cause a range of lesions including strand breaks and removal of bases.
Ionizing radiation (e.g. X-rays) and ultraviolet radiation can each cause DNA lesions.
Ionizing radiation is often a cause for double-stranded breaks of the DNA. As described
later in the chapter, the repair process for double-stranded breaks necessarily leads to
some loss of information, and could potentially knock out a gene. Ultraviolet radiation that hits adjacent thymines can cause them to react and form a cyclobutyl (four
carbons bonded in closed loop) thymine dimer. The dimer pulls each thymine towards
the other, out of the normal alignment. Depending on the structural form of the dimer,
this is sufficient to stymie the replication machine and halt replication. However, some
data suggests that normal basepairing to adenine may be possible under some conditions, although, it is likely only one base-pair would result, and the missing base could
lead to either random substitution or a deletion in the newly synthesized strand.
Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

5’
-O

O
H3C

OP

N

O

H

H

O

O

N

O

H2C
H

H

O

H
O

H
H3C

O
O
H3C
-O

P

N

O

O

H

N

O

H2C
H
O

H

H

UV radiation

H3C

C

N

C
O

N

H

C

N

C
N

H

O

O

H

H

3’

Figure 17. Ultraviolet radiation can be absorbed by some DNA and commonly
causes pyrimidine cyclobutyl dimers connecting adjacent nucleotide bases.

Page 108

Finally, we consider the formation of chemical adducts (covalently attached groups)
on DNA. They may come from a variety of sources, including lipid oxidation, cigarette
smoke, and fungal toxins. These adducts attach to the DNA in different ways, so there
are a variety of different effects from the adducts as well. Some may be very small
adducts - many environmental carcinogens are alkylating agents, transferring methyl
groups or other small alkyl groups to the DNA. Other adducts are larger, but also attach
covalently to a nitrogenous base of DNA. Common examples are benzo(a)pyrene, a major mutagenic component of cigarette smoke, and aflatoxin B1, produced by a variety of
Aspergillus-family fungi. Benzo(a)pyrene is converted to benzo(a)pyrene diol epoxide,
which can then attack the DNA. When this happens, the flat pyrene ring intercalates
between bases, causing steric changes that lead to local deformation of the DNA and
disruption of normal DNA replication.
OH

O

HO

HO

5’

OH

Benzo(a)pyrene

-O

OH

O

O

Benzo(a)pyrene-7,8-epoxide

P

N

O

O

N

O

H2C
H

H

N

H

N

NH2

Adduct bound to guanine
base in DNA

H

H

O

H

3’

Figure 18. Benzo(a)pyrene is converted to an epoxide form by the cell. The epoxide and form an
adduct on DNA.

Aflatoxin B1 is the primary aflatoxin produced by some species (esp. flavus, parasiticus)
of Aspergillus, a very common mold that grows on stored grain (as well as detritus and
other dead or dying plant matter). In addition to infecting grain, it is a common problem with stored peanuts. At high levels, aflatoxin is acutely toxic, but at lower levels,
it has the insidious property of being unnoticeably toxic but mutagenic. Like benzo(a)
pyrene, it is metabolized into an epoxide and will then react with DNA to form an adduct that can disrupt replication.
O

O

O

O

O

O

O

OCH3

O

Aflatoxin

Benzo(a)pyrene and aflatoxin B1 are not themselves mutagens.
Once they are in the cell, the normal metabolism of these compounds leads to diol epoxide formation, which can then attack
the DNA. Although the 7-nitrogen (N7) of guanine is more nucleophilic, and is a target for aflatoxin, most benzo(a)pyrene diol
epoxide adducts attach to the 2-nitrogen of guanine residues.

OH

O

O

OCH3

O

5’

Aflatoxin-2,3-epoxide

P

N

O

O

N

O

H2C
H

O

OCH3

O

O
-O

H
O

H

H

H

3’

Figure 19. The epoxide form of aflatoxin also forms adducts on DNA.

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

In a similar vein, crosslinking chemotherapeutic agents such as
cisplatin (a platinum atom bonded to two chloride groups and
two amino groups) also bind to DNA. The chloride groups are
displaced first by water and then by other groups including sites
on DNA. Although sometimes classified as an alkylating agent, it
obviously is not, but it acts similarly. Cisplatin goes a step further
than a simple alkylating agent though, because it has another
reactive site and can thus crosslink (covalently bond) another
nucleotide, possibly on another strand of DNA, making a strong
obstruction to DNA replication. Cisplatin can also crosslink proteins to DNA.

O

O

O

O

Some alkylating agents, particularly N-nitroso compounds, are
formed in the acidic conditions of the stomach from nitrosation
of naturally occurring nitrites produced from food (reduction
of nitrates), or environmental nitrites in drinking water. Ironically, while some alkylating agents can cause cancers, others are
used therapeutically as anticancer treatments, e.g. mitomycin,
melphalan. The idea, as with many cancer treatments, is that
although such drugs cause DNA damage to non-cancerous cells
as well as cancer cells, the high rate of cancer cell proliferation
gives them fewer chances for repair of damaged DNA, and thus
greater likelihood that the damage might halt replication and
lead to cell death.

N
N

H
NH2

Adduct bound to
guanine base in DNA

There are federal standards (20-300 parts per billion depending on
usage) for aflatoxin in various forms of grain-based animal feed,
especially corn-based feeds, because the toxin can pass through
the animal into milk, as well as linger in the meat. In addition to
feed, there are federal maximums for peanuts and peanut products, brazil nuts, pistachios, and other foodstuffs (actionable at
20 ppb).
Page 109

Well then, what’s a poor cell to do when its DNA is being constantly ravaged? As it
turns out, there are some very good repair processes that are constantly at work on
the DNA, scanning it for defects, and where possible, making repairs. Often the repairs
are perfect, if the complementary strand is intact, sometimes mutations must be introduced, and finally there are occasions when repair is impossible, and apoptosis is
triggered to kill the cell and prevent propagation of damaged DNA.

DNA Repair
Strictly defined, the simplest repair mechanism does not use an enzyme. Dealkylation,
or removal of alkyl groups (like —CH3 or —C2H5) involves only the transfer of an alkyl
group from an O6-methylguanine or O6-ethylguanine onto O6-alkylguanyl-DNA alkyltransferase. Despite the name, the alkyltransferase is not really an enzyme, since it
is permanently altered and inactivated by the reaction and therefore does not fit the
definition of a catalyst. Note that this does not remediate alkylation at N7 or other
sites, just the O6-linked ones.
The next simplest repair mechanism is the uncoupling of pyrimidine cyclobutyl dimers. This can be accomplished through the activity of DNA photolyases, also known as
photoreactivating enzymes. These are named not just because the formation of the
pyrimidine cyclobutyl dimers is usually due to UV light exposure, but because the repair
enzymes themselves require exposure to light (300-500nm, near UV to visible blue) to
catalyze the dimer-breaking reaction.
While dealkylation and dimer lysis are relatively simple processes that make only a
subtle change to the DNA, excision repair mechanisms are more complicated and require multiple enzymatic steps to complete. When a small (not sterically bulky) lesion
is limited to a single base, whether missing from depurination or incorrectly formed
due to deamination or misincorporation, the process known as base excision repair (BER)
is engaged. As illustrated in figure 20, if a non-conventional base is recognized, it is then
removed by an appropriate DNA glycosylase. At present (Genbank search, July 2009),
there are at least 8 specific genes encoding human DNA glycosylases, although three
encode glycosylases that recognize uracil in various situations. Once the base has been
removed by the glycosylase, an endonuclease is enlisted to break the phosphodiester
bonds than hold the now-empty phosphodeoxyribose. The resulting gap in the DNA is
filled in by a DNA polymerase and finally the strand is reconnected by DNA ligase.

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

More specifically, DNA photolyases (a ~60kD protein), are non-covalently associated with a chromophore (N5,N10-methylenyltetrahydrofolate or 5-deazaflavin) and an FADH—. The photolyase binds
to the pyrimidine cyclobutyl dimer of either single-stranded or
double-stranded DNA in a light-independent and sequence-independent manner. However it does not catalyze any change in
the bond until light is absorbed by the chromophore, which then
transfers the energy to FADH—, causing it to eject and electron to
the dimer, thus breaking it apart.

Page 110

Figure 20. Base Excision
Repair requires five separate steps.

A

1 Altered nucelotide recognized

F

XPC

RNA pol II

RNA

XPD
XPB
TFIIH

B

XPA RPA

XPC

2 DNA glycosylase removes base
XPA RPA

HO

BRCA1
BRCA2

RNA pol II

XPG
HO

HO

XPG
CSB

MSH

BRCA2

XPC
P

XPA RPA

CSA

XAB2

BRCA1

ERCC1

P

XPF

4 DNA polymerase removes phosphate
and inserts correct complimentary base

G

XPD XPB

C

3 Endonuclease cleaves DNA backbone

TFIIH

RNA

RNA pol II
XPD
XPB
TFIIH
TFIIH RPA
XPA

TFIIH

= Adenine
= Thymine

D

PCNA

XPD XPB
pol δ
P

= Cytosine
5 DNA ligase seals gap
= Guanine

E

DNA
ligase

= Uracil

In the case of bulky lesions that significantly alter the physical presentation of the DNA
to the polymerases and other enzymes that process DNA, a different type of repair process is involved. Nucleotide excision repair (NER), perhaps better named polynucleotide
excision repair, involves the removal of the lesion as well as some of the nucleotides
in the immediate vicinity. There are two major initiators of NER: either a non-transcriptionally active portion of the DNA is scanned by XPC (fig. 21A), which recognizes
a bulky lesion and recruits the repair complex, or as a gene is being transcribed, RNA
polymerase runs into a lesion, and then recruits the repair complex via CSA and CSB
(fig. 21F and G). If the detection is through XPC, one of the early repair factors recruited
to the site is Transcription Factor IIH/XPB/XPD, which is a DNA helicase (fig. 21B). This
type of global genome detection is inefficient and relatively slow, but provides a basal
level of error-checking for all DNA. In the case of DNA being transcribed, the RNA
polymerase complex already includes TFIIH, of which XPB and XPD are a part. This
transcriptionally-directed detection is more efficient and targets those parts of the DNA
in greatest use in a given cell. In the next step (fig. 21C), XPG, associated with BRCA1/2,
and XPF, associated with ERCC1, excise a portion of the affected strand, including but
not limited to the lesion itself. DNA polymerase d or e can then add onto the free 3’OH
to fill in the gap based on the complementary strand sequence (fig. 21D). Finally, the
repair is connected on its 3’ end to the rest of the strand by DNA ligase (fig. 21E).

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Figure 21. Nucleotide Excision Repair in Eukaryotic Systems

The “XP” in XPC, XPB, XPD, and the others in fig. 18 refers to xeroderma pigmentosa, another autosomal recessive disease, of which
the primary characteristic is the formation of skin carcinomas at
a young age. Because NER is a major form of pyrimidine dimer
repair (in addition to photolyases), its disruption by mutations to
one or more of the XP genes leads to extreme sensitivity to UVinduced lesions. Affected individuals must minimize exposure to
the sun. The name of the disease comes from the characteristic
pigmented lesions (keratoses) that often form on the skin when
exposed to sun.
CSA and CSB are named for Cockayne syndrome, an autosomal
recessive aging disorder. Mutations in either gene can cause the
disorder, which is characterized by premature aging, stunted
growth, photosensitivity, and developmental defects of the nervous system. Presumably, knocking out the DNA repair capability
of CSA or CSB leads to fast accumulation of damage, inability to
transcribe needed genes, and eventually cell death.
Page 111

A sort of variation on NER is the mismatch repair (MMR) system. This is best understood in prokaryotes: in E. coli, MutS is a small protein that forms homodimers at
mismatch sites. The MutS dimers recruit two MutL proteins, each of which interacts
with one of the MutS units. Each MutS/MutL complex pushes DNA through inwardly,
forming a loop with the mismatch in the center of the loop. This continues until one
of the MutS/MutL complexes encounters a hemimethylated GATC sequence. This causes
recruitment of MutH, a highly specialized endonuclease that makes a single-stranded
nick in the backbone of the non-methylated strand. This provides an opening for the
3’-5’ exonuclease I or the 5’-3’ exonuclease VII (or RecJ) to degrade the strand from the
nick to the point of mismatch. This is then, as you may have guessed, filled in by DNA
polymerase and the backbone connected by ligase. In eukaryotes, multiple homologues
to the MutS and MutL proteins have been discovered and the process is similar, but not
clearly understood yet, as no homologue to MutH has yet been discovered.
A

B
CH3

5’

3’

MutS

CH3

Template strand

New strand

3’

5’

5’

3’

3’

5’

MutL

C

D

CH3

MutH

5’

3’

Strand nicked

Operators

Exonuclease

ATP

5’

CH3
3’

5’

5’

3’

5’

recA

lexA

uvrB

uvrA

3’

Transcription
&
Translation

3’

5’

DNApol

Figure 22. Mismatch Repair System. Mismatched nucleotides do not for normal H-bonds, and cause
a minor disturbance (A) in the DNA structure. (B) MutS dimerizes at mismatch sites and each
recruits a MutL protein. (C) The MutS/L complex pushes DNA through to form a loop with the mismatch in the center. When a methylated GATC is encountered, the MutS/L stop moving DNA and
recruit th the MutH endonuclease. An exonuclease then digests the DNA strand to the mismatch.
(D) Finally, a DNA polymerase fills in the missing segment and the backbone is sealed by ligase.

So far, the repairs have been based on the assumption that a lesion affects only one
strand, and the other strand can provide a reliable template for effecting repairs without the loss of information. Unfortunately, that is not always the case, and some lesions and repair processes necessarily lead to sequence loss. When a double-strand
break occurs, perhaps as the product of ionizing radiation, the most common repair
mechanism is known as non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). The double-stranded
ends are first recognized by Ku, a heterodimeric circular protein that binds the DNA
ends. Ku then recruits the kinase DNA-PKCS. The DNA-PKCS acts as a bridge to bring the
Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Another prokaryotic DNA repair system is the SOS response. As
depicted in fig. 23 below, if there is no damage, RecA is inactive,
so LexA protein can repress the production of more SOS repair
proteins. However, if there is damage, RecA proteins bind to the
single stranded DNA and are activated. They in turn cleave the
LexA repressor allowing production from a number of DNA repair
genes.
A

3’

ADP + Pi

Recall that in E. coli, Dam methyltransferases eventually methylate the DNA as a method of protecting its genome, but newly synthesized DNA is not methylated. Thus, the assumption is that the
methylated strand contains the original and correct base, while
the mismatch is due to misincorporation in the newer strand.

Repression

LexA

B
Damaged DNA

Active RecA

Active LexA

Transcription
&
Translation

lexA

5’

Cleaved (inactive) LexA

LexA

RecA

recA

UvrA

uvrA

UvrB

uvrB

3’

No Repression

Figure 23. The prokaryotic SOS operon. (A) repressed state when there is no DNA
damage, and (B) the activated state in which DNA damage has been detected.

Page 112

two ends together, and a DNA ligase can then join the ends together. If the strands
were broken in different places, resulting in complementary single-stranded overhangs
at each end (like those generated by some restriction endonucleases) then the repair
is often perfect, since the complementary sequences align the two ends correctly in
their original positions. However, if the strand ends have already been acted upon by
nucleases and are no longer complementary, then the rejoining of the ends will likely
lead to loss of information. In some parts of the DNA, this would have little effect,
but if it happened within a gene, the mutated gene product could have abnormal or
compromised function.

Telomeres
If there is a mechanism for recognizing loose ends of DNA, what about the ends of every eukaryotic chromosome? They are linear chromosomes, so they have ends, right?
What prevents the double-strand-break repair systems from mis-recognizing them all
as broken DNA and concatenating all of the chromosomes together? Interestingly, the
answer to this question is intimately tied up with the answer to the problem of endreplication, which was very briefly alluded to in our description of replication.
The end-replication problem is one that affects all linear chromosomes. It boils down
to one simple fact: an RNA primer is needed to start any DNA replication. So on the 5’
end of each strand is an RNA primer (fig. 24 in yellow) that gets removed by the errorcorrection process. Thus with every round of replication, information is lost from the 5’
end of each strand of each chromosome.
DNA
3’
Eventually, crucial genes are lost and the 5’3’
5’
cell will die; most likely many cellular
Replication
functions will be compromised long before that happens. The solution to the
DNA
3’
end-replication problem might be consid- 5’3’
5’
RNA primer
+
ered more a treatment of symptoms than
RNA primer
5’
3’
a cure, to use an analogy to medicine. In 3’
5’
short, during the very early stages of an
Removal of 5’ RNA primers
organism’s life, a lot of non-coding DNA
is added onto the ends of the DNA so that
DNA
3’
as the cell and its progeny continue to 5’3’
5’
reproduce, the nucleotides do not affect
+
5’
3’
any functional genes. This process is cat- 3’
5’
alyzed by the enzyme, telomerase.
Figure 24. End-replication problem.

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Page 113

Telomerase is a large holoenzyme that acts as a reverse transcriptase, reading a selfcontained RNA template to add on telomere sequence to the 3’ ends of linear chromosomes. Note that this does not add onto the 5’ ends - as mentioned above, there is
nothing to be done about the 5’ ends directly. However, while telomerases are active,
the 3’ ends can be extended, and thus when the 5’ end primer is removed, the sequence
lost (forever) from that strand of DNA is only a telomeric repeat and not something
more useful. The repeats are well conserved across eukaryotes, and almost completely
conserved across mammalian species (shown in Fig. 25).
5’
3’

DNA

Telomere repeats
A G G G T T A G G G T T A G G G T T A G G G T T A G G G 3’
A A AA U C C C AA U U U A C
5’
UA
C
U

U C C C A A UC C C A A U C C

RNA

3’

Elongation

5’
3’

DNA

5’

Telomerase

A G G G T T A G G G T T A G G G T T A G G G T T A G G G T T G 3’
A A AA U C C C AA U U U A C
5’
UA
C
U

UCCCAAUCCCAAUCC

RNA

3’

5’

Telomerase
Translocation
5’
3’

DNA

A G G G T T A G G G T T A G G G T T A G G G T T G G G G T T A 3’
A A AA U C C C AA U U U A C
5’
UA
C
U

C C C C A A U C C C A A UC C

3’

Elongation

5’
3’

DNA

RNA

5’

Telomerase

A G G G T T A G G G T TA G G G T TA G G G T T A G G G T T A G G G T T A 3’
AA U C C C AA U U U A C
AA A
5’
U
C
U

CCCCAAUCCCAAUCC

3’

Telomerase

RNA

5’

Figure 25. Telomerases are reverse transcriptases that generate
DNA repeats from a built-in RNA template.

In metazoans, telomerase activity is high in the embryonic stages of life, but is virtually
non-existent in adults except in cell types that must constantly proliferate (e.g. blood
and epithelial cells). The activity of telomerase is primarily regulated by expression
of the TERT gene (telomerase reverse transcriptase) although construction of the full
telomerase also requires the expression of the TERC gene (the telomerase RNA, also abChapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Page 114

breviated TR), and dyskerin. Roughly speaking, the number of telomeric repeats that
are placed on a chromosome in early development determines the number of DNA
replications and cell divisions that the cell can undergo before succumbing to apoptosis
(programmed cell death). Experiments on cells in culture demonstrate a strong correlation between telomere length and longevity, and it is known that cells taken from
people with the premature aging disease, progeria, have relatively short telomeres.
Conversely, cancer cells almost universally have upregulated expression of telomerase.
Given that a defining characteristic of cancer cells is the ability to proliferate rapidly
and indefinitely, turning telomerase back on is, not surprisingly, an important aspect of
carcinogenesis. It is therefore a target for anti-cancer treatments; however, to date no
telomerase-targeting therapies have proven effective.
Now that we know about telomeres, the question that started this section becomes
even more problematic: with these repeated sequence overhangs, how are chromosomes prevented from connecting end-to-end through a double-strand repair-like process? In part due to their repeated sequences, telomeres are able to form end-caps
and protect chromosomal ends. The telomeres protect the ends of each chromosome
by binding to protective proteins and by forming complex structures. Telomere end
binding proteins (TEBP) bind to the 3’ overhanging end of the telomere. Other capping
proteins, such as the mammalian TRF1 and TRF2 (telomere repeat binding factors) not
only bind the telomere, but help to organize it into large looped structures known as
T-loops (Fig. 26).
G
T
T
Telomeric DNA
T T GGGG T T GGGG T T GGGG

5’

G
G
G
T T GGGG

T T GGGG

AA C C C C

T T GGGG 3’
GG
G
5’
C
G
C
T T CC
AA

T T GGGG T T GGGG T T GGGG

Non-telomeric
DNA

AA C C C C AA C C C C AA C C C C

AA C C C C AA C C C C AA C C C C AA C C C C AA C C C C

3’

AA C C C C AA C C C C
T T GGGG T T GGGG

Figure 21. Telomeres form protective T-loop structures on the ends of
linear chromosomes.

Chapter 7, DNA, v. 1.0

Finally, the T-loop ends are further stabilized by the formation
of G-quartets (fig. 27). G-quartets are a cyclic tetramers that can
form in sequences with four consecutive guanine residues, which
hydrogen-bond to each other to make a linked square shape stabilized by a metal ion in the center. Furthermore in cases like the
telomere, in which such sequences are repeated, the G-quartets
can stack and associate three-dimensionally, increasing their stability.

Figure 27. G-quartets form by hydrogen bonding of fours consecutive guanine
residues stabilized by a metal ion (green), and can form three-dimensional stacks
due to telomeric repeats. Produced from Protein DataBank data by T. Splettstoesser.

Page 115

Transcription :

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.

Reading the Instructions in the Genome

Although DNA is an excellent medium for the storage of information, the very characteristic
that makes it so stable and inherently self-correcting - being double-stranded - also makes
it unwieldy for using that genetic information to make cell components. Since the informational parts of the molecule (the nitrogenous bases) are locked inside the ladder, reading it
requires the energetically expensive task of breaking all the hydrogen bonds holding the two
strands together. To do so for every single copy of each protein needed by the cell would not
only take a lot of energy, but a lot of time. Instead, there must be a mechanism to take the
information from DNA once (or a few times), and then make many copies of a protein from
that single piece of information. That mechanism is transcription.
5’

In order to obtain the genetic information in a form that is easily read and then used
to synthesize functioning proteins, the DNA must first be transcribed into RNA (ribonucleic acid). As we saw in chapter 1, RNA is extremely similar to DNA, using some of
the same nitrogenous bases (adenine, guanine, cytosine) as well as one unique to RNA,
uracil. Notice that uracil is very similar to thymine (chapter 7, fig.1), particularly in the
placement and spacing of the hydrogen-bonding atoms. Since it is the hydrogen-bonding interaction of these bases (i.e. base-pairing of guanine to cytosine, adenine to thymine/uracil) that forms the basis of information transfer from original DNA to daughter
cell DNA, it is logical to expect that the same kind of base-pairing mechanism is used to
move the information from a storage state in the double-stranded nucleic acid (DNA) to
a more useful/usable state in the form of a single-stranded nucleic acid (RNA).
The process of copying DNA into RNA is called transcription. In both prokaryotes and
eukaryotes, transcription requires certain control elements (sequences of nucleotides
within the DNA) to proceed properly. These elements are a promoter, a start site, and
a stop site. The need for a recognizable point to begin and a point to end the process
is fairly obvious. The promoter is somewhat different. The promoter controls the frequency of transcription. If you imagine the needs of a cell at any given time, clearly not
all gene products are needed in the same quantity at the same time. There must be a
way to control when or if transcription occurs, and at what speed.
Chapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

-O

NH2

OP

N

O

O

H

H

H

O
-O

N

O

H2C

P

-O

N

O
N

O

O

H

N

N

O
H

H

O

OH

P

A
H

H

OH

H2C

N

H
NH2
N

C

O

H
-O

O

O

N

H

H

O

OH

P

H
O

O

N

H

U

O

H

3’

N

O

H2C
H
OH

G
NH2

N

O

H2C

H

H

O

H

OH

Figure 1. Ribonucleic Acid (RNA) is a polymer of the nucleotides adenine, guanine,
cytosine, and uracil, connected by 3’-5’ phosphodiester bonds.

Page 116

The bare-bones version of the process goes something like this: (1) special docking proteins recognize the promoter sequence and bind to it, unzipping a small section around
the “start” site; (2) RNA polymerase binds to those special proteins and to the little bit
of single-stranded DNA that has just opened up; (3) a helicase enzyme (part of, or attached to the polymerase) unzips the DNA; (4) the RNA polymerase follows behind the
helicase, “reading” the DNA sequence, taking ribonucleotides from the environment,
matching them against the DNA template, and if they match, adding them to the previous ribonucleotide or RNA chain. This continues until the polymerase reaches the
stop site, at which point, it detaches from the template DNA, also releasing the newly
made RNA copy of that DNA. Of course, if that was all there was to it, there wouldn’t
be entire journals dedicated to studying RNA, its transcription, and the control of that
transcription.
The sequence of the promoter is directly related to its function. There may be promoters for housekeeping genes (needed constantly, but at low copy number), “normal”
genes (needed as the cell’s situation dictates, rate of transcription also varies), stress
response genes (needed rarely), and a variety of other categories. Even within a category, the sequence of the promoter determines its strength. This is based upon what
is known as the “consensus sequence”. The consensus sequence is a theoretical “best”
promoter based on a survey of all genes in a particular category. The figure below
shows an alignment of the promoter sequences of a variety of different genes, all of
which are regulated by the same type of promoter and promoter-binding-protein. The
highlighted boxes show areas centered around -35 (35 nucleotides upstream of the start
site) and -10.
Gene
aceB
aceE
ada
ampC
ansB

Start
AATTAAAATGGAAATTGTTTTTGATTTTGCATTTTAAATGAGTAGTCTTAGTTGTGCTGA
GCAACTAAACGTAGAACCTGTCTTATTGAGCTTTCCGGCGAGAGTTCAATGGGACAGGTT
AAAGCGCAAGATTGTTGGTTTTTGCGTGATGGTGACCGGGCAGCCTAAAGGCTATCCTTA
TGGCTGCTATCCTGACAGTTGTCACGCTGATTGGTGTCGTTACAATCTAACGCATCGCCA
TGCCTCTAACTTTGTAGATCTCCAAAATATATTCACGTTGTAAATTGTTTAACGTCAAAT
-35

5’
3’

Bipartite σ70 promoter

TTGACA
AACTGT

-10
TATAAT
ATATTA

In contrast to its cellular role as a transient and disposable carrier
of genetic information, RNA is thought to have been the primary
molecule responsible for making life possible on earth. It has
long been postulated that it served dual roles as both a repository
of genetic information and as a rudimentary enzyme to act upon
that information. Unfortunately, prebiotic chemists have been
stymied for decades in coming up with a reasonable synthetic
pathway by which RNA could arise from the simple molecules of
the earth’s primordial “soup”. The key problem was that ribose
could be synthesized, though not particularly efficiently, and bases could be synthesized, but there was no way to connect them
together. The chemistry would not allow a condensation reaction between the bases and sugars. In 2009, by leaving behind the
conventional idea that ribonucleotides must have been synthesized from ribose and purines/pyrimidines, Powner, Gerland, and
Sutherland (Nature 459:239-242, 2009) showed that in fact, ribonucleotides could be synthesized from the chemical conditions of
a newly formed earth. Rather than attempt to make each “part”
and put them together, Powner et al synthesized a molecule that
contained parts of what would eventually be both the ribose and
a pyrimidine, 2-aminooxazole. Through a series of reactions that
utilized phosphate as a catalyst and scavenger, all of which were
clearly plausible in the current model of primordial earth, both
ribocytidine and ribouridine were created. Of course, this is only
the beginning, since this does not extend directly to the formation
of purine nucleotides, but it is a very significant step in prebiotic
chemistry, and an excellent example of the virtues of “stepping
outside of the box” sometimes.

Start site
A
T

3’
5’

Pribnow box

Figure 2. Upstream control sequences of various E. coli genes. Below it is the consensus sequence for
for s70 promoters.

Chapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Page 117

The consensus sequence in fig. 2 shows the most common nucleotide found at each position within those areas of similarity. In this example, the most common prokaryotic
promoter is shown: the s70 promoter, so called because it is recognized and bound by
the s70 transcription factor. [Here, and by universally accepted convention, recognition
sequences of DNA are written as the nucleotides would occur from 5’ to 3’ on the sense,
or non-template, strand. ] It is a two-part promoter, with a region centered around -35
(consensus TTGACA), and a region (sometimes called Pribnow box, consensus TATAAT)
centered around -10. The (-) sign indicates that the nucleotide is “upstream” of the
start site. Upstream means “to the left” when the nucleotides are written as a string
of letters, and it means “on the 5’ side of” with respect to the 5’-3’ directionality of a
DNA strand. Notice the relationship between the various individual promoters and the
consensus sequence. In general, those promoters with more matches to the consensus
sequence are stronger promoters.
A few paragraphs ago, the task of the promoter was defined as controlling the frequency of transcription. How does it do that? What does it mean to be a stronger (or
weaker) promoter? First, keep in mind that the expression of any given gene is not
automatic, or 100%. At any point in time, many of a cell’s genes will be near 0%, or shut
off. However, even genes that are turned on are transcribed at different rates. One of
the governing factors is the recognition of the promoter site by the RNA Polymerase.
For stronger promoters, the RNA polymerase is more likely to recognize the site, dock
properly, open up the double helix, and begin transcribing. On the other hand, the
RNA polymerase can potentially recognize weaker promoters, but it is less likely to
do so, instead passing it by as just another unimportant stretch of DNA. While this
is partially a matter of recognition by the polymerase, keep in mind that it is actually
governed by recognition of the promoter sequence by the general transcription factors
(to be discussed shortly) such as sigma factors in prokaryotes that are recognized by
the polymerase.
Notice that there is a high proportion of (A)denines and (T)hymines in the s70 promoter
sequences. This is true for many promoters in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic genes.
As you probably suspected, this is advantageous because there are only two H-bonds
between A-T pairs (as opposed to 3 H-bonds between G-C pairs), which means that it is
33% easier to unzip.

Chapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Page 118

Prokaryotic Transcription
In E. coli, as with other prokaryotes, there is only one true RNA polymerase (not including the specialty RNA polymerase, primase, which makes short RNA primers for DNA
replication). The polymerase is a multi-subunit holoenzyme comprised primarily of two
a subunits, a b subunit, a b’ subunit, an w subunit, and a s subunit. The a subunits are
primarily structural, assembling the holoenzyme and associated regulatory factors. The
b subunit contains the polymerase activity that catalyzes the synthesis of RNA, while
the b’ subunit is used to nonspecifically bind to DNA. The w subunit is involved in assembly of the holoenzyme and may also play a role in maintaining the structural integrity of the RNA polymerase. Finally, there is the s subunit, which does not stay closely
associated with the core enzyme (abb’w) except when helping to initiate transcription,
and is used to recognize the promoter by simultaneously decreasing the affinity of
RNAP to DNA in general, but increasing the affinity of RNAP for specific DNA promoter
sequences. Why decrease the affinity for non-specific DNA? When the RNAP is not in
use, it does not just float about in the nucleoplasm: it is bound quite tightly along the
DNA. When the sigma is bound, the decreased affinity allows the RNAP holoenzyme
to move along the DNA and scan for promoter sequences. There are multiple isoforms
of the s subunit (such as the sigma-70 mentioned above), each of which recognizes different promoter sequences. All isoforms perform the same basic function of properly
locating the RNAP to the start of a gene, and all isoforms only stay attached to the
holoenzyme for that one transient purpose, after which they are released (usually after
transcribing about ten nucleotides).
RNA transcript

Although RNA polymerase was discovered in 1960, the E. coli
RNAP has not yet been successfully mapped by x-ray crystallography. However, it is very similar to the RNAP of the archaean
species, Thermophilus aquaticus, which is highly stable (= easier
to crystallize) and for which an x-ray crystallographic structure
has been elucidated. The data from the Taq RNAP structure and
electron microscopic analyses of E. coli RNAP produce a lobsterclaw-shaped holoenzyme. The inner surface of the claw is lined
with positively charged amino acids that can interact with the
negatively charged DNA, and when the holoenzyme binds a sigma
subunit, the two halves of the claw (formed mostly by the beta
and beta’ subunits) move closer together to interact with the
DNA.
Rifamycins are a class of antibiotics that include rifamycin B, made
by the bacteria Streptomyces mediterranei (incidentally just one
of many antibiotics derived from the Streptomyces genus), and
rifampicin, its synthetic cousin. They work by binding within the
DNA-RNA channel near the active site of RNA polymerase, which
sterically prevents the addition of nucleotides to the RNA strand.
If the organism cannot transcribe RNA, it cannot use the RNA to
make the enzymes and other proteins necessary for life either,
and dies. The rifamycin binding site is highly conserved in most
prokaryotes but not in eukaryotes, so the antibiotic kills bacteria
specifically with little chance of harm to eukaryotes.

β
α
ω

Coding Strand

σ

α
β’
DNA

Complimentary Strand

Figure 3. Prokaryotic RNA Polymerases consist of two a subunits, a b, b’, w, and s subunits.

Chapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Page 119

Once the holoenzyme has recognized and bound tightly to the DNA at the promoter
site, the next step is to “melt” the DNA (breaking the H-bonds and separating the
strands of the double helix) in that area so that the RNAP can proceed downstream,
read the template DNA strand, and produce the new RNA. Often many RNA transcripts
of a gene are needed to produce a large number of active proteins in a short span of
time. Highly transcriptionally active genes therefore often have multiple RNA polymerases reading them, one right after another. Generally, an RNA polymerase only
needs to process about 15 nucleotides before there is room for another RNAP can bind
the promoter and start another transcript.

Strand separation is an energetically difficult process due to the
strength of the combined H-bonds between the strands, and often an RNAP may make several short-lived abortive attempts before finally prying open the double helix long and far enough to
allow the RNAP to stabilize and transcribe continuously to the
stop site.

RNA transcripts

5’

Promoter
sequence

3’

σ
σ

RNA polymerase

DNA

Figure 4. A new RNA polymerase can begin transcribing a gene before the previous one has finished.

The elongation phase of transcription proceeds in a 5’ to 3’ direction, which is to say
that new nucleotides are added to the 3’-OH of the growing strand. Elongation is a
stochastic process in which one of the plentiful free-floating ribonucleotides drops
into the active site of RNAP opposite the DNA template. If it is the correct nucleotide
(complementary to the template), then H-bonds will temporarily form, stabilizing the
new nucleotide in place long enough for the RNAP to catalyze the formation of a phosphodiester bond between the 3’-OH of the RNA-in-progress and the 5’-phosphate of
the nucleotide. However, if it is the incorrect nucleotide, the proper H-bonds do not
form, and the nucleotide usually dissociates from the active site before the RNAP has
a chance to bind it to the growing RNA strand. Obviously, this is not a perfect system,
and in fact, the error rate for transcription is quite high at approximately 1 in 10000
nucleotides. Fortunately, the cell generally churns out many copies of RNA from any
given gene very quickly (approximately 80 nucleotides per second), most of which are
either error-free or have errors that do not affect the function of the end-product protein. Furthermore, unlike DNA, in which errors of replication get carried along from
one generation of cells to the next, RNA is not a storage medium, and its transient nature means that even mutations that severely impact the protein function only affect
the few proteins translated from that one RNA, not the proteins generated from other
RNAs made from the same template gene, much less subsequent generations. In other
words, to misappropriate a phrase from the movie Meatballs, “It just doesn’t matter.”
Chapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Page 120

Eventually, the RNA polymerase reaches the end of the gene and stops transcribing.
The termination site is usually marked by a sequence of 4-10 adenine (A) residues on the
template strand, and some have a palindromic G-C-rich region that forms a hairpin loop
just upstream of the series of adenines. In the first case, it is thought that the resulting
string of A-U base pairs is unstable and may lead to the RNAP and the new RNA strand
falling off the template DNA while at the same time, the hairpin structure may cause
the RNAP to stop or pause, and this can also lead to it dissociating from the DNA. Only
about half of all transcription termination sites are marked in this way though, and the
others have no significant hairpin loops or easily recognizable sequences other than a
series of G-C-rich regions. In this type of termination site, the enzymatic co-factor, rho,
is required for termination, and so this is known as rho-dependent termination. Rho is
an RNA-binding protein with helicase activity, so it is postulated that it effects termination by forcing the RNA strand off of the DNA template.

Eukaryotic Transcription
Transcription in eukaryotes is more complicated, but follows the same general ideas.
The promoter sequences are much more varied both in placement (with respect to the
start site) and size. As we will see in the next chapter, eukaryotic genes have many
more control elements regulating their expression than do prokaryotic genes. Not
only are there more control elements, there are also more RNA polymerases, which
serve different specific cellular functions. Obviously, the broad function and location
of all the RNA polymerases is the same: read a DNA template and transcribe an RNA
copy of it; and since the DNA is found only in the nucleus, so are the polymerases.
However, the polymerases differ in exactly what kinds of RNA they produce. RNA Polymerase I is specialized for producing pre-rRNA (rRNA = ribosomal RNA). The pre-rRNA
is cleaved post-transcriptionally and incorporated into the ribosomes. Since ribosomes
are assembled in the the nucleolus, that is the part of the nucleus in which most RNA
Polymerase I is concentrated. RNA Polymerase III also makes an RNA (5S) that is incorporated into the ribosome. It also makes other untranslated RNAs such as tRNAs and
a variety of small nuclear RNAs. The only RNA polymerase that makes the translatable
RNA (mRNA, or messenger RNA) that most people think of when RNA is referred to
generically, is RNA polymerase II. This is the RNA polymerase that produces pre-mRNA,
which after some processing, becomes mRNA, is transported out of the nucleus, and
finally translated into proteins. All of the eukaryotic RNA polymerases are composed
of two large subunits, roughly analogous to the b and b’ subunits of prokaryotic RNAP,
but instead of just three or four other subunits, there are over a dozen smaller subunits
to the eukaryotic RNA polymerase holoenzymes.

Chapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Page 121

Initiation of transcription is also much more complicated. Not only is there great variety in promoters recognized by RNAP II, both RNAP I and RNAP III recognize promoters
with particular structural characteristics. One of the most common eukaryotic RNAP
II promoters is the TATA box, named for the highly conserved motif that defines it.
Although it appears similar to the Pribnow box in prokaryotes, it is generally located
further upstream from the start site, and its position is far more variable. Whereas the
Pribnow box is located at -10, the TATA box may be located closer to -30 +/- 4. Also,
rather than just a sigma factor to recognize the promoter in conjunction with the polymerase core enzyme, the eukaryotic promoter is recognized by a multi-subunit complex
called transcription factor IID (TFIID). TFIID is comprised of TATA-binding protein (TBP)
RNA transcript

The eukaryotic RNA polymerases were named I, II, and III based
on their elution order from ion-exchange chromatography purification. They are also partially distinguishable by their sensitivity to a-amanitin and related amatoxin-family mushroom
poisons. RNAP I (and prokaryotic RNAP) is insensitive to these
toxins, RNAP III is somewhat sensitive (Kd ~10-6 M), and RNAP II is
highly sensitive (Kd ~10-8 M). These toxins act by binding to a site
in the RNA-DNA cleft and interfering with translocation of the
RNA. That is, there is no problem with importing a nucleotide
or with attaching it to the new RNA, but the RNA strand cannot
move through the active site and allow the next nucleotide to be
added.

RNAPII

TAPs
TFIIB

TFIIE

TBP
TFIIF
TFIIA

TFIIH

Coding Strand

Complimentary Strand
DNA

Figure 5. Eukaryotic Transcription. An initiation complex of several transcription factors is needed to dock the RNA Polymerase II in position to begin transcription.

and several TBP-associated factors (TAFs). This binding of the promoter by TFIID occurs
independently of RNA Polymerase II, and in fact, RNAP II will not attach to TFIID at
this time. After TFIID has bound the TATA box, two more transcription factors, TFIIA
and TFIIB, attach to the TFIID as well as the nearby DNA, stabilizing the complex. TFIIF
attaches to TFIID and TFIIB to allow docking of the RNA Polymerase II. The complex is
still not ready to begin transcription: two more factors are required. TFIIE binds TFIIF
and RNAP II, and finally, TFIIH attaches to RNAP II, providing a helicase activity needed
to pry apart the two strands of DNA and allow the polymerase to read one of them.
TFIIH also has another important enzymatic activity: it is also a serine kinase that phosphorylates the carboxyl-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II. There are several
serines in the CTD, and as they are sequentially phosphorylated, the CTD extends like
a (negatively charged) tail and helps to promote separation between the RNAP II and
the TFIID/promoter.

Chapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Page 122

Elongation of the RNA strand in eukaryotes is very similar to that in prokaryotes with
the obvious difference that transcription occurs in the nucleus rather than in the cytoplasm. Thus, in prokaryotes, the RNA can be used for translation of proteins even as
it is still being transcribed from the DNA! In eukaryotes, the situation is significantly
more complex: there are a number of post-transcriptional events (5’ end-capping, 3’
polyadenylation, and often RNA splicing) that must occur before the RNA is ready to be
transported out of the nucleus and made available for translation in the cytoplasm.
Termination of eukaryotic transcription is not well-described at this writing. RNAP I
appears to require a DNA-binding termination factor, which is not analogous to the
prokaryotic Rho factor, which is an RNA binding protein. RNAP III terminates transcription without any external factor, and this termination usually occurs after adding a series of uridine residues. However, it does not appear to use the hairpin loop structure
found in rho-independent bacterial transcription. The termination of protein-coding
RNAP II transcripts is linked to an enzyme complex that also cleaves part of the 3’ end
of the RNA off, and adds a poly-A tail. However, it is not clear how the polyadenylation
complex is involved in determining the point of transcription termination, which can
be over 1000 nucleotides beyond the poly-A site (e.g. the b-globin gene in Mus musculus). Upon termination and release from the RNAP II and template DNA, the RNA
is known as the primary transcript, but must undergo post-transcriptional processing
before it is a mature messenger RNA (mRNA) ready to be exported to the cytoplasm
and used to direct translation.

Post-Transcriptional Processing of RNA
The first of the post-transcriptional events is 5’ end capping. Once the 5’ end of a nascent RNA extends free of the RNAP II approximately 20-30 nt, it is ready to be capped
by a 7-methylguanosine structure. This 5’ “cap” serves as a recognition site for transport of the completed mRNA out of the nucleus and into the cytoplasm.
CH3

O

5’

N

O-O

P

5’ O-

O

O
-O

P

-O

O

P

N

O

O

H

H

H

O
-O

P

H

O

H

3’

N

O
H
O

H

N
N

H

H
NH2

RNA
triphosphatase

-O

P

H

H

3’

O

H

-O

O

N

O
H

P

5’
O

P

N
N

H

+

-O

P

NH2

O
O

N

O
H
HO

-O

O
N

O

H

O

P

O

H

N
N

H

PPi

P

H

OH

Guanylyl
transferase

O

H

H

P

H

H

H
O

H

CH3

H

H

O

Guanine-7-methyltransferase
N

N

P

H

HO

H
NH2

H

H

RNA with 5’-5’ guanosine linkage

H

H

P

H

H

3’

N

O
H

O
N

O

O

H

N

H

O
H2C

N

N

O
H
O

-O

H
NH2

O

H

N
N

H
NH2

N

OH
N

O

H2C

O

N

O

P

N

N

O

CH2

O

O
-O

-O

H

N

O

P

O

N

H

O
H2C

Guanosine triphosphate (GTP)

5’

H

N

N

O
H
O

-O

N
O
-O

OH
N

O

H 2C
NH2

H

RNA diphosphate

H

HO

H
NH2

N

NH2

3’
RNA transcript

H

H

N

N

O

CH2

O

H2C

H

P
O

-O

O
O

N

O

-O

H

N

H

O

H2C
H

H

H

ON

N

O

O

O
N

O

NH2
N

O

H2C

H

N

P
O

H

H

H2C

-O

N

N

O

H2C

O
-O

O

O

NH2

O
-O

P

O

The process actually involves three steps. First, RNA triphosphatase removes the 5’-terminal triphosphate group. Guanylation
by GTP is catalyzed by capping enzyme, forming an unusual 5’-5’
“backward” bond between the new guanine and the first nucleotide of the RNA transcript. Finally, guanine-7-methyltransferase
methylates the newly attached guanine.

H
NH2

H

H

RNA with 5’ 7-methylguanosine cap

Figure 6. Capping the 5’ end of eukaryotic transcripts.

Chapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Page 123

On the opposite end of the RNA, on the free 3’-OH, polyadenylation occurs. As noted
previously, an enzyme complex that docks to a site on the CTD tail of RNAP II cleaves
a portion of the 3’ end near an AAUAAA recognition sequence and then serially adds a
large number of adenine residues. The poly(A) tail is not required for translation, but it
has an effect on the stability of transcripts in the cytoplasm. As mRNA molecules stay
in the cytoplasm longer, the poly(A) tail is gradually removed. Once the poly(A) tail is
gone, the mRNA will soon be destroyed. mRNA molecules with longer poly(A) tails are
generally longer-lived in the cytoplasm than those with shorter tails, but there is currently no evidence for a directly proportional effect.
5’

-O

5’
-O

P

N

O

O

H

H

H

O
-O

P

H

3’

N

O

H2C
H
OH

H

+

O
N
N

P

O

H
NH2

P
P

NH2
N

O

O

N

O

H2C
H

H

O

O
-O

H

H

H
HO

PPi

H

N
N

H

H

O
-O

Poly(A)
polymerase

H

OH

P

H

H

H

P

H

O

H2C
H

Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)

H
HO

H

-O

O
O

P

H

N

N

O

N

N

O
H
HO

PPi

NH2

O
-O

H

P

H

H

N
N

H

Poly(A)
polymerase

H

OH

H

H

H

P

H

H

P

Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)

H

3’

N

O
H
HO

NH2
N

O

O
H2C

H

N

H

OH

O
-O

N

N
H

RNA + (A)n

NH2
N

O

H2C

NH2

N

H

H

O

H

OH

RNA + (A)1

H

O

H

N

N

O

O
-O

O
N

O

H2C

H

N

H

O

H2C

NH2

N

+

P

O

N

O

O

3’

NH2

N

H

-O

H

N

N

O

O
-O

H

RNA transcript

N

O

P
O

O

H

N

N

O

O

O-O

O
H2C

H

H

N

H

H

N

O

H2C

N

N

O

H2C
O

O
-O

N

O

-O

H

N

H

H
O

O-

N

N

O

H2C

P
O

NH2

O

N

P
O

NH2

O

NH2

O

-O

5’

H

Although the enzyme that cleaves the primary transcript in preparation for polyadenylation has not been identified, two nonenzymatic factors, the excitingly-named cleavage factor I (CFI) and
cleavage factor II (CFII) have been implicated. The serial adenylation comes from the activity of poly(A) polymerase (PAP) in
conjunction with CPSF (cleavage and polyadenylation specificity
factor), which binds to the RNA. PAP itself has relatively poor
affinity for RNA. As with other nucleic acid polymerases, it adds
new nucleotides onto the free 3’-OH of the pre-existing chain.
To encourage processivity (continuous polymerization) poly(A)
binding protein II (PABII) joins the polyadenylation complex, and
is involved in controlling the final length of the poly(A) tail. It
should be noted that PABII is a nuclear protein and should not
be confused with PABP (poly(A) binding protein) which binds to
mRNA molecules in the cytoplasm and plays a role in protecting
them from nuclease attack.

N
N

H

H

OH

RNA + (A)2

Figure 7. Polyadenylation of the primary transcript.

The third and most complicated modification to newly-transcribed eukaryotic RNA is
splicing. Unlike prokaryotic RNA, which is a continuously translatable coding region
immediately as it comes out of the RNA polymerase, most eukaryotic RNAs have interrupted coding regions. Splicing is the process by which the non-coding regions,
known as introns, are removed, and the coding regions, known as exons, are connected
together. In some RNAs, this can happen autonomously, with part of the RNA acting as
an enzymatic catalyst for the process. This requires that the RNA have a specific secondary and tertiary structure, bringing the two exons close together while looping out
the intron. It was the study of this phenomenon that led to the discovery of ribozymes,
which are enzymes made of RNA.
In most cases, however, splicing is carried out by a multi-subunit protein complex
known as the spliceosome. Whether it is self-spliced or by spliceosome, there are three
main sequence components needed to define an intron that is going to be spliced out
(fig. 8). There is a 5’ splice site with the consensus sequence AG|GUAAGU. There is a 3’
splice site that starts with an 11-nucleotide polypyrimidine tract followed by NCAG|G.
And somewhere in between the two, there is a branchpoint adenine, typically within a
YNCURAY sequence (Y is a pyrimidine, N is any nucleotide, R is a purine). Splicing is actually a set of two sequential transesterification reactions, and requires physical proxChapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Until the discovery of ribozymes, it had been assumed that only
the enzymes could only be generated with the diversity of structures possible with the amino acids in proteins.

5’ splice site

5’

A G G U R A G U
Exon 1

Branch point

...

Y N C U R AY
Intron

Polypyrimidine
tract

3’ splice site

3’

N C A G G
Exon 2

Figure 8. Consensus sequences for splicing.

Page 124

imity of the reactive sites by bending and looping of the RNA, either autonomously or
around protein factors know as snRNPs (pronounced “snurps”). SnRNPs is an acronym
for small nuclear ribonucleoproteins. They contain both a protein and a small nuclear
RNA (snRNA) component; the latter helps with sequence recognition. Examination of
the structure of the snRNA part of these spliceosome snRNPs shows that they are very
similar to the shapes taken by the RNA transcript itself in cases of self-splicing. Keeping that in mind, much of the following description of spliceosome-mediated splicing
happens in self-splicing as well.
5’ splice site

5’

Intron

5’ Exon

3’ splice site

Branch point
A

3’

3’ Exon

U1

Although the snRNPs are the primary components of the spliceosome, a variety of other splicing factors also play a role. The
most prominent are U2AF (U2-associated factor, which binds to
the polypyrimidine tract, and SF1 (splicing factor 1, aka branchpoint protein BPP) which binds to consensus sequence near the
branchpoint. Together they help to properly position the U2
snRNP. There are also a variety of other less-studied splicing
factors from the SR protein family (C-terminal Serine-Arginine
binding motif) and the hnRNP (heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoprotein) families that act to recruit the primary members of the
spliceosome to their proper locations.

U2

5’

3’

A

A

U6

U2

U4

U1

5’

3’

U5

Transesterification 1

A

U2

U6

3’

U5

5’

Transesterification 2
Intron

5’

5’ Exon

3’ Exon

3’

Figure 9. RNA splicing by spliceosome. Description in text below.

In the first step, the U1 snRNP binds to the intronic portion of the 5’ splice site. Next,
the U2 snRNP binds to the consensus site around the branchpoint, but importantly,
there is no base-pairing to the branchpoint A itself. Instead, due to basepairing of U2
with the surrounding sequence, the branchpoint A is forced to bulge out from the rest
of the RNA in that region. U4, U5, and U6 join the spliceosome together, but while
U5 binds to the 5’ exon, and U6 displaces U1 at the 5’ splice site, U4 is only transiently
attached and also falls off the spliceosome before the first transesterification reaction.
As the figure shows, in this reaction, the 2’-OH of the branchpoint A nucleophilically atChapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Page 125

tacks the 5’-phosphate of the first intron nucleotide to form a lariat structure in which
the 5’ end of the intron is connected to the branchpoint via a 2’,5’-phosphodiester bond.
This releases the 5’ exon (and the whole 5’ half of the RNA for that matter), but it is
kept in close proximity to the 3’ exon (and the rest of the RNA) by U5, which attaches
to both exons. This allows the second transesterification to take place, in which the 3’OH of the first exon attacks the 5’ phosphate at the beginning of the second exon, thus
simultaneously breaking the bond between the intron and the second exon, and also
connecting the two exons via a conventional 3’,5’-phosphodiester bond. The intron, in
the shape of a lariat, is thus released and will be quickly degraded.
A

Intron

B

NH2
N
H

O

P

O
H

H

H

N
5’

Branch
Point

O H
O

O
H

O
2’

P
O-

O

5’

5’ Exon

5’
O

O

Transesterification 2

P OO

H

O
O

Branch
Point

P OO

O

P O-

O-

CH2
H

O

O

P
O

N

P O-

O

Transesterification 1

H

O

O

A

CH2

2’ OH

O

N

N

O-

O

N

H

NH2

O

N

A
N

Intron

O
O

3’ Exon

5’

3’

5’ Exon

P OO

O H

3’ Exon

3’

Figure 10. (A) Transesterification reaction 1 connects
the 2’-OH of the branchpoint ribose to the 5’-phosphate of the 3’ end of exon
1. (B) Transesterification 2 is
an attack by the remaining
-OH on the 3’ end of exon 1
on the 5’ phosphate of exon
2. (C) This simultaneously
releases the lariat and connects the exons.

Intron Lariat

C
NH2
N
H

N

5’
5’ Exon

O

P
O

O

3’ Exon

3’

O

O H
O

P
O-

P

O-

O

N

O

5’

O

N

A
O
H

O
2’

CH2
H

H

O
O

P OO

OH

3’

Splicing is an efficient (with respect to genome size) way to generate protein diversity. In alternative splicing, some potential introns may be spliced out under certain
circumstances but remain as coding sequence under other circumstances. Recall that
the splice sites are recognized by base-pairing and therefore, there can be stronger and
weaker splice sites depending on how close they are to the consensus and the complementary sequence on the snRNPs. Therefore, a gene with several potential introns may
have all introns spliced out 80% of the time, but the other 20% of the time, perhaps
only one or two introns are spliced out. Adding variability, there are splicing factors
that may bind near splice sites and can either make them more easily recognizable, or
nearly hidden.

Chapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Page 126

The classic example of alternative splicing is the gene encoding a-tropomyosin (fig. 11).
By splicing in/out different combinations of exons, a single gene can generate seven different proteins, depending on the tissue type. In these cases, particular types of cells
or tissues contain specific combinations of splicing factors, and therefore control the
recognition of specific splice sites, leading to the different splicing patterns.
α-Tropomyosin (Rat) Gene Structure

α-Tropomyosin (Rat) Splice Variants
Striated Muscle

Smooth Muscle

Fibroblast

Liver

Brain

Figure 11. Alternative splicing of the a-tropomyosin gene leads to different forms of the mRNA
and protein in different cell types.

Although this concludes the discussion of basic mechanisms of transcription, the next
chapter is really a continuation of this one: control of gene expression in its simplest
form is regulating the recognition of a promoter sequence by an RNA polymerase.

Chapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Page 127

A

B
5’ splice site

5’

Intron

5’ Exon

3’ splice site

Branch point
A

Intron

3’

3’ Exon

NH2
N
H

U1

5’

O
O
H

H

3’

A

O-

P

O

N

N

U2

O

N

A

CH2
H

P O-

O

Transesterification 1

Branch
Point

H

O

2’ OH

O

O
O

5’

A

U6

5’

O
P O-

O

O

O

3’

3’ Exon

Intron

U2

C

U4

U1

5’ Exon

5’

P O-

NH2

3’

U5

N
H

O

N

O

A
N
5’
O H
O

P
O-

P

O-

O

N

O

CH2

H

O
2’

H

H

O

Branch
Point

P O-

O

Transesterification 1

O

Transesterification 2

O
P O-

O

A

5’

U2

U6

5’ Exon

O

O H

3’

3’ Exon

3’

U5

D

5’

Intron Lariat

NH2
N

Transesterification 2

H

Intron

N

5’
O H
P
O-

5’ Exon

3’ Exon

3’

O
O
H

O
2’

5’ Exon

O

P
O

O-

CH2
H

H

O
O

P OO

O

5’

P
O

N

O

5’

O

N

A

O

3’ Exon

3’

3’
OH

Figure 12. Splicing of RNA. Splicing removes some portions of a primary transcript (introns) while combining the remaining RNA (exons) to form the final mRNA sequence. The chemical mechanism is a series of two transesterifications. The first accomplishes the looping of the intron, while the second releases that intron as a “lariat” while simultaneously joining
the two exons together. Splicing specificity relies on three landmarks on the RNA, most important of which is the branchpoint, an adenine residue that is the connection point for the
intron loop formation. The other two landmarks are the 3’ and the 5’ splice sites, each of which are sequences that bind to snRNPs to bring together the spliceosome.

Chapter 8, Transcription, version 1.0

Page 128

Gene Regulation :

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.

Control Mechanisms

To define a gene, a stretch of DNA must have a promoter, a start site, and and a stop
site. In a prokaryote, these are necessary and often sufficient, but in a eukaryote, they
are still necessary, but seldom sufficient. This chapter discusses the other elements,
both positive and negative, that are used to regulate the expression (i.e. transcription)
of a gene. It is primarily a story of transcription factors and the recognition elements
to which they bind.

Prokaryotic Transcriptional Regulation
Unlike multicellular organisms, in which most cells are in a tightly regulated internal
environment, most prokaryotic cells are constantly responding to changing conditions
in their immediate environment, such as changes in salt concentration, temperature,
acidity, or nutrient availability. Because these organisms must respond quickly, the
lifetime of an RNA is kept short, on the order of several minutes - so gene products
that are not useful in the new conditions do not waste resources. For the same reason,
initiation of new transcription must also occur very quickly - so that gene products
that are needed to stabilize the cell in the new conditions are rapidly available. A fast
and efficient control system is needed, and in prokaryotes, this means that the controls
on transcription are simple activators and repressors. For some genes, both may be
used for regulation, while for others, only one is needed to change from a default state
of expression or non-expression.
A classic example of repressor control of gene expression, the lac operon, also illustrates
another method by which bacteria may control the expression of genes. An operon is
a group of genes whose products participate in the same metabolic pathway, and are
transcribed under the control of a single promoter. The lac operon consists of three
genes (lacZ, lacY, lacA) that participate in the catabolism of the disaccharide, lactose.
LacZ is b-galactosidase, an enzyme that cleaves lactose into galactose and glucose. LacY
is b-galactoside permease, which transports lactose from the extracellular environment
into the cell. Both are required for lactose catabolism. Oddly, lacA is not absolutely
Chapter 9, Gene Regulation, version 1.0

Page 129

required for lactose metabolism, but its function is related to the other two: it is a bgalactoside transacetylase that transfers acetyl groups from acetyl-CoA to lactose. All
three are translated (they retain their individual start and stop codons for translation,
not to be confused with the start and stop of transcription) from a single transcript. Of
particular interest with respect to the regulation of this transcription is the structure
of the promoter region. Note that in addition to the exected s70 promoter upstream of
the start site, there is another control sequence on each side of the start site (fig. 1A).
A) lac operon

CAP-binding

5’

RNAP-binding
(promoter)

Repressor-binding

CAP-binding region

nt

-10

lacY

lacA

3’

lacZ

lacY

lacA

3’

lacZ

lacY

lacA

3’

lacZ

lacY

lacA

3’

lacY

lacA

3’

lacZ

OPERATOR
-35

+1

B) Lactose high, Glucose high (cAMP low)

Repressor
Lactose

CAP

RNAP

Very Low Transcription

5’

CAP-binding region

nt

OPERATOR
-35

-10

+1

C) Lactose low, Glucose high (cAMP low)
CAP

Repressor
No Transcription

5’
nt

CAP-binding region

OPERATOR
-35

-10

+1

D) Lactose low, Glucose low (cAMP high)
CAP
5’
nt

Repressor

+cAMP

No Transcription

CAP-binding region

OPERATOR
-35

-10

+1

E) Lactose high, Glucose low (cAMP high)

Repressor

Lactose

RNAP
CAP
5’
nt

+cAMP

High Transcription

CAP-binding region

OPERATOR
-35

-10

lacZ

+1

Figure 1. The lac operon.

The operator is a sequence of DNA that lies between the promoter and the start site.
It is recognized by the lac repressor, a DNA binding protein with a helix-turn-helix
motif. In the absence of lactose (fig. 1C), the lac repressor has a high affinity for the
operator sequence and binds tightly, obstructing the start site and forming a physical
“roadblock” to transcription by preventing the RNA polymerase from moving forward
Chapter 9, Gene Regulation, version 1.0

Note that the helix-turn-helix (HTH) motif, which is common in
bacterial DNA-binding proteins, is not the same thing as the helixloop-helix DNA-binding proteins that are used in many eukaryotic
systems. An elaboration of the basic HTH motif, known as the
winged helix motif, is also found in a variety of prokaryotic DNAbinding proteins.
Page 130

from the promoter. This makes sense physiologically because the cell is more efficient
metabolizing glucose, and if there is no lactose around, then it is a waste of resources
to make enzymes that metabolize it. However, what if there is suddenly an abundance
of lactose in the environment? As the lactose is taken into the cell, intracellular levels
rise, and now enzymes are needed to utilize this new food source. The lactose actually
turns on the expression of enzymes that will metabolize it! Specifically, the lactose
binds to the lac repressor protein (4 lactose binding sites), which causes a conformational change that releases it from the operator sequence (fig. 1B). Now an RNA polymerase that attaches at the lac operon promoter can proceed to transcribe the message
unhindered, producing RNA and subsequently proteins that are used to break down the
lactose. This continues as long as there is abundant lactose in the cell. As the lactose
levels drop, repressor proteins are no longer bound by lactose, and can once again bind
the operator and inhibit expression of the operon once again. For now, ignore the CAP
protein in figure 1, and parts D and E. We’ll come back to that. The lac operon is an
example of an inducible operon, in which the native state is “off” and the introduction
of and inducer (in this case lactose) will bind the repressor and turn the operon “on”.
In contrast, there are also operons with the reverse mechanism. An example of one
such repressible operon is the trp operon (fig. 2). This operon contains five genes
that are involved in the synthesis of the amino acid tryptophan: trpE and trpD, which
A) trp operon
RNAP-binding
(promoter)
5’

trpE

OPERATOR
nt

-10

-35

trpD

trpB

trpA

3’

trpC

trpB

trpA

3’

trpC

trpB

trpA

3’

trpC

+1

Repressor-binding

B) Tryptophan low

Repressor (inactive)

RNAP

High Transcription

5’

trpE

OPERATOR
nt

-10

-35

C) Tryptophan high

trpD

+1

Tryptophan

Repressor (active)

No Transcription

5’

trpE

OPERATOR
nt

-35

-10

trpD

+1

Figure 2. The trp operon.

Chapter 9, Gene Regulation, version 1.0

Page 131

together encode the subunits of anthranilate synthetase, trpC, which encodes N-(5’phosphoribosyl)-anthranilate isomerase, and trpB and trpA, which each encode subunits of tryptophan synthetase. The trp repressor is larger and more complex than the
lac repressor, but it also utilizes a helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif.
However, it differs in a crucial aspect. In its native form, it does not bind to the operator sequence. It only binds to the operator after it has first bound tryptophan (two
molecules of trp bind to one repressor). This is the opposite of the lac repressor, but
when considering the physiological function of these genes, this should make perfect
sense. As long as there is no tryptophan, the operator is unbound, allowing the RNA
polymerase to transcribe the genes needed to make tryptophan (fig. 2B). When enough
tryptophan has accumulated in the cell, some of the “extra” tryptophan binds to the trp
repressor, which activates it and allows it to bind to the operator (fig. 2C). When this
happens, the RNAP cannot reach the start site, and resources are not wasted transcribing genes for enzymes that make something the cell already has a lot of.
Let us now return to the lac operon in figure 1. It turns out that even when the operon
is induced by the presence of lactose, the rate of transcription is low. The limitation
is not from the repressor - that has been removed as described above (fig. 1B). Instead,
the low expression is due to a low-affinity promoter. This is true not just of the lac
operon, but also other non-glucose-pathway sugar-catabolism genes. There is a simple
explanation: even if there are abundant alternate sugars available (e.g. lactose), if there
is glucose available, it is the cell’s most efficient and preferred pathway for energy production, and the production of enzymes for other pathways would be an inefficient use
of resources. So, when and how is the lac operon really turned on?
The answer lies in a CAP, catabolite gene activator protein, also known as CRP, or cAMP
receptor protein. It is a small homodimeric DNA binding protein that binds to a sequence that overlaps the 5’ side of the promoter. In the presence of cAMP, which binds
to the protein, CAP has a high affinity for the DNA recognition sequence, and binds to
it (Fig. 1E). The protein then helps to recruit the RNAP to the promoter site, binding
directly to the C-terminal domain of the RNAP a subunit to increase the affinity of the
polymerase for the promoter sequence to overcome a weak promoter.
What does cAMP have to do with this? When there is abundant extracellular glucose,
there is little cAMP. The enzyme that synthesizes cAMP, adenylate cyclase, is negatively
regulated by glucose transport. However, when there is little environmental glucose,
adenylate cyclase is more active, makes cAMP, which binds CAP, and leads to robust
production of lactose catabolism enzymes. CAP is an example of an activator that can
control gene expression in a positive direction.
Chapter 9, Gene Regulation, version 1.0

In E. coli, cAMP levels are not directly tied to intracellular glucose
levels or glucose metabolism. Rather, cAMP levels are altered
by glucose transport through a phosphoenolpyruvate-dependent
phosphotransferase system (PTS), part of which is de-phosphorylated (the crr gene product, also known as EIIA) when glucose
is moved inward. The phosphorylated EIIA~P is an activator of
adenylate cyclase. So, as glucose moves into the cell, cAMP levels
drop due to inactive adenylate cyclase.
Page 132

The last, and most complicated example of prokaryotic metabolic gene control is the
araBAD operon. This operon produces enzymes used for the catabolism of the 5-carbon
sugar, L-arabinose. The interesting thing about this operon is the presence of both
positive and negative control elements that are used by the same control protein, araC.
When there is little or no arabinose, the araC binds to the operator sequences araO2
and araI1. The two araC proteins then interact, which causes the DNA to loop around
preventing RNAP from binding to the promoter and transcribing araBAD. Furthermore,
this operon is also under the control of CAP, and the double araC loop structure also
A) araBAD operon
Structural ara genes

Control sites

5’

araO2

araO1

araI

CAP

araB

araA

araD

3’

B) L-arabinose low, cAMP low
5’

araO2

AraC repressors (active)
No Transcription
araO1L araO1R

CAP

araI1

araI2

araB

araA

araD

3’

3’ araD

3’

C) L-arabinose high, cAMP high
CAP
+
cAMP

L-arabinose

RNAP
High Transcription

5’

araO2

araO1L araO1R

CAP

araI1

araI2

araB

araA

AraC repressors (inactive) + L-arabinose

Figure 3. The araBAD operon.

prevents CAP from binding. However, when there is plentiful arabinose, araC repressors bind the arabinose and then interact differently, still forming dimers, but now in
a different conformation that leads to binding of araO1L and araO1R together as well
as araI1 and araI2. The arabinose-bound araC at the araI sites interact with RNAP and
together with CAP promote strong activation of araBAD expression.

Not all operons are concerned with coordinating metabolic activities. An important non-metabolic operon in E. coli is the LexA/
RecA SOS response operon, which contains genes that are involved in DNA repair. The SOS repair system is invoked to allow
DNA replication to continue through areas of damaged DNA, but
with the penalty of low fidelity. One of the gene products of this
operon, RecA, is important in recognizing and repairing damage
caused by UV light. It also functions as a regulator of the LexA
repressor protein. LexA is actually a repressor for multiple SOS
operons, binding to a common operator sequence upstream of
each gene/operon. It is activated when RecA, upon detecting DNA
damage, undergoes a conformational shift and activates protease
activity, which then cleaves LexA, allowing transcription from the
SOS genes/operons.
SOS repair is error-prone because when the replisome encounters
bulky damage, it undergoes “replication fork collapse” in which
the DNA polymerase III units are released. The replacement, or
bypass, polymerases, Pol IV (dinB), and Pol V (umuDC), do not
have 3’—5’ proofreading exonuclease activity. Misincorporation of
G opposite thymine dimers occurs at about half the rate of proper
A incorporation, and generally, the bypass polymerases are about
1000 times more error-prone than Pol II or Pol I.
A

Operators
5’

recA

lexA

uvrB

uvrA

3’

Transcription
&
Translation

Repression

LexA

B
Damaged DNA

Eukaryotic Transcriptional Regulation
As with almost every comparison with prokaryotic systems, regulation of eukaryotic
transcription is much more complex than prokaryotic gene control, although still based
on similar mechanisms of activators and repressors. There is no close eukaryotic equivalent to operons, though: eukaryotic genes are always transcribed one per mRNA. The
previous chapter described the formation of a preinitiation complex of transcription

Active RecA

Active LexA

Transcription
&
Translation

lexA

5’

Cleaved (inactive) LexA

LexA

RecA

recA

UvrA

uvrA

UvrB

uvrB

3’

No Repression

Chapter 9, Gene Regulation, version 1.0

Page 133

factors for RNA polymerase II. These transcription factors (e.g. TFIID, TFIIH, etc.) are
known as general transcription factors, and are required for transcription of any gene
at any level. However, there are also specific transcription factors, usually referred to
simply as transcription factors (TF), that modulate the frequency of transcription of
particular genes. Some upstream elements and their associated TFs are fairly common,
while others are gene or gene-family specific. An example of the former is the upstream
element AACCAAT and its associated transcription factor, CP1. Another transcription
factor, Sp1, is similarly common, and binds to a consensus sequence of ACGCCC. Both
are used in the control of the beta-globin gene, along with more specific transcription
factors, such as GATA-1, which binds a consensus AAGTATCACT and is primarily produced in blood cells. This illustrates another option found in eukaryotic control that
is not found in prokaryotes: tissue-specific gene expression. Genes, being in the DNA,
are technically available to any and every cell, but obviously the needs of a blood cell
differ a great deal from the needs of a liver cell, or a neuron. Therefore, each cell may
produce transcription factors that are specific to its cell or tissue type. These transcription factors can then allow or repress expression of multiple genes that help define this
particular cell type, assuming they all have the recognition sequences for the TFs. These
recognition sequences are also known as response elements (RE).
A
RNAP

TBP
5’

TATA

I
+1

3’

B
RNAP

TBP
5’

TATA

I
+1

3’

Figure 5. Eukaryotic transcription factors can work in complex combinations. In this figure, the transcription factors hanging downward are representative of inhibitory TFs, while those riding upright
on the DNA are considered enhancers. Thus, the RNA polymerase in (A) has a lower probability of
transcribing this gene, while the RNAP in (B) is more likely to, perhaps because the TF nearest the promoter interacts with the RNAP to stabilize its interactions with TFIID. In this way, the same gene may
be expressed in very different amouunts and at different times depending on the transcription factors
expressed in a particular cell type.

Very often, a combination of many transcription factors, both enhancers and silencers,
is responsible for the ultimate expression rate of a given eukaryotic gene. This can be
done in a graded fashion, in which expression becomes stronger or weaker as more
Chapter 9, Gene Regulation, version 1.0

Page 134

enhancers or silencers are bound, respectively, or it can be a binary mode of control,
in which a well-defined group of TFs are required to turn on transcription, and missing
just one can effectively shut down transcription entirely. In the first case, activating
TFs generally bind to the GTFs or RNA Polymerase II directly to help them recognize the
promoter more efficiently or stably, while repressing TFs may bind to the activating TFs,
or to the GTFs or RNAP II, in preventing recognition of the promoter, or destabilizing
the RNAP II preinitiation complex. In the second case, activation hinges on the building
of an enhanceosome, in which transcription factors and protein scaffolding elements
and coactivators come together to position and stabilize the preinitiation complex and
RNAP II on the promoter. The most prominent and nearly ubiquitous coactivator is
named Mediator, and binds to the CTD of the b’ subunit of RNA polymerase II and also
to a variety of transcription factors.
Enhancer

5’

Activator

(transcription factor)

Coactivator
DNA
Bending
Protein

3’

General Transcription Factors and RNA polymerase II

Figure 6. An enhancer can stabilize or recruit components of the transcription machine through a
coactivator protein.

Eukaryotic transcription factors, while varied, usually contain at least one of the following transcription factor motifs: zinc fingers, leucine zippers, basic helix-loop-helix
domains, Rel homology region domains, or a variation thereof.
The zinc finger motif was the first DNA-binding domain to be discovered, and was
found in a general transcription factor associated with RNA polymerase III. The initial
structure found was a repeating ~30-amino acid motif with two invariant Cys and two
invariant His residues that together bind a Zn++ ion and thus bring a tight loop or “finger” of basic potentially DNA-binding residues together. The basic finger binds to the
major groove of the DNA, with the exact sequence-matching characteristics determined
by the topology of the particular residues that make up the finger. Although most DNA
binding motifs insert a positively-charged a-helical domain into the major groove of
Chapter 9, Gene Regulation, version 1.0

Page 135

DNA, the zinc-finger proteins are the only ones that combine several such motifs to
interact with the DNA in several sequential sites.
Figure 7. Zinc-finger family
transcription factor (left) and
close-up of Zn++ binding site
(right). Each cylinder represents an a-helical domain.

His

His
Zn2+

Cys

Cys

In addition to the first type of Zn++-binding site described with
two Cys and two His (Cys2-His2), there are two major variations
to note. The first is the Cys2-Cys2 type, which is characteristic of
steroid receptor transcription factors such as the glucocorticoid
receptor or estrogen receptor. We will consider them in more detail later with the discussion of intracellular signal transduction,
but for now, the general idea is that unactivated steroid hormone
receptors are found in the cytoplasm, where they come in contact
with and bind their cognate hormone molecule. They then translocate to the nucleus, where they dimerize and are able to act as
transcription factors. The second major variation of the zinc finger is the binuclear Cys6, which carries six Cys residues to create
a slightly larger “basket” in which two Zn++ ions are held, rather
than just one. The best-studied example of this type of zinc-finger
protein is GAL4, a yeast metabolic transcription factor.

The next motif is the leucine zipper. Although this is a common motif for transcription factors, it is important to note that unlike the zinc-finger, the leucine zipper itself
is not a DNA-binding motif. Rather, it is a protein dimerization motif, and determines
the way in which two protein subunits interact. However, the leucine zipper is a common structural motif in transcription factors. It works through opposing domains of
regularly spaced hydrophobic amino acids, particularly leucines, which are very effective at holding the two subunits
together in the aqueous environL
L
ment of the cell. The leucines are
L
L
found in every 7th residue posiL
L
tion of an a-helical domain, leadL
L
ing to a coiled-coil superstructure
L
L
L
when two subunits interact. The
L
(+) charged DNA-binding domains
of these proteins are usually Nterminal to the leucine zippers,
as in the case of the bZIP category of leucine zipper proteins
(the name stands for basic region
Figure 8. Leucine zipper.
leucine zipper).
Chapter 9, Gene Regulation, version 1.0

Page 136

The bHLH, or basic helix-loop-helix domains appear to be elaborations on the leucine
zipper theme. In this case, the N-terminal region is highly basic, making it ideal for
interacting with DNA, and this basic domain, which is also helical, leads into the first
helix (H1) of the motif, which is then connected by a non-helical loop of amino acids,
leading into a second helical region (H2). Beyond the bHLH, these transcription factors may merge into a leucine zipper motif or other protein interaction domain for
dimerization. Though the primary binding domain is N-terminal to H1, the H1 domains
also appear to play a role in binding the major groove of the DNA. [Example myc]

Figure 9. Binding of a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) class transcription factor.

NF-kB (nuclear factor kB) is a ubiquitous transcription factor discovered (and most
noticeable) in the immune system. When active, it is a heterodimer, with both subunits containing a Rel homology region (RHR). Rel is an oncogene, and the RHR are
named for their similarity to the previously-sequenced rel. The RHR domains bind to
DNA with extraordinary affinity, due in part to having five loops for DNA contact per
subunit. Just as with the other types of transcription factors, some RHR-containing
proteins are repressors, while others are activators.

Figure 10. RHR domains are a DNA-binding domain found in the NF-kB family of
transcription factors.

Chapter 9, Gene Regulation, version 1.0

The regulation of NF-kB is rather interesting: once it is in the
nucleus, it is generally active. However, it is, as almost all cellular
proteins, made in the cytoplasm. Inhibitors of NF-kB (IkB) also
reside in the cytoplasm, and they act by binding the NF-kB and
covering the nuclear localization signal that allows its import into
the nucleus. Thus sequestered, the NF-kB must remain in the cytoplasm inactive until some stimulus activates IkB kinase, which
phosphorylates the IkB and leads to ubiquitination and degradation, finally releasing the NF-kB from its bonds.
Because it can be mobilized quickly (compared to synthesizing
new protein), NF-kB is consider a rapid-response transcription
factor that is often used to begin expression of a gene needed
soon after it has been “ordered” by a signal, either extracellular
or intracellular. Not surprisingly for a factor discovered in the
immune system, it is activated in response to bacterial and viral
antigens, as well as other types of cellular stress or insult.
Page 137

In addition to the relatively short-term regulation of gene expression controlled by
binding transcription factors to regulatory elements, there are also stronger methods
of locking away a gene to prevent its expression. In chapter 7, acetylation and deacetylation of histones was discussed as a method for decreasing and increasing their affinity for DNA. This can be controlled (Fig. 11B) by the recruitment of histone deacetylase (HDAC) to particular genes bia repressor/co-repressor complexes. The deacetylase
forces tight winding of the targeted DNA to the histones, precluding access by RNA
polymerases or general transcription factors.
Another recruiter of HDAC are MBD proteins, which bind to methylated DNA. DNA
methylation in mammals usually occurs on CpG dinucleotide sequences. This methylation appears to have the effect of blocking access of transcription factors and enzymes
to the DNA. It can do so directly, or by recruiting MBD (methyl-CpG-binding domain)
proteins. In either case, methylation is a long-term method of locking up genes, and is
the mechanism for turning off genes that would never be used in a particular cell type
(e.g. hemoglobin in neurons).

A
O

O
C

DNA repressor
site

C

CH3

O

O

C

C

CH3

CH 3

CH 3

DNA
Acetylated histones (loose DNA)

B

O

Corepressor

C

HDAC

O
CH3

C

O
C

CH3

CH3

O
C

CH3

Transcriptional
repressor

DNA
Deacetylated histones (tight DNA)

C

DNA methyltransferase
Corepressor

CH3

Transcriptional
repressor

CH3
CH3

CH3

CH3
CH3

CH3

CH3
CH3

DNA
Methylated DNA

Figure 11. Long-term gene repression. (A) Acetylation of histones allows DNA to move
off, potentially freeing the genes in that region for expression. (B) Specific regions can be
wrapped more tifhtly around histones through the action of HDAC, removing the acetyl
groups. (C) Methylation of the DNA can also prevent expression, either by physically blocking access, or by recruiting HDAC.

Chapter 9, Gene Regulation, version 1.0

Page 138

Translation :

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.

From RNA to Protein

The RNA polymerase has done its job (or in the case of prokaryotes, may still be in the process
of doing its job), so now what happens to the RNA? For RNA that is destined to provide instructions for making a protein, then it needs to be translated, which is a job for Superman™!
Oops, actually it’s a job for ribosomes.
Ribosomes are a complex of RNA and protein that bind to and processively move down
(from 5’ to 3’ end) a strand of mRNA, picking up aminoacyl-tRNAs, checking to see if
they are complementary to the RNA tri-nucleotide being “read” at the moment, and
adding them to the new polypeptide chain if they are. The RNA part of the ribosomes
are generated by the organism’s general purpose RNA polymerase in prokaryotes, and
generated by the RNA polymerases I and III in eukaryotes. Recall that RNA Pol II is
used by eukaryotes to generate protein-coding mRNA’s. Although the numbers of RNA
strands and protein subunits differ between the prokaryote and eukaryote, the mechanism for translation is remarkably well conserved.

Figure 1. Two views of a prokaryotic ribosome. The large ribosomal subunit (50S) is
shown in red, while the small ribosomal subunit (30S) is shown in blue. 3D images generated
from data in the RCSB Protein Data Bank.

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Page 139

Prokaryotic ribosomes
The prokaryotic ribosomes contain 3 RNA strands and 52 protein subunits which can be
divided into 1 RNA and 21 proteins in the small ribosomal subunit (aka the 30S subunit)
and 2 RNA and 31 proteins in the large ribosomal subunit (50S subunit). The small subunit locates the start site and moves along the RNA. The large ribosomal subunit contains the aminoacyl transferase enzyme activity that connects amino acids to make a
protein. Neither subunit is sufficient to carry out translation by itself. They must come
together to form the full 70S ribosome for translation to occur. If you aren’t already
familiar with the nomenclature, you’re probably thinking that it’s obvious why I went
into biology rather than math. My competence at basic computation aside, there is a
method to the madness. The “S” in 30S or 50S indicates Svedberg units, or a measurement of the sedimentation rate when the molecules in question are centrifuged under
standard conditions. Because the rate of sedimentation depends on both the mass and
the shape of a molecule, numbers do not always add up.
The genes for the prokaryotic rRNA molecules are arranged in an operon and thus
come from a single transcript. Depending on the organism, there may be several such
operons in the genome to ensure steady production of this crucial enzymatic complex.
However, these RNAs are not translated, so instead of having multiple translation start
codons to signal the beginning of each gene, the single transcript is cleaved post-transcriptionally by Ribonuclease III (RNase III) into 25S, 18S, and 5S segments, and these are
then further trimmed by RNase III and RNase M into the final 23S, 16S, and 5S rRNAs
found in the ribosomes. Although the 5S does not appreciably differ in sedimentation
rate, it is in fact slightly “shaved” in post-transcriptional editing.

Eukaryotic ribosomes
Like the RNA molecules in prokaryotic ribosomes, the eukaryotic rRNA molecules are
also post-transcriptionally cleaved from larger transcripts. This processing, and the
subsequent assembly of the large and small ribosomal subunits are carried out in the
nucleolus, a region of the nucleus specialized for ribosome production, and containing
not only high concentrations of rRNA and ribsomal proteins, but also RNA polymerase I
and RNA polymerase III. In contrast, RNA polymerase II, as befits its broader purpose, is
found throughout the nucleus. The 40S small ribosomal subunit in eukaryotes also has
just 1 rRNA, and has 33 proteins. The 60S, or large ribosomal subunit in eukaryotes has
three rRNA molecules, two of which are roughly analogous to the prokaryote (28S and
5S eukaryotic, 23S and 5S prokaryotic), and one, the 5.8S, that binds with complemenChapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Because of the density of material in the nucleolus needed for
constant ribosome production, it is often readily visible under
various types of microscopy despite not being bounded by a
membrane.

Page 140

tary sequence on part of the 28S rRNA. It also contains 50 proteins. These ribosomal
subunits have roughly the same function as the prokaryotic versions: the small subunit
in conjunction with various initiation factors is responsible for finding the start site
and positioning the ribosome on the mRNA, while the large subunit houses the docking
sites for incoming and spent aminoacyl-tRNAs and contains the catalytic component to
attach amino acids via peptide bonds.
The ribosomal RNA precursors (pre-rRNA) are remarkably conserved in eukaryotes,
with the 28S, 5.8S, and 18S rRNAs encoded within a single transcript. This transcript,
synthesized by RNA polymerase I, always has the same 5’ to 3’ order: 18S, 5.8S, 28S. After
the 45S pre-rRNA is transcribed, it is immediately bound by nucleolar proteins in preparation for cleavage and base modification. However, it is primarily the small nuclelolar
RNAs (snoRNAs), not the proteins, that determine the position of the modifications. The
primary modifications are 2’-hydroxylmethylation and transformation of some uridines
into pseudouridines. These snoRNAs are sometimes transcribed independently by RNA
polymerase III or II, but often are formed from the introns of pre-mRNA transcripts.
Oddly, some of these introns come from pre-mRNAs that form unused mRNAs!
For the nucleolus to be the site of ribosome assembly, the ribosomal proteins must be
available to interact with the rRNAs. By mechanisms discussed in the next chapter, the
mRNAs for the ribosomal proteins are translated (as are all proteins) in the cytoplasm,
but the resulting proteins are then imported into the nucleus for assembly into either
the large or small ribosomal subunit. The subunits are then exported back out to the
cytoplasm, where they can carry out their function.

The Genetic Code
We have blithely described the purpose of the DNA chromosomes as carrying the information for building the proteins of the cell, and the RNA as the intermediary for doing
so. Exactly how is it, though, that a molecule made up of just four different nucleotides joined together (albeit thousands and even thousands of thousands of them), can
tell the cell which of twenty-odd amino acids to string together to form a functional
protein? The obvious solution was that since there are not enough individual unique
nucleotides to code for each amino acid, there must be combinations of nucleotides
that designate particular amino acids. A doublet code, would allow for only 16 different combinations (4 possible nucleotides in the first position x 4 possible nucleotides in
the 2nd position = 16 combinations) and would not be enough to encode the 20 amino
acids. However, a triplet code would yield 64 combinations, easily enough to encode

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Page 141

20 amino acids. So would a quadruplet or quintuplet code, for that matter, but those
would be wasteful of resources, and thus less likely. Further investigation proved the
existence of a triplet code as described in the table below.

With so many combinations and only 20 amino acids, what does the cell do with the
other possibilities? The genetic code is a degenerate code, which means that there is redundancy so that most amino acids are encoded by more than one triplet combination
(codon). Although it is a redundant code, it is not an ambiguous code: under normal
circumstances, a given codon encodes one and only one amino acid. In addition to the
20 amino acids, there are also three “stop codons” dedicated to ending translation. The
three stop codons also have colloquial names: UAA (ochre), UAG (amber), UGA (opal),
with UAA being the most common in prokaryotic genes. Note that there are no dedicated start codons: instead, AUG codes for both methionine and the start of translation,
depending on the circumstance, as explained forthwith. The initial Met is a methionine,
but in prokaryotes, it is a specially modified formyl-methionine (f-Met). The tRNA is
also specialized and is different from the tRNA that carries methionine to the ribosome
for addition to a growing polypeptide. Therefore, in referring to a the loaded initiator
tRNA, the usual nomenclature is fMet-tRNAi or fMet-tRNAf. There also seems to be a
little more leeway in defining the start site in prokaryotes than in eukaryotes, as some
bacteria use GUG or UUG. Though these codons normally encode valine and leucine,
respectively, when they are used as start codons, the initiator tRNA brings in f-Met.
Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

The colloquial names were started when the discoverers of UAG
decided to name the codon after a friend whose last name translated into “amber”. Opal and ochre were named to continue the
idea of giving stop codons color names.
The stop codons are sometimes also used to encode what are
now considered the 21st and 22nd amino acids, selenocysteine
(UGA) and pyrrolysine (UAG). These amino acids have been discovered to be consistently encoded in some species of prokarya
and archaea.
Page 142

Although the genetic code as described is nearly universal, there are some situations
in which it has been modified, and the modifications retained in evolutionarily stable
environments. The mitochondria in a broad range of organisms demonstrate stable
changes to the genetic code including converting the AGA from encoding arginine into
a stop codon and changing AAA from encoding lysine to encoding asparagine. Rarely,
a change is found in translation of an organismic (nuclear) genome, but most of those
rare alterations are conversions to or from stop codons.

Other minor alterations to the genetic code exist as well, but the
universality of the code in general remains. Some mitochondrial
DNAs can use different start codons: human mitochondrial ribosomes can use AUA and AUU. In some yeast species, the CGA
and CGC codons for arginine are unused. Many of these changes
have been cataloged by the National Center for Biotechnology
Information (NCBI) based on work by Jukes and Osawa at the
University of California at Berkeley (USA) and the University of
Nagoya (Japan), respectively.

tRNAs are rather odd ducks
In prokaryotes, tRNA can be found either as single genes or as parts of operons that
can also contain combinations of mRNAs or rRNAs. In any case, whether from a single
gene, or after the initial cleavage to separate the tRNA transcript from the rest of the
transcript, the resulting pre-tRNA has an N-terminal leader (41 nt in E. coli) that is
excised by RNase P. That cleavage is universal for any prokaryotic tRNA. After that,
there are variations in the minor excisions carried out by a variety of nucleases that
produce the tRNA in its final length though not its mature sequence, as we will see in
a few paragraphs.
Eukaryotic pre-tRNA (transcribed by RNA polymerase III) similarly has an N-terminal
leader removed by RNase P. Unlike the prokaryote though, the length can vary between different tRNAs of the same species. Some eukaryotic pre-tRNA transcripts also
contain introns, especially in the anticodon loop, that must be spliced out for the tRNA
to function normally. These introns are different from the self-splicing or spliceosomespliced transcripts discussed in the transcription chapter. Here, the splicing function
is carried out not by ribozymes, but by conventional (protein) enzymes. Interestingly,
RNaseP also removes a 3’ sequence from the pre-tRNA, but then another 3’ sequence is
added back on. This new 3’ end is always CCA, and is added by three successive rounds
with tRNA nucleotidyl transferase.
Earlier in this textbook, when RNA was introduced, it was noted that although extremely similar to DNA on many counts, it is normally single stranded, and that property,
combined with the opportunity for complementary base pairing within a strand, allows
it to do something far different than double-stranded DNA: it can form highly complex
secondary structures. One of the simplest and clearest examples of this is tRNA, which
depends on its conformation to accomplish its cellular function. The prototypical cloverleaf-form tRNA diagram is shown in fig. 2 on the left, with a 3D model derived from
x-ray crystallographic data on the right. As you can see, the fully-splayed-out shape

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Page 143

Amino Acid
Phe

3’

A 3’
C
5’ G
C
G
G
A

D G A
D loop D
G
G

G A

U
U
U
A

C

C
U
U
A

G
C
C
A
G
A

C
U

T loop

A

C U C G
G A G C

D loop

5’

C
G

G
G
U
C

U
A
G A C A C C
G T loop
C U G U G
C
T ψ
C
U
G
A G

ψ
A

Y
G A A
Anticodon loop

Anticodon loop

Figure 2. tRNA structure. At left, the classic clover-leaf, splayed out for simplicity. At
right, a more accurate representation of the tRNA in pseudo-3D.

has four stem-loop “arms” with the amino acid attached to the acceptor arm, which
is on the opposite side of the tRNA from the anticodon arm, which is where the tRNA
must match with the mRNA codon during translation. Roughly perpendicular to the
acceptor-anticodon axis are the D arm and the TyC arm. In some tRNAs, there are actually five total arms with a very short loop between the TyC and anticodon arms. The
arm-like stem and loop structures are formed by two areas of strong complementarity
(the stems, base-paired together) interrupted by a short non-complementary sequence
(the loop). In general terms, the arms are used to properly position the tRNA within
the ribosome as well as recognizing the mRNA codon and bringing in the correct amino
acid.
When it comes time for the tRNA to match its anticodon with the codon on the mRNA,
the code is not followed “to the letter” if you will pardon the pun. There is a phenomenon called “wobble” in which a codon-anticodon match is allowed and stabilized for
translation even if the nucleotide in the third position is not complementary. Wobble
can occur because the conformation of the tRNA allows a little flexibility to that position of the anticodon, permitting H-bonds to form where they normally would not.
This is not a universal phenomenon though: it only applies to situations where a U
or a G is in the first position of the anticodon (matching the third position of codon).
Following the convention of nucleic acid sequences, the sequence is always written 5’
to 3’, even though in the case of codon-anticodon matching, the strands of mRNA and
tRNA are antiparallel:
			
			

tRNA
mRNA

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

3’ U A A 5’
5’ A U U 3’
Page 144

In addition to being allowed a bit of wobble in complementary base-pairing, tRNA molecules have another peculiarity. After being initially incorporated into a tRNA through
conventional transcription, there is extensive modification of some of the bases of the
tRNA. This affects both purines and pyrimidines, and can range from simple additions
such as methylation or extensive restructing of the sugar skeleton itself, as in the conversion of guanosine to wyosine (W). Over 50 different modifications have been catalogued to date. These modifications can be nearly universal, such as the dihydrouridine
(D) found in the tRNA D loop, or more specific, such as the G to W conversion found
primarily in tRNAPhe of certain species (examples have been identified in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic species). As many as 10% of the bases in a tRNA may be modified.
Naturally, alterations to the sugar base of the nucleotides can also alter the base-pairing characteristics. For example, one common modified base, inosine, can complement
U, C, or A. This aberrant complementary base pairing can be equal among the suitor
bases, or it may be biased, as in the case of 5-methoxyuridine, which can recognize A,
G, or U, but the recognition of U is poor.
The knowledge of the genetic code begs the question: how is the correct amino acid attached to any given tRNA? A class of enzymes called the aminoacyl tRNA synthetases are
responsible for recognizing both a specific tRNA and a specific amino acid, binding an
ATP for energy and then joining them together (sometimes called charging the tRNA)
with hydrolysis of the ATP. Specificity is a difficult task for the synthetase since amino
acids are built from the same backbone and are so similar in mass. Distinguishing
between tRNA molecules is easier, since they are larger and their secondary structures
also allow for greater variation and therefore greater ease of discrimination. There is
also a built-in pre-attachment proofreading mechanism in that tRNA molecules that fit
the synthetase well (i.e. the correct ones) maintain contact longer and allow the reaction to proceed whereas ill-fitting and incorrect tRNA molecules are likely to disassociate from the synthetase before it tries to attach the amino acid.

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Charging an aminoacyl tRNA synthetase with its amino acid requires energy. The synthetase first binds a molecule of ATP and
the appropriate amino acid, which react resulting in the formation of aminoacyl-adenylate and pyrophosphate. The PPi is released and the synthetase now binds to the proper tRNA. Finally,
the amino acid is transferred to the tRNA. Depending on the
class of synthetase, the amino acid may attach to the 2’-OH of the
terminal A (class I) or to the 3’-OH of the terminal A (class II) of
the tRNA. Phe-tRNA synthetase is the exception: it is structurally
a class II enzyme but transfers the Phe onto the 2’-OH. Note that
amino acids transferred onto the 2’-OH are soon moved to the 3’OH anyway due to a transesterification reaction.

Page 145

Prokaryotic Translation
As soon as the RNA has emerged from the RNAP and there is sufficient space to accomodate a ribosome, translation can begin in prokaryotes. In fact, for highly expressed
genes, it would not be unusual to see multiple RNA polymerases transcribing the DNA
and multiple ribosomes on each of the transcripts translating the mRNA to protein!
The process begins with the small ribosomal subunit (and only the small subunit - if
it is attached to the large subunit, it is unable to bind the mRNA), which binds to the
mRNA loosely and starts to scan it for a recognition sequence called the Shine-Dalgarno
sequence, after its discoverers. Once this is recognized by the small ribosomal subunit
rRNA, the small subunit is positioned around the start codon (AUG). This process is facilitated by initiation factors as follows. The 30S ribosomal subunit dissociates from the
50S ribosomal subunit if it was associated with one, and binds to intiation factors IF-1
and IF-3. IF-1 binds to the A site, where it prevents new aminoacyl-tRNA molecules from
entering before the full ribosome is assembled. It also facilitates the assembly and stabilization of the initiation complex. IF-3 is required to allow the 30S subunit to bind to
mRNA. Once this has occurred, IF-2-GTP arrives on scene, carrying with it the initiator
aminoacyl-tRNA. This settles into the P site, which is positioned so that the anticodon
of the tRNA settles over the AUG start codon of the mRNA. Hydrolysis of the GTP attached to IF-2 and release of all the initiation factors is needed to allow the 50S subunit
to bind to the 30S subunit to form the full and fully functional ribosome. Because GTP
hydrolysis was required, the joining of the subunits is irreversible spontaneously, and
requires expenditure of energy upon termination of translation. Once the 50S subunit
joins with the 30S subunit, the A site is ready to accept the next aminoacyl-tRNA.

A
IF-3
30S subunit

5’

mRNA transcript
Shine-Dalgarno
Sequence

B
fMet-tRNAi

fMet

IF-2

GTP
IF-1

3’

AUG

5’

C
50S subunit
fMet

E

P

A
GTP
3’

AUG

5’

CH3

CH3
S

S

CH2
H

CH2
H2N

3’

AUG

C

C

H

O

N

H3C

H
C

O
C
O

H

H2N

CH3
CH
C

O

5’

H

CH2

O
H2 N

C

H

3’

CH2

3’

C

C

H

O

N

H
C

O

H3C

C

N

H

OH

5’

C

D
O

C
O

H H

fMet

5’

E

+

peptidyl-tRNA
(Met-Gly)

aminoacyl-tRNA
(Val)

free tRNA

5’

peptidyl-tRNA
(Met-Gly-Val)

Figure 4. Peptide bond formation at the addition of the third amino acid. The previous two amino acids
are peptide bonded together as well as attached to the tRNA from the second amino acid. The aminoacyltRNA bond is broken and transferred/transformed to the peptide bond connecting the initial dipeptide
to the third amino acid.

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

GDP + Pi
IF-2

IF-1

3’

5’

3’

Peptidyl transferase

CH3
CH

P
AUG

A

IF-3
3’

Figure 3. Initiation of Translation in Prokaryotes. (A) 30S subunit binds to ShineDalgarno sequence. (B) fMet-tRNAi is loaded into the middle slot of the small
ribosomal subunit. Initiation factors occupyh the other two slots. (C) The large
ribosomal subunit docks with the small subunit. (D) The initiation factors are
released and the ribosome is ready to start translation.

Page 146

A common and understandable misconception is that the new amino acid brought to
the ribosome is added onto the growing polypeptide chain. In fact, the mechanism is
exactly the opposite: the polypeptide is added onto the new amino acid (fig. 4). This
begins from the second amino acid to be added to a new protein (fig. 5). The first
amino acid, a methionine, you should recall, came in along with IF-2 and the initiator
tRNA. The new aminoacyl-tRNA is escorted by EF-Tu, an elongation factor that carries
a GTP. Once the aa-tRNA is in place, EF-Tu hydrolyzes the GTP and dissociates from the
aminoacyl-tRNA and ribosome.
A

Pro
His

EF1α

GTP

EF1α

GTP

Val

Met

Lys

EF1α

GTP

P

E

EF1α

A

GTP

3’

AUG

7-mG

For a long time, there was a bit of mystery surrounding the simultaneous docking of two tRNA molecules on immediately adjacent
codons of mRNA. Under normal conditions, there should not be
enough room, since the tRNAs are fairly bulky and one should
obstruct the other from reaching the mRNA to make a codonanticodon match. The matter was finally cleared up in 2001 with
x-ray crystallographic examinations showing a bend in the mRNA
between the codon in the P slot and the codon in the A slot. The
bend puts the two associated tRNAs at slightly different angles
and thus creates just enough room for both to maintain basepairing hydrogen bonds with the mRNA. See Yusupov et al, Science
292 (5518): 883-896, 2001.

5’

B
EF1α

Val

Met

P

E

GDP

A

3’

AUG G U G

7-mG

+ Pi

5’

C

Met

Ribosome
Translocation

Val

E

P

A

AUG G U G

7-mG

EF2

3’

GTP

5’

D

His

EF1α

GTP
Lys

Pro

Met

Val

EF1α

GTP

E

P

A

GTP

3’

AUG G U G

7-mG

EF1α

5’

EF2

GDP

+ Pi

Figure 5. Elongation of the polypeptide chain. (A) a new aminoacyl-tRNA drops into the A slot of the
ribosome. (B) the fMet is moved off its tRNAi and peptide-bonded to the new amino acid, which is
still attached to its tRNA. (C) Ribosome shifts over to the right. (D) empty tRNAi is ejected.

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Page 147

When a new aminoacyl-tRNA drops into the A slot of the ribosome, the anticodon is
lined up with the codon of the mRNA. If there is no complementarity, the aminoacyltRNA soon floats back out of the slot to be replaced by another candidate. However,
if there is complementarity (or something close enough, recalling the idea of wobble)
then H-bonds form between the codon and anti-codon, the tRNA changes conformation, which shifts the conformation of EF-Tu, causing hydrolysis of GTP to GDP + Pi,
and release from the aa-tRNA. The codon-anticodon interaction is stable long enough
for the catalytic activity of the ribosome to hydrolyze the bond between fMet and the
tRNAf in the P slot, and attach the fMet to the new amino acid with a peptide bond in
the A slot. The new amino acid is still attached to its tRNA, and as this process occurs,
the ribosome shifts position with respect to the mRNA and tRNAs. This puts the nowempty (no amino acid attached) tRNAf in the E slot, the tRNAaa in the P slot, attached
to that aa which is bonded to Met, and the A slot is again open for a new tRNA to
come in. The elongation factor EF-G binds near the A slot as soon as EF-Tu leaves, and
is required for ribosomal translocation, providing energy for the process by hydrolyzing a GTP that it carries with it to the ribosome. From my students’ experiences, the
best way to learn this seems to be to study the diagrams and see the movements of the
molecules, filling in the mechanistic details in your mind. This process continues until
the ribosome brings the A slot in line with a stop codon.
There is no tRNA with an anticodon for the stop codon. Instead, there is a set of release
factors that fit into the A site of the ribosome, bind to the stop codon, and actvate the
ribosome to cut the bond between the polypeptide chain and the last tRNA (fig. 6).
Depending on which stop codon is present either RF1 (recognizes UAA or UAG) or RF2
(for UAA or UGA) first enters the A slot. The RF1 or RF2 is complexed with RF3, which is
involved in subsequent releasing of the RF complex from the A slot. This is necessary
because once the polypeptide has been released from the ribosome, the mRNA must
be released. Ribosome releasing factor (RRF) also binds in the A slot, which causes a
conformational change in the ribosome releasing the previous and now empty tRNA.
Finally, EF-G binds to RRF, and with an accompanying hydrolysis of GTP, causes dissociation of the ribosome into separate large and small subunits. Note that it is the
combination of EF-G/RRF that causes dissociation; EF-G alone plays a different role in
ribosome movement when it is not at the stop codon.

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

A
RF3
GTP

RF1
Phe

His

Pro

Gly

Phe

Lys

Met

Pro

Val

E

P

A

3’

7-mG
5’

B

Phe

His

Pro

Gly

Phe

Lys

Met

Pro

Val

RF3
E

P

GTP

RF1
A

3’

UA A

7-mG
5’

C
Phe

Gly

Pro

His

Phe

Lys

Pro

Met

Val

RF3
RF1
E

P

A

GDP

+ Pi

3’

7-mG
5’

Figure 6. Termination of translation.

Page 148

Eukaryotic Translation
Eukaryotic translation, as with transcription, is satisfyingly similar (from a student
studying point of view, or from an evolutionary conservation one) to the prokaryotic
case. The initiation process is slightly more complicated, but the elongation and termination processes are the same, but with eukaryotic homologues of the appropriate
elongation and release factors.
A

Met-tRNAi
Met

GTP 2
1A

3

40S subunit

4E

4A 4B
7-mG
4G

3’

AUG

mRNA transcript
5’

B
Met

ATP

GTP 2
4E

4A 4B

1A

ADP + Pi

3

3’

AUG

7-mG
4G

5’

C
60S subunit

E

P

4A
4E

Met

A

2

GTP

1A

GDP + Pi
4B

5B
3

4G
3’

AUG

7-mG
5’

D
GDP + Pi
5B
Met

E

P
AUG

7-mG

A

3’

5’

Figure 7. Initiation of Translation in Eukaryotes.

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Page 149

For eukaryotes, each mRNA encodes one and only one gene (as opposed to multi-gene
transcripts such as operons), so there isn’t much question of which AUG is a start
codon, and which are just regular methionines. Therefore, there is no requirement
for a Shine-Dalgarno sequence in eukaryotes. The small ribosomal subunit, accompanied by eukaryotic initiation factors eIF-3, eIF-2, and Met-tRNAi, together known as the
terneary complex, binds to eIF-1A. Meanwhile, eIF-4A, -4B, -4E, and -4G bind to the 5’
(7-methyguanosine) cap of the mRNA (fig. 7A). The small subunit complex and the eIF4/
mRNA cap-binding complex interact to form the 43S complex, which then begins scanning the mRNA from 5’ to 3’ looking for the first AUG.

Usually, but not always, the first AUG is the start codon for eukaryotic genes. However, the context of the AUG matters, and
it is a much stronger (i.e. more frequently recognized and used)
start codon if there is a purine residue (A or G) at -3 and a G at +4.
See Kozak, M., Biochimie 76: 815-821, 1994.

Once the 43S scanning complex has found the start codon, the initiation factors drop
off, and the large ribosomal subunit arrives. The large ribosomal subunit has bound
eIF-6, which prevents it from reassociating with small subunits, and its removal is
required first. Another factor, eIF-5 enters the scene during the coupling process between the large and small ribosomal subunits, and hydrolysis of an eIF-5-attached GTP
is required to complete the docking of the subunits and the formation of a complete
functional ribosome on the mRNA.
Elongation is functionally the same as in prokaryotes except that the functions of EF-Tu
is taken care of by EF-1a, also with hydrolysis of GTP. EF-2 is the eukaryotic analog of
EF-G, and utilizes GTP hydrolysis for translocation of the ribosome. Termination uses
eukaryotic homologues of the release factors, though eRF-1 takes the place of both
prokaryotic RF-1 and RF-2.
Although polyribosomes (aka polysomes) can form on both prokaryotic and eukaryotic
mRNAs, eukaryotic polysomes have an additional twist. Technically, a polysome is simply an mRNA with multiple ribosomes translating it simultaneously, but in eukaryotes,
the polysome also has a unique morphology because it utilizes PABPI, or poly-A binding
protein. This protein not only binds to the 3’ poly-A tail of an mRNA, it also interacts
with the eIF-4 initiation factors, which thus loops the mRNA into a circular shape. That
way, once the ribosome reaches the end of the gene and releases from the mRNA, it is
physically near the beginning of the mRNA to start translating again.

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Page 150

Regulation of Translation
Gene expression is primarily regulated at the pre-transcriptional level, but there are a
number of mechanisms for regulation of translation as well. One well-studied animal
system is the iron-sensitive RNA-binding protein, which regulates the expression of
genes involved in regulating intracellular levels of iron ions. Two of these genes, ferritin, which safely sequesters iron ions inside cells, and transferrin, which transports
iron from the blood into the cell, both utilize this translational regulation system in a
feedback loop to respond to intracellular iron concentration, but they react in opposite ways. The key interaction is between the iron response elements (IRE), which are
sequences of mRNA that form short stem-loop structures, and IRE-BP, the protein that
recognizes and binds to the IREs. In the case of the ferritin gene, the IRE sequences are
situated upstream of the start codon. When there is high iron, the IRE-BP is inactive,
and the stem-loop structures are melted and overrun by the ribosome, allowing translation of ferritin, which is an iron-binding protein. As the iron concentration drops,
the IRE-BP is activated and binds around the IRE stem-loop structures, stabilizing them
and preventing the ribosome from proceeding. This prevents the production of ferritin
when there is little iron to bind.
A.

Low Iron Concentration

Active IRP
IRE

5’

B.

Ferritin-coding region

mRNA

3’

High Iron Concentration
Inactive IRP
Iron

IRE
Ribosome
5’

mRNA

Translation
3’

Ferritin

Figure 8. Pre-translational control of gene expression by iron-response protein (IRP), which binds to
either the iron-response element (IRE), unless it has bound iron.

Transferrin also uses iron response elements and IRE-binding proteins, but in a very
different mechanism. The IRE sequences of the transferrin gene are located downstream of the stop codon, and play no direct role in allowing or preventing translation.

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Page 151

However, when there is low intracellular iron and there is a need for more transferrin
to bring iron into the cell, the IRE-BP is activated as in the previous case, and it binds
to the IREs to stabilize the stem-loop structures. In this case; however, it prevents the
3’ poly-A tail degradation that would normally occur over time. Once the poly-A tail
is degraded, the rest of the mRNA is destroyed soon thereafter. As mentioned in the
transcription chapter, the longer poly-A tails are associated with greater persistence in
the cytoplasm, allowing more translation before they are destroyed. The IRE-BP system
in this case externally prolongs the lifetime of the mRNA when that gene product is
needed in higher amounts.
Since mRNA is a single-stranded nucleic acid and thus able to bind complementary
sequence, it is not too surprising to find that one of the ways that a cell can regulate
translation is using another piece of RNA. Micro RNAs (miRNAs) were discovered as
very short (~20 nucleotides) non-protein-coding genes in the nematode, C. elegans.
Since their initial discovery (Lee et al, Cell 75: 843-54, 1993), hundreds have been found
in various eukaryotes, including humans. The expression pattern of the miRNA genes
is highly specific to tissue and developmental stage. Many are predicted to form stemloop structures, and appear to hybridize to 3’-untranslated sequences of mRNA thus
blocking initiation of translation on those mRNA molecules. They may also work
through a mechanism similar to the siRNA discussed below, but there is clear evidence
that mRNA levels are not necessarily altered by miRNA-directed translational control.

MicroRNAs are currently under investigation for their roles as
either oncogenes or tumor suppressors (reviewed in Garzon et
al, Ann. Rev. Med. 60: 167-79, 2009). Approximately half of known
human miRNAs are located at fragile sites, breakpoints, and other
regions associated with cancers (Calin et al, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
(USA) 101: 2999-3004, 2004). For example, miR-21 is not only upregulated in a number of tumors, its overexpression blocks apoptosis - a necessary step to allow abnormal cells to contine to live
and divide rather than die out. Conversely, miR-15a is significantly
depressed in some tumor cells, and overexpression can slow or
stop the cell cycle, even inducing apoptosis.

Another mechanism for translational control that uses small RNA molecules is RNA
interference (RNAi). This was first discovered as an experimentally induced repression
of translation when short double-stranded RNA molecules, a few hundred nucleotides
in length and containing the same sequence as a target mRNA, were introduced into
cells. The effect was dramatic: most of the mRNA with the target sequence was quickly
destroyed. The current mechanistic model of RNAi repression is that first, the doublestranded molecules are cleaved by an endonuclease called Dicer, which cleaves with
over-hanging single-stranded 3’ ends. This allows the short fragments (siRNA, ~20nt
long) to form a complex with several proteins (RISC, RNA-induced silencing complex).
The RISC splits the double-stranded fragments into single strands, one of which is an
exact complement to the mRNA. Because of the complementarity, this is a stable interaction, and the double-stranded region appears to signal an endonuclease to destroy
the mRNA/siRNA hybrid.
The final method of controlling levels of gene expression is control after the fact,
i.e., by targeted destruction of the gene product protein. While some proteins keep
working until they fall apart, others are only meant for short-term use (e.g. to signal
a short phase in the cell cycle) and need to be removed for the cell to function propChapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Page 152

erly. Removal, in this sense, would be a euphemism for chopped up and recycled. The
ubiquitin-proteasome system is a tag-and-destroy mechanism in which proteins that
have outlived their usefulness are polyubiquitinated. Ubiquitin is a small (76 amino
acids, ~5.6 kDa), highly conserved (96% between human and yeast sequences) eukaryotic protein (fig. 9) that can be attached to other proteins through the action of three
sequential enzymatic steps, each catalyzed by a different enzyme.
E1 activates the ubiquitin by combining it with ATP to make ubiquitin-adenylate, and
then transfers the ubiquitin to itself via a cysteine thioester bond. Through a trans(thio)
esterification reaction, the ubiquitin is then transferred to a cysteine in the E2 enzyme,
also known as ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme. Finally, E3, or ubiquitin ligase, interacts
with both E2-ubiquitin and the protein designated for destruction, transferring the
ubiquitin to the target protein. After several rounds, the polyubiquitinated protein is
send to the proteasome for destruction.

Ub

Ub
Ub

C
S

+ ATP

E1

O

C
S

E2

E2

E1
AMP + PPi

O
O

NH2

C Ub

E3

Figure 9. Ubiquitin. This 3D representation
was generated from the file 1ubi (synthetic
human ubiquitin) in the RCSB Protein Data
Bank

Mutations in E3 genes can cause a variety of human medical disorders such as the neurodevelopmental disorders Angelman syndrome, Hippel-Lindau syndrome, or the general growth disorder
known as 3-M syndrome. Mechanisms linking malfunction in
ubiquitination pathways and symptoms of these disorders are not
currently known.

+

E1

E2

Repeat multiple times...
ATP
AMP

Ub

Ub

Ub

Ub

Ub

Ub

Proteasome

Proteasome
Ub
Ub
Ub

Figure 10. Polyubiquitination of a targeted protein (blue) requires three ubiquitinating enzymes, E1, E2, and
E3. Once tagged, the protein is positioned in the proteasome by binding of the polyubiquitin tail to the outer
surface of the proteasome. The proteasome then cleaves the protein into small polypeptides.

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Page 153

Proteasomes are very large protein complexes arranged as a four-layered barrel (the
20S subunit) capped by a regulatory subunit (19S) on each end. The two outer rings are
each composed of 7 a subunits that function as entry gates to the central rings, each
of which is composed of 7 b subunits, and which contain along the interior surface, 6
proteolytic sites. The 19S regulatory units control the opening and closing of the gates
into the 20S catalytic barrel. The entire proteasome is sometimes referred to as a 26S
particle.
A polyubiquitinated protein is first bound to the 19S regulatory unit in an ATP-dependent reaction (the 19S contains ATPase activity). 19S unit opens the gates of the 20S
unit, possibly involving ATP hydrolysis, and guides the protein into the central proteolytic chamber. The protease activity of proteasomes is unique in that it is a threonine
protease, and it cuts most proteins into regular 8-9 residue polypeptides, although this
can vary.
As we will see in the cell cycle chapter, proteasomes are a crucial component to precise
regulation of protein functions.

Chapter 10, Translation, version 1.0

Page 154

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.

ER, Golgi and Vesicles :
Post-translational Processing and Vesicular Transport

Once a polypeptide has been translated and released from the ribosome, it may be ready
for use, but often it must undergo post-translational processing in order to become fully
functional. While many of these processes are carried out in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, the presence of organelles provides the need as well as some of the mechanisms for
eukaryote-specific modifications such as glycosylation and targeting.

Proteolytic Cleavage
The most common modification is proteolytic cleavage. Some of the pre-cleavage polypeptides are immediately cleaved, while others are stored as inactive precursors to
form a pool of enzymes (or other kinds of proteins) that can be activated very quickly,
on a timescale of seconds to minutes, as compared to having to go through transcription and translation, or even just translation. Interestingly, though methionine (Met) is
universally the first amino acid of a newly synthesized polypeptide, many proteins have
that methionine cleaved off (also true for some prokaryotic f-Met).
HS

Signal sequence

M-A-L-

-L-C
-Q-H
W
V-N
-M
-A-F-R-L
-P-A-A
-L-P-L-LA-L-L-A-L-W-G-P-D

A

V
-L-H
G-S

-E
-AL-Y-L-V-

CG-E
Q-V-E-L-G-G-G-P-G-A-G-S
-R-G-Q-V-G-L-QF-F-Y-T-P-K-T-R-R-E-A-E-D-L
P-L-A
-L-E
-

-L
D

N-Y-C-N

A-E-

S-L-Y-Q-L-E-

SH

-E-

SH

-R

-Q

-V-E

S

-G

- L- G - G

- G - P- G - A - G - S - L-

S

-V

S

-Q

Q-P

- L- A

- L-

E-

G-

S

SH

SH

S - I- C -

K-R-G-I-V-E-Q-C-C-T-S-I-C-S-L-Y-Q-L-E-N-Y-C-N

A chain

C-T-

S

- C-

L- Q

S

S-

- K - R - G -I-

B

G-

Q
L-

C-peptide

E- Q

HS

V-

B chain

S-

Figure 1. Proteolytic processing is
necessary to make biologically active insulin. (A) The linear protein
contains a signal sequence, which
is cleaved after the protein enters
the ER, an A chain, a B chain, and
a C-peptide. (B) Inside the ER,
the proinsulin (insulin precursor)
folds and disulfide bonds form between cysteines. (C) Finally, two
cleavages release the C peptide,
which leaves the A and B chains
attached by the disulfide bonds.
This is now active insulin.

F-V-N-Q-H-L-C-G-S-H-L-V-E-A-L-Y-L-V-C-G-E-R-G-F-F-Y-T-P-K-T R

C

S

S

K-R-G-I-V-E-Q-C-C-T-S-I-C-S-L-Y-Q-L-E-N-Y-C-N

S

S

S

S

F-V-N-Q-H-L-C-G-S-H-L-V-E-A-L-Y-L-V-C-G-E-R-G-F-F-Y-T-P-K-T

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Page 155

Activation of proteins by cleavage of precursors is a common theme: the precursor
protein is termed a proprotein, and the peptide that is cleaved off of it to activate the
protein is called the propeptide. Among the better known examples of proteins that
are derived from proproteins are the hormone insulin, the cell death protein family of
caspases, and the Alzheimer-associated neural protein b-amyloid. Insulin is an interesting example (fig. 1) in mammals: preproinsulin (inactive as a hormone) is first translated
from the insulin mRNA. After a cleavage that removes an N-terminal sequence, proinsulin (still inactive) is generated. The proinsulin forms some internal disulfide bonds,
and when the final proteolytic action occurs, a substantial chunk (called the C-peptide)
is taken out of the middle of the proinsulin. Since the protein was internally disulfide
bonded though, the two end pieces remain connected to become the active insulin
hormone.
Another interesting protein processing example is that of collagen assembly (fig. 2). As
you will read in chapter 13, collagen is a very large secreted protein that provides structure and shock absorbance for the extracellular matrix in animals. You can find it in
skin, hooves, cartilage, and various connective tissues. An individual collagen protein
is actually a twisted triple-helix of three subunits. The collagen subunits are made as
procollagen, and propeptides are lopped off of both N- and C- termini to generate the
final protein. However, they are not cleaved off until after the three subunits assemble
around one another. In fact, collagen subunits that have already been processed do not
assemble into triple-helical proteins. The propeptide sequences are clearly necessary
for efficient assembly of the final protein complex.
OH

Procollagen

H2N

COOH
OH

OH

Propeptide

Propeptide

Triple helix formation

H2 N
OH

H2N

OH

OH

H2N

OH

COOH
COOH
COOH

Secretion from cell
Propeptides clipped

OH

OH

Completed collagen molecule
OH

OH

OH

Figure 2. Processing and assembly of procollagen into collagen.

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Page 156

Protein Trafficking
The idea that propeptide sequences have important functions in protein maturation
beyond just keeping them from being active is not exclusive to assembly. A major
class of cleaved peptide sequences is signal peptides. Signal peptides direct the protein
from the cytoplasm into a particular cellular compartment. In the case of prokaryotes, this essentially means the cell membrane, but for eukaryotes, there are specific
signal peptides that can direct the protein to the nucleus, to the mitochondria, to the
endoplasmic reticulum, and other intracellular organelles. The peptides are specifically
recognized by receptors on the membranes of particular compartments, which then
help to guide the insertion of the protein into or through the membrane. Almost all
protein synthesis in eukaryotes is carried out in the cytoplasm (with the exception of
a few proteins in the chloroplasts and mitochondria), so proteins found in any other
compartment or embedded in any membrane must have been targeted and transported
into that compartment by its signal sequence.

Although this is primarily considered a eukaryotic process given
that there are so many potential targets, prokaryotes do have
membrane proteins (in fact, some 800 different ones in E. coli
comprising ~20% of total protein), and they are positioned there
with the aid of insertase enzymes such as YidC and complexes
such as Sec translocase. The Sec translocase uses a signal recognition particle (SRP) much like that in eukaryotes, and will be
discussed later in this chapter when the SRP is introduced. YidC,
which has eukaryotic homologues (e.g. Oxa1 in mitochondria), is
a 61 kDa transmembrane protein that is placed in the membrane
through an SRP-Sec translocase mechanism. Once there, YidC interacts with nascent polypeptides (once they reach ~70 amino
acids long) that have begun to interact with the lipids of the cell
membrane, and pushes the protein into/through the membrane.

The nucleus is one such compartment, and examples of the proteins found within include DNA and RNA polymerases, transcription factors, and histones. These and other
nuclear proteins have an N-terminal signal sequence known as the NLS, or nuclear localization signal. This is a well-studied pathway that involves a set of importin adapter
proteins and the nuclear pore complex (fig. 3). Transport into the nucleus is particularly challenging because it has a double membrane (remember that it is contiguous
with the endoplasmic reticulum membrane. Although there are other mechanisms
for making proteins that are embedded in the nuclear membrane, the primary mechanism for import and export of large molecules into and out of the nucleus itself is the
nuclear pore complex. The complex is very large and can be made of over 50 different
proteins (nucleoporins, sometimes called nups). The nucleoporins are assembled into
a large open octagonal pore through the nuclear membranes. As figure 3 indicates,
there are antenna-like fibrils on the cytoplasmic face, and these help to guide proteins
from their origin in the cytoplasm to the nuclear pore, and on the nuclear side there
is a basket structure. Of course, not all proteins are allowed into the nucleus, and the
mechanism for distinguishing appropriate targets is straightforward. The protein must
bear a nuclear localization signal (NLS). While in the cytoplasm, an importin-a protein
binds to the NLS of a nuclear protein, and also binds to an importin-b. The importinb is recognized and bound by the nuclear pore complex. The details of the transport
mechanism are murky, but phenylalanine-glycine repeats in the nucleoporin subunits
(FG-nups) are thought to be involved.

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Page 157

Figure 3. Transport
through nuclear pore.

Importin α

A
Protein with NLS

B

Importin β
Cytoplasmic filament

Cytoplasm

Nucleoplasm

Nuclear basket

C

D

Ran-GTP

Central transporter

Ran-GDP

Exportin

Once the nucleoprotein-importin aggregate is moved into the nucleus, Ran-GTP, a small
GTPase, causes the aggregate to dissociate (fig. 3c). The imported protein is released in
the nucleus. The importins are also released in the nucleus, but they are exported back
out again to be reused with another protein targeted for the nucleus.
Export from the nucleus to the cytoplasm also occurs through the nuclear pore. The
Ran-GTP is also a part of the export complex (fig. 3d), and in conjunction with an
exportin protein and whatever is to be exported, is moved out of the nucleus via the
nuclear pore. Once in the cytoplasm, the hydrolysis of GTP to GDP by Ran (activated
by Ran-GAP, a cytoplasmic protein) provides the energy to dissociate the cargo (e.g.
mRNA) from the exporting transport molecules. The Ran-GDP then binds to importins,
re-enters the nucleus, and the GDP is exchanged for GTP.

The mechanisms of small GTPase activation of other processes
will be discussed again in more detail in later chapters (cytoskeleton, signaling). The key to understanding the mechanism is to
remember that the GTPase hydrolyzes GTP to GDP, but still holds
onto the GDP. Although the GTPase will hydrolyze GTP spontaneously, the GTPase-activating protein, GAP (or Ran-GAP in this case)
greatly speeds the rate of hydrolysis. In order to cycle the system
back to GTP, the GDP is not re-phosphorylated: it is exchanged for
a new GTP. The exchange is greatly facilitated by the action of an
accessory protein, the guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF),
in this particular case, a Ran-GEF.

The nuclear pore is the only transport complex that spans dual membrane layers, although there are coordinated pairs of transport complexes in double-membraned organelles such as mitochondria. The transport proteins in the outer mitochondrial
membrane link with transport proteins in the inner mitochondrial membrane to move
matrix-bound proteins (e.g. those involved in the TCA cycle) in from the cytoplasm.
The complexes that move proteins across the outer membrane are made up of Tom
(translocator outer membrane) family of proteins. Some of the proteins will stay em-

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Page 158

bedded in the outer membrane: they are processed by a SAM (sorting and assembly
machinery) complex also embedded in the outer membrane). Meanwhile, others continue to the Tim (translocator inner membrane) proteins that move them across the
inner membrane. As with the nuclear proteins, there is a consensus signal sequence on
mitochondrial proteins that is bound by cytosolic chaperones that bring them to the
Tom transporters. As shown in the table below, there are signal sequences/propeptides
that target proteins to several other compartments.
Nucleus		
ER entry		
ER retention	
Mito. Matrix	
Peroxisome		
Peroxisome		

—PPKKKRKV—
MMSFVSLLLVGILFWATEAEQLTKCEVFQ—
—KDEL
MLSLRQSIRFFKPATRTLCSSRYLL—
—SKL
—RLXXXXXHL

Of particular importance for the rest of this chapter, is the sequence targeting proteins
to the endoplasmic reticulum, and by extension, any proteins destined for the ER, the
Golgi apparatus, the cell membrane, vesicles and vesicularly-derived compartments,
and secretion out of the cell. Here, in addition to an N-terminal signal sequence, the
position of secondary internal signal sequences (sometimes called signal patches) helps
to determine the disposition of the protein as it enters the ER.
The initial insertion requires recognition of the signal sequence by SRP, the signal recognition protein. The SRP is a G-protein and exchanges its bound GDP for a GTP upon
binding to a protein’s signal sequence. The SRP with its attached protein then docks to
a receptor (called the SRP receptor, astoundingly enough) embedded in the ER membrane and extending into the cytoplasm. The SRP usually binds as soon as the signal
sequence is available, and when it does so, it arrests translation until it is docked to the
ER membrane. Incidentally, this is the origin of the “rough” endoplasmic reticulum: the
ribosomes studding the ER are attached to the ER cytoplasmic surface by the nascent
polypeptide it is producing and an SRP. The SRP receptor can exist on its own or in
association with a translocon, which is a bipartite translocation channel. The SRP receptor (SR) is also a GTPase, and is usually carrying a GDP molecule when unassociated.
However, upon association with the translocon it exchanges its GDP for a GTP. These
GTPs are important because when the SRP binds to the SR, both GTPase activities are
activated and the resulting release of energy dissociates both from the translocon and
the nascent polypeptide. This relieves the block on translation imposed by the SRP, and
the new protein is pushed on through the translocon as it is being synthesized. Once
the signal sequence has completely entered the lumen of the ER, it reveals a recognition
site for signal peptidase, a hydrolytic enzyme that resides in the ER lumen and whose
purpose is to snip off the signal peptide.
Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Prokaryotes also use an SRP homolog. In E. coli, the SRP is simple,
made up of one protein subunit (Ffh) and a small 4.5S RNA. By
comparison, some higher eukaryotes have an SRP comprised of
six different proteins subunits and a 7S RNA. Similarly, there is
a simple prokaryotic homologue to the SRP receptor, FtsY. An
interesting difference is that FtsY generally does not interact with
exported proteins, and appears to be necessary only for membrane-embedded proteins. Otherwise, there are many similarities
in mechanism for SRP-based insertion of membrane proteins in
eukaryotic and prokaryotic species, including GTP dependence,
and completion of the mechanism by a translocase (SecYEG in E.
coli).

Page 159

1

mRNA
Ribosome

Signal
sequence

2

SRP

3

Cytosol

4

5

Plug

Translocon

SRP receptor

ER

Signal peptidase

Figure 4. SRP and its receptor SR mediate movement of proteins through the ER membrane. The SRP recognizes the signal sequence and binds to it and the ribosome, temporarily arresting translation. The SRP-polypeptide-ribosome complex is bound by its receptor, SR, which positions the complex on a translocon. Once
the ribosome and polypeptide are docked on the translocon, the SRP dissociates, and translation resumes,
with the polypeptide moving through the translocon as it is being synthesized.

If that was the only signal sequence in the protein, the remainder of the protein is
synthesized and pushed through the translocon and a soluble protein is deposited in
the ER lumen, as shown in figure 4. What about proteins that are embedded in a membrane? Transmembrane proteins have internal signal sequences (sometimes called
signal patches). Depending on their relative locations, they may be considered either
start-transfer or stop-transfer sequence, where “transfer” refers to translocation of the
peptide through the translocon. This is easiest to understand by referring to fig. 5. If
Figure 5. Single-pass transmembrane protein insertion.
(1) the signal sequence has allowed the ribosome to dock
on a translocon and newly
made polypeptide is threaded through until the stoptransfer sequence. (2) The
hydrophobic stop transfer
sequence gets “stuck” in the
membrane, forcing the rest
of the polypeptide to stay in
the cytoplasm as it is translated.

1

Ribosome

mRNA

Stop transfer
sequence

Cytosol

ER

Translocon

2

C-terminus

N-terminus

Signal sequence
Signal peptidase

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Page 160

there is a significant stretch of mostly-uninterrupted hydrophobic residues, it would
be considered a stop-transfer signal, as that part of the protein can get stuck in the
translocon (and subsequently the ER membrane) forcing the remainder of the protein
to remain outside the ER. This would generate a protein that inserts into the membrane once, with its N-terminus in the ER lumen and the C-terminus in the cytoplasm.
In a multi-pass transmembrane protein, there could be several start- and stop- transfer
hydrophobic signal patches. Building on the single-pass example, if there was another

1

2
Ribosome

Cytosol

ER

3

mRNA
Stop transfer
sequence

Translocon
Signal sequence

Start transfer
sequence

N-terminus
C-terminus
Signal peptidase

Figure 6. Insertion of 2-pass transmembrane protein.

signal patch after the stop-transfer sequence, it would act as a start-transfer sequence,
attaching to a translocon and allowing the remainder of the protein to be moved into
the ER. This results in a protein with both N- and C- termini in the ER lumen, passing
through the ER membrane twice, and with a cytoplasmic loop sticking out. Of course,
the N-terminus could be on the
mRNA
other side. For a cytoplasmic N-ter- 1
minus, the protein cannot have an
Ribosome
N-terminal signal sequence (fig. 7). N-terminus
It has an internal signal patch in2
Start
transfer
stead. It plays essentially the same
3
sequence
role, but the orientation of the
N-terminus
N-terminus
Cytosol
patch means that the N-terminal
stays cytoplasmic. The polypeptide
translated after the patch is fed
Translocon
ER
into the ER. And just as in the last
C-terminus
example, multiple stop- and startsequences can reinsert the protein
in the membrane and change the Figure 7. Insertion of a single-pass protein with N-terminus in
facing of the next portion.
cytoplasm uses a signal patch but no N-terminal signal.
Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Page 161

Protein Folding in the ER

S S

The ER lumen plays four major protein processing roles: folding/refolding of the polypeptide, glycosylation of the protein, assembly of multi-subunit proteins, and packaging
of proteins into vesicles. Refolding of proteins is an important process because the initial folding patterns as the polypeptide is still being translated and unfinished may not
be the optimal folding pattern once the entire protein is available. This is true not just
of H-bonds, but of the more permanent (i.e. covalent) disulfide bonds as well. Looking
at the hypothetical example polypeptide, the secondary structure of the N-terminal
half may lead to the formation of a stable disulfide bond between the first cysteine and
the second cysteine, but in the context of the whole protein, a more stable disulfide
bond might be formed between cysteine 1 and cysteine 4. The exchange of disulfide
bonding targets is catalyzed by protein disulfide isomerase (PDI). The internal redox
environment of the endoplasmic reticulum, is significantly more oxidative than that
in the cytoplasm. This is largely determined by glutathione, which is found in a 30:1
GSH:GSSG ratio or higher in the cytoplasm but at nearly 1:1 ratio in the ER lumen. This
oxidative environment is also conducive to the disulfide remodeling. It should be noted
that PDI does not choose the
Ribosome
“correct” bonding partners. It
simply moves the existing disCytosol
ulfide bonds to a more energetically stable arrangement.
As the rest of the polypeptide
4
Translocon
ER
4 HS
Incorrect organization
continues to refold, breaking
3
SH
2
and making H-bonds quickly,
2
3
1
HS
S S
new potential disulfide bond
2
1
partners may move near one
1
PDI
SH
Rearrangement
another and PDI can again
4
3
Polypeptide
attempt to rearrange the disS
S
ulfide bonding pattern if the
S
S
resulting pattern is more ther1
2
modynamically stable.
S S

Figure 8. Protein Disulfide Isomerase rearranges disulfide bonds.

The assembly of multisubunit proteins and the refolding of polypeptides are similar
in their use of chaperone proteins that help prevent premature folding, sequestering
parts of the protein from H-bonding interaction until the full protein is in the ER lumen. This mechanism simply makes finding the thermodynamically optimal conformation easier by preventing the formation of some potential suboptimal conformations.
These chaperone proteins bind to the new proteins as they enter the lumen through

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

A

B
HS

1

S S

PDI

2

C

1
S

S

1
HS
..

2

HS

SH

S
S

HS
..

4

1

S S

4

3

2

S S

3

PDI
2

SH

PDI ..

D

2
3

S S

4

3

S S

S S

4

Figure 9. Protein Disulfide Isomerase. This enzyme uses a sulfhydryl group of a
cysteine residue as temporary bonding partner in order to break disulfide bonds
on the target protein and allow for new ones to form. Note that the formation of
a new bond is not directed by PDI, but is instead a stochastic process in which a
stronger binding partner displaces the PDI —SH.

Page 162

Figure 10. Protein folding is optimized
in the ER. Proteins such as calnexin can
temporarily bind to nascent polypeptides,
preventing them from forming secondary
structures from incomplete information,
releasing the protein for folding once the
entire polypeptide has been translated.

Ribosome

Calnexin

Translocon

Cytosol

ER

Polypeptide

the translocon and in addition to simply preventing incorrect bonds that would have
to be broken, they also prevent premature interaction of multiple polypeptides with
one another. This can be a problem because prior to the proper folding that would
normally hide such domains within the protein, the immature polypeptides may have
interaction domains exposed, leading to indiscriminate binding, and potentially precipitation of insoluble protein aggregates.

Chaperone proteins can also be found in prokaryotes, archaea,
and in the cytoplasm of eukaryotes. These are somewhat similar
to each other, and function somewhat differently than the types
of folding proteins found in the ER lumen. They are referred to
generally as chaperonins, and the best characterized is the GroEL/
GroES complex in E. coli. As the structure in figure 11 indicates, it
is similar in shape to the proteasome, although with a completely
different function. GroEL is made up of two stacked rings, each
composed of 7 subunits, with a large central cavity and a large
area of hydrophobic residues at its opening. GroES is also composed of 7 subunits, and acts as a cap on one end of the GroEL.
However, GroES only caps GroEL in the presence of ATP. Upon
hydrolysis of the ATP, the chaperonins undergo major concerted
conformational changes that impinge on the protein inside, causing refolding, and then the GroES dissociates and the protein is
released back into the cytosol.

N-linked Protein Glycosylation Begins in the ER
Glycosylation is an important modification to eukaryotic proteins because the added
sugar residues are often used as molecular flags or recognition signals to other cells
than come in contact with them. There are two types of protein glycosylation, both
of which require import of the target polypeptide into the ER. N-linked glycosylation
actually begins in the endoplasmic reticulum, but O-linked glycosylation does not occur
until the polypeptide has been transported into the Golgi apparatus. Therefore, it is also
the case that N-linked glycosylation can (and is) usually beginning as a co-translational
mechanism, whereas O-linked glycosylation must be occurring post-translationally.
Other major differences in the two types of glycosylation are (1) N-linked glycosylation
occurs on asparagine (N) residues within an N-X-S or N-X-T sequence (X is any amino
acid other than P or D) while O-linked glycosylation occurs on the side chain hydroxyl
oxygen of either serine or threonine residues determined not by surrounding sequence,
but by secondary and tertiary structure; (2) N-linked glycosylation begins with a “tree”
of 14 specific sugar residues that is then pruned and remodeled, but remains fairly large,
while O-linked glycosylation is based on sequential addition of individual sugars, and
does not usually extend beyond a few residues.

Figure 11. GroEL/GroES complex. The two heptameric rings of GroEL are
shown in green and blue/purple. The GroES heptamer (red/yellow) caps the
GroEL complex in the presence of ATP. Illustration by D.S. Goodsell, 2002.

Technically, N-glycosylation begins before a protein is even being translated, as the
dolichol pyrophosphate oligosaccharide (i.e. the sugar “tree” - not an official term, by
the way) is synthesized in the ER (fig. 12) without being triggered by translation or
Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Page 163

= N-Acetylglucosamine
= Mannose

= Dolichol phosphate

P

= Glucose

Cytosol

= Dolichol diphosphate

PP

UDP UDP UMP

PP

ER lumen

1

GDP
P

4

PP

GTP

GDP

2

5x

2x

UDP

GDP

P

6

FLIP!

PP

3

PP

UDP

Cytosol

+

+
ER lumen

PP

4x

P

5

PP

3x
7

P

Asn-X-Ser/Thr

PP

8

Figure 12. Formation of N-glycosylation “sugar tree” and attachment to protein. Each step is catalyzed by a
glycosyltransferase. Note that the sugar substrates are sugar nucleotides, not isolated sugar molecules.

protein entry. Dolichol is a long-chain hydrocarbon [between 14-24 isoprene units of
4+1 carbons] found primarily in the ER membrane, and serves as a temporary anchor
for the N-glycosylation oligosaccharide as it is being synthesized and as it waits for an
appropriate protein to glycosylate. The oligosaccharide synthesis begins with the addition of two N-acetylglucosamine residues to the pyrophosphate linker, followed by a
mannose. From this mannose, the oligosaccharide branches, with one branch receiving
three more mannose residues and the other receiving one. So far, all of these additions
to the oligosaccharide have been taking place in the cytoplasm. Now the glycolipid is
flipped inwards to the ER lumen! Once in the lumen, four more mannoses are added,
and finally three glucose residues top off the structure.
The enzymes that accomplish the glycosylation are glycosyltransferases specific for
both the added sugar residue and the target oligosaccharide. The sugars used by the
enzymes are not simply the sugar, but nucleotide sugars - usually a sugar linked to a
nucleoside diphosphate, for example, uracil diphosphate glucose (UDP-glucose) or GDPmannose.
Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Not all nucleosides are used for this process: sugars have only been
found linked to UDP, GDP, and CMP. UDP is the most versatile,
binding N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc), N-acetylglucosamine
(GlcNAc), N-acetylmuramic acid, galactose, glucose, glucuronic
acid, and xylose. GDP is used for mannose and fucose, while CMP
is only used for sialic acid.
Page 164

The N-linked oligosaccharide has two physiological roles: it acts as the base for further
glycosylation, and it is used as a marker for error-checking of protein folding by the
calnexin-calreticulin system (fig. 13). Once the oligosaccharide is attached to the new
polypeptide, the process of further glycosylation begins with the action of a glucosidase and that removes two of the glucoses. The last glucose is necessary to help the
glycoprotein dock with either calnexin or calreticulin (fig.13, step 1 or 4), which are
very similar proteins that have a slow glucosidase activity and associate with a protein
disulfide isomerase-like activity. The major difference is that calreticulin is soluble in
the ER lumen while calnexin is bound to the ER membrane. Both temporarily hold
onto the glycoprotein giving it time to (re)fold and possibly rearrange disulfide bonds,
then it removes the glucose, allowing the glycoprotein to continue on its way. Importantly, if the glycoprotein has not been completely folded (step 2a), the enzyme UDPglucose:glycoprotein glucosyltransferase (GT) recognizes it and adds back the glucose
residue (step 3), forcing it to go through the calreticulin/calnexin cycle again in hopes
of folding correctly this time. If it has been folded correctly (step 2b), it can be recognized by ER-a-1,2-mannosidase, which removes a mannose, completing the glycosylation modifications in the ER.

The protein disulfie isomerase-like activity comes from ERp57,
which is technically a thiol oxidoreductase, but is functionally
similar to PDI.

Cytosol

ER
Calnexin

Incompletely
folded
polypeptide

Glucosidase II

1
Incompletely
folded

4

(return to cycle)

2a

2b

Folded correctly

(to vesicle for transport)

Glucosyltransferase

3

UDP

UDP-

Figure 13. N-glycosylation can be used in error-checking.

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Page 165

Most glycoproteins continue with oligosaccharide remodeling once they have been
moved from the ER to the Golgi apparatus by vesicular transport. There, a variety of
glycosidases and glycosyltransferases prune and add to the oligosaccharide. Although
the glycosylation is consistent and stereotyped for a given protein, it is still unclear
exactly how the glycosylation patterns are determined.
ER lumen

Asn-X-Ser/Thr

Asn-X-Ser/Thr
= N-Acetylglucosamine
= Mannose
= Glucose

1

= Galactose
= Sialic acid

Transport to Golgi body

Two common antibiotics, tunicamycin and bacitracin, can target
N-linked glycosylation, although their antibiotic properties come
from disrupting formation of bacterial cell walls. Tunicamycin is
an analogue of UDP-GlcNAc, and inside eukaryotic cells can disrupt the initial oligosaccharide formation by blocking the initial
GlcNAc addition to the dolichol-phosphate. Since it can be transported into eukaryotic cells, tunicamycin is not clinically useful
due to its toxicity. Bacitracin, on the other hand, is a small cyclic
polypeptide that binds to dolichol-PP preventing its dephosphorylation to dolichol-P, which is needed to build the oligosaccharide.
Bacitracin is not cell-permeable, so even though it has similar
activity to tunicamycin on bacteria by disrupting extracellular
glycolipid synthesis needed for cell wall formation, it is harmless
to eukaryotes and thus is a useful therapeutic antibiotic.

Cytosol

Golgi lumen

Asn-X-Ser/Thr

2

Asn-X-Ser/Thr

Asn-X-Ser/Thr

Asn-X-Ser/Thr

3

5
4

UDP UDP

UDP

UDP

and/or

CMP

CMP

Figure 14. N-linked glycosylation can continue in the Golgi. Sugars may be added and removed in different
patterns by glycosyltransferases resident in the Golgi.

O-linked Protein Glycosylation takes place entirely in the Golgi
O-linked glycoproteins begin their glycosylation with the action of the Golgi-specific
enzyme, GalNAc transferase, which attaches an N-acetylgalactosamine to the hydroxyl
group of a serine or threonine. The determination of which residue to glycosylate appears to be directed by secondary and tertiary structure as previously mentioned, and
often occurs in dense clusters of glycosylation. Despite being fairly small additions (usu.
<5 residues), the combined oligosaccharide chains attached to an O-linked glycoprotein
can contribute over 50% of the mass of a glycoprotein. Two of the better known Olinked glycoproteins are mucin, a component of saliva, and ZP3, a component of the
zona pellucida (which protects egg cells). These two examples also illustrate a key
property of glycoproteins and glycolipids in general: the sugars are highly hydrophilic
and hold water molecules to them, greatly expanding the volume of the protein.

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Page 166

UDP

UDP
Ser

CMP
Ser

Ser

1

CMP

3

= N-Acetylgalactosamine

UDP

UDP

GDP
Ser

= Galactose

Ser

2

GDP
Ser

4

= Sialic acid

= Fucose

Figure 15. O-linked glycosylation in the
Golgi involves attachment of only a few
sugars to serine or threonine.

Interestingly, this protective waterlogged shell can mask parts of the protein core. In
the case of the cell adhesion molecule, NCAM, which is a highly polysialylated glycoprotein at certain developmental stages and locations, and unglycosylated in others,
the naked protein can be recognized as an adhesive substrate while the glycosylated
protein can be recognized as a repulsive substrate to other cells. Even in highly glycosylated proteins though, the sugar residues often acts as recognition sites for other cells.
For instance, the zona pellucida is very important as a physical barrier that protects the
egg, but glycosylated ZP3 also acts as a sperm receptor.

...to endosome,
lysosome, or vacuole

clathrin

trans Golgi

Vesicular Transport
In addition to protein processing, the ER and Golgi also take care of some types of
protein transport. Vesicles (membrane-bound bubbles, essentially) pinch off from the
ER, Golgi, and other membranous organelles, carrying with them whatever soluble molecules were inside the fluid that was enclosed as well as any molecules embedded in
that section of membrane. These vesicles then catch a ride on a molecular motor such
as kinesin or myosin, and travel along the cytoskeleton until they dock at the appropriate destination and fuse with the target membrane or organelle. In general, vesicles
move from the ER to the cis-Golgi, from the cis- to the medial Golgi, from the medial to
the trans- Golgi, and from the trans-Golgi to the plasma membrane or other compartments. Although most movement is in this direction, there are also vesicles that move
back from the Golgi to the ER, carrying proteins that were supposed to stay in the ER
(e.g. PDI) and were accidentally scooped up within a vesicle.

medial Golgi

cis Golgi
KDEL receptor
ERGIC
COP I

= transport cargo
= glycosylation enzymes

The formation of vesicles is dependent on coat proteins that will, under proper conditions, self-assemble into spherical cages. When associated with transmembrane proteins, they can pull the attached membrane along into a spherical shape also. The
major types of coat proteins used in vesicle formation are COPII, COPI, and clathrin.
Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

COP II

rough ER

ribosome

Figure 16. Vesicles bud from the endoplasmic reticulum and merge to form ERGIC,
which matures into the cis Golgi, then the medial Golgi, and finally the trans Golgi.
Vesicles may also bud from any of these other compartments to other organelles
or to the plasma membrane.

Page 167

COPII coat proteins form the vesicles that move from ER to Golgi. COPI coat proteins
are used between parts of the Golgi apparatus as well as to form vesicles going from
the Golgi back to the ER. Finally, clathrin is used to form vesicles leaving the Golgi for
the plasma membrane as well as for vesicles formed from the plasma membrane for
endocytosis.

A

B

Clathrin

Light chain
Heavy chain

C

Light chain

AP2 complex

Golgi lumen

Heavy chain

Cargo receptor proteins

Figure 17. Clathrin. (A) clathrin binds to adapter proteins which are bound to transmembrane cargo receptors, linking the membrane with the clathrin. (B) A single clathrin triskelion is composed of three heavy
chains and three light chains. (c) The triskelions self-assemble into a roughly spherical construct without the
need for any additional energy or enzymes.

From the late 1990’s, there has been debate about the origins
and stability of the Golgi apparatus. The two primary competing models, both of which are described in many textbooks prior
to 2006, were the stable compartment model and the cisternal
maturational model. According to the older stable compartment
model, the cis, medial, and trans Golgi are each permanent structures with particular characteristics (lumenal enzymes, pH, etc).
Proteins are shuttled from cis to medial to trans compartments
in sequence. The cisternal maturation model, on the other hand,
posits that cis Golgi compartments actually mature into medial
Golgi, which then mature into trans Golgi - “maturation” being
accomplished by import and export of specific proteins characteristic of a particular compartment. Although there was some
evidence on either side of the argument, visual demonstration
(fluorescent labeling of early- and late- Golgi specific proteins)
of cisternal maturation in 2006 (Losev, et al, Nature 441: 939-40)
confirmed that model.

Clathrin (fig. 17) is the best described of the three, and the vesicular coats are made from
arrangements of clathrin triskelions (from Gk. meaning three-legged). Each triskelion
is composed of three heavy chains joined together at the C-terminus, and three light
chains, one associated with each heavy chain. The heavy chains of different triskelions
interact along the length of their heavy chain “legs” to create a very sturdy construct.
The light chains are unnecessary for vesicle formation, and are thought to help prevent
accidental interactions of clathrin molecules in the cytoplasm.
There is significant similarity between the vesicle formation mechanisms using these
different coat proteins, beginning with the recruitment of ARF1 (ARF stands for ADP
ribosylation factor, which has nothing to do with its function here) to the membrane.
This requires the ARNO-facilitated exchange of a GTP for GDP (ARNO is ARF nucleotide
binding site opener). Once ARF1 has bound GTP, the conformational change reveals an
N-terminal myristoyl group which inserts into the membrane. Both COPI and clathrincoated vesicles use ARF1 and ARNO, but COPII uses similar proteins called Sar1p and
Sec12p.
The ARF1 (or Sar1p) is used to recruit adapter proteins that bind to the “tail” end of
membrane-bound receptor proteins. The business end of these receptors binds to cargo molecules that need to be packaged into the vesicle. The adapter proteins act as the
link between the membrane (through the receptors) and the coat proteins. For clathrin, the adapter proteins are AP1 for trans-Golgi-derived vesicles and AP2 for endocytic
Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Page 168

A. COP I

B-subcomplex

F-subcomplex

vesicles. For COPI vesicles, the
approximate homologues are
the b-, g-, d-, and z- COPs while
the COPII system uses Sec23p
and Sec24p.

Cargo receptor protein

All three types of vesicle coat proteins have the abiliy to spontaneously associate into
a spherical construct, but only the COPI and COPII coated vesicle also spontaneously
“pinch off” the membrane to release the vesicle from its originating membrane. Clathrin-coated vesicles require an external mechanism to release the vesicle (fig. 19). Once
the vesicle has almost completed, there
is still a small stalk or neck of mem- A
B
brane that connects the vesicle to the
membrane. Around this stalk, dynaminClathrin-coated
vesicle
GTP molecules aggregate in a ring/spiral
construction. Dynamin molecules are
globular GTPases that contract upon Dynamin
hydrolysis of GTP. When they associate
Cytosol
= GTP
= GDP
around the vesicle stalk, each dynamin
protein contracts, with the combined
Figure 19. Dynamin monomers, each of which is a GTeffect of constricting the stalk enough Pase, polymerizes around the neck of the vesicle. When
that the membrane pinches together, the GTP is hydrolyzed, the dynamin “noose” tightens
sealing off and releasing the vesicle from and pinches off the vesicle.
the originating membrane.

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

medial Golgi

Arf

Finally, the adapters link to the
actual coat proteins: clathrin,
a- or e- COP, Sec13p and Sec31p.
B. COP II
Sec13/31
What these proteins all have
in common is that spontaneously (i.e. without any requireGTP
ment for energy expenditure),
P
Sec23/24
GT
GTP
Sar1-GTP
they self-assemble into cage-like
spherical structures. Under the
electron microscope, the clathCargo receptor protein
ER lumen
rin-coated vesicles are more
Figure 18. COP coated vesicles.
sharply defined and the hexagonal and pentagonal shapes bounded by the clathrin subunits give the vesicle a “soccer
ball” look. COP coatamer-coated vesicles are much fuzzier in appearance under EM.
Golgi lumen

trans Golgi

cis Golgi

ER

= Glycerophospholipids

= Sphingolipids

= Other membrane lipids

Figure 20. Glycerophospholipids are made primarily in the ER. Although the ER
also makes the ceramide precursors for sphingolipids, the sphingolipids are made
only in the Golgi.

Although lipids and membranes were discussed in chapter 4, we
neglected to discuss the location of their syntheses in eukaryotes.
As fig. 20 indicates, the synthesis of certain types of lipids is segregated and exclusive. Glycerophospholipids are primarily formed
in the endoplasmic reticulum, although they are also made in
mitochondria and peroxisomes. In contrast, sphingolipids are not
made in the ER (though their ceramide precursors are) in mammals, the necessary enzymes are found in the lumen of the cis and
medial Golgi. There is evidence of anterograde and retrograde
vesicular traffic between the various Golgi and ER compartments,
which would theoretically indicate a redistribution of lipid types.
However, the sphingolipids tend to aggregate into lipid rafts and
seem to be more concentrated in anterograde-moving vesicles.

Page 169

The coat proteins come off shortly after vesicular release. For clathrin, the process
involves Hsc70, an ATPase. However, for COPI or COPII coated vesicles, hydrolysis of
the GTP on ARF/Sar1p appears to weaken the coat protein affinity for the adapters and
initiates uncoating. The GTPase activator is ARF GAP (or Sec23p) and is an integral part
of the COP I (or II) coat.
The vesicles carry two categories of cargo: soluble proteins and transmembrane proteins. Of the soluble proteins, some are taken up in the vesicle by virtue of being bound
to a receptor. Other proteins just happen to be in the vicinity and are scooped up as
the vesicle forms. Occasionally, a protein is taken up that was not supposed to be; for
example, PDI may be enclosed in a vesicle forming from the ER. It has little function
in the Golgi, and is needed in the ER, so what happens to it? Fortunately, PDI and
many other ER proteins have a C-terminal signal sequence, KDEL (Lysine-Aspartic AcidGlutamic Acid-Leucine), that screams “I belong in the ER.” This sequence is recognized
by KDEL receptors inside the Golgi, and binding of the KDEL proteins to the receptors
triggers vesicle formation to send them back to the ER.
Secretory vesicles have a special problem with soluble cargo. If the vesicle was to
rely simply on enclosing proteins within it during the formation process, it would
be difficult to get high concentrations of those proteins. Many secreted proteins are
needed by the organism quickly and in significant amounts, so there is a mechanism
in the trans Golgi for aggregating secretory proteins. The mechanism uses aggregating
proteins such as secretogranin II and chromogranin B that bring together the target
proteins in large concentrated granules. These granins work best in the trans Golgi
milieu of low pH and high Ca++, so when the vesicle releases its contents outside of the
cell, the higher pH and lower Ca++ breaks apart the aggregates to release the individual
proteins.

There is a consistent pH change during the maturation of the
Golgi, so that as we go from ER to Golgi, each compartment has a
progressively lower (more acidic) lumenal pH.

Finally, there is the question of targeting the vesicles. The vesicles are much less useful
if they are tossed on a molecular freight train and dropped off at random. Therefore,
there is a docking mechanism that requires a matching of the v-SNARE protein on the
vesicle’s cytoplasmic surface and the t-SNARE on the cytoplasmic surface of the target
membrane. Fusion of the vesicle to the membrane only proceeds if there is a match.
Otherwise, the vesicle cannot fuse, and will attach to another molecular motor to head
to another, hopefully correct, destination. This process is aided by tethering proteins
which initially make contact with an incoming vesicle and draw it close enough to the
target to test for SNARE protein interaction. Other proteins on the vesicle and target
membranes then interact and if the SNAREs match, can help to “winch” the vesicle into
the target membrane, whereupon the membranes fuse. An important rule of thumb to
understanding vesicular fusion and also the directionality of membrane proteins and
Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Page 170

A

B
v-SNARE

Vesicle

Vesicle
Tethering
proteins

t-SNARE

Twisting
SNARE
complex

Rab-GTP

Target membrane

Target membrane

C

Membranes joined - single compartment

Figure 21. Vesicles first interact with tethering proteins (A), which help bring the vesicle and target membranes close. SNAREs can then interact, and if they match, then they will begin to twist around each other,
ratcheting the two membranes closer as they twist.

lipids, is that the cytoplasmic-facing side of a membrane is always going to be facing
the cytoplasm. Therefore a protein that is eventually found on the outer surface of the
cell membrane will have been inserted into the lumenal surface of the ER membrane
to begin with.
More specifically, as a vesicle approaches the target membrane, the tethering protein
Rab-GTP, which is linked to the target membrane via a double geranylgeranyl lipid tail,
loosely associates with the vesicle and holds it in the vicinity of the target membrane
to give the SNARES a chance to work. The v-SNAREs and t-SNAREs now have the opportunity to interact and test for a match. Recently, the SNAREs have been renamed
R-SNAREs and Q-SNAREs, respectively, based on conserved arginine and glutamine residues. In addition to these two primary SNAREs, at least one other SNARE is involved,
together forming a bundle of four a-helices (four, not three, because at least in the best
studied example, one of the SNAREs is bent around so that two of its alpha-helical domains participate in the interaction. The four helices wrap around each other and it is
thought that as they do so, they pull the vesicle and the target membrane together.

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

The tetanus toxin, tetanospasmin, which is released by Clostridium tetani bacteria, causes spasms by acting on nerve cells, and
preventing neurotransmitter release. The mechanism for this is
that it cleaves synaptobrevin, a SNARE protein, so that the synaptic vesicles cannot fuse with the cell membrane. Botulinum
toxin, from Clostridium botulinum, also acts on SNAREs to prevent vesicle fusion and neurotransmitter release, although it targets different neurons and so has the opposite effect: tetanus is
caused by preventing the release of inhibitory neurotransmitters,
while botulism is caused by preventing release of excitatory neurotransmitters.

Page 171

Receptor-mediated Endocytosis
Just as there is vesicular traffic towards the plasma membrane, either for secretion or
for incorporation of membrane lipids or proteins, there can also be vesicular traffic
from the plasma membrane. Endocytosis is the process by which a coat protein (usually clathrin) on the cytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane, begins to polymerize a
coat that draws the membrane with it into a vesicle. However, instead of capturing a
bit of ER or Golgi lumen with it, the vesicle contains a little material from outside of
the cell. Sometimes endocytosis is initiated internally, perhaps to remove a particular
protein from the cell surface (for an example, see trailing edge dynamics in cell motility
in the next chapter), but often, the endocytosis is the result of a ligand binding to an
extracellular receptor molecule, leading to its activation and subsequent nucleation of
a clathrin assembly and vesicle formation.
There are many types of ligands: a nutrient molecule (usually on a carrier protein, as
in the examples below) or even an attacking virus which has co-opted the endocytic
mechanism to facilitate entry into the cell. The example depicted here is a classic
example: endocytosis of cholesterol (via low-density lipoprotein). This illustrates one
potential pathway that the receptors and their cargo may take. In the case of cholesterol, the carrier protein is broken down fully, although in the case of transferrin, a
serum protein that carries iron in the blood, the carrier protein is just recycled after
releasing its transferrin cargo. It is packaged into an exocytic vesicle headed back to
the cell surface.
Serum cholesterol is usually esterified and bound by LDL (low density lipoprotein),
which then floats about in the bloodstream until it meets up with an LDL receptor on
the surface of a cell. When the LDL binds to its receptor, the receptor is activated, and
a clathrin-coated vesicle forms around the LDL/receptor complex. LDL receptors tend
to aggregate in what are known as clathrin-coated pits — crater-like partial vesicles
that already have a small number of polymerized clathrin molecules. The vesicle forms
exactly as described previously for Golgi-derived clathrin vesicles: the clathrin selfassembles into a spherical vesicle, and dynamin pinches the vesicle off the cell membrane. This vesicle then fuses with an early endosome, which carries proton pumps
in its membrane, causing the environment inside the vesicle to acidify (~pH 6). This
acidification can cause conformational shifts in proteins that could, for example, lead
to a receptor releasing its ligand, as is the case here with LDL and LDL receptor. The
early endosome also functions as a sorting station: the receptor is re-vesicularized and
transported back to the plasma membrane. Meanwhile, the LDL is packaged into a different vesicle and heads off for further processing.

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

The endosomal proton pumps are ATP-driven, Mg++-dependent
V-type pump (as opposed to the F-type pump in the mitochondrial inner membrane). Structurally, the two are similar though,
and ATP hydrolysis drives the rotary unit, which then powers the
movement of protons across the membrane from cytoplasm into
endosome.

Page 172

LDL
ApoB
LDL receptor

Endocytosis

Clathrin

AP2

Cholesterol
CH3

H3C
CH3

CH3

CH3

Lysosome

AA

HO

CH3

H3C
CH3

CH3

Amino acid
Fatty acid

CH3

AA

Coated
vesicle

HO

CH3

H3C
CH3

AA

CH3

CH3

HO

Uncoating

Recycled
LDL receptor

Transport
vesicle

Late
endosome

Fusion

Early
endosome

Figure 22. Receptor-mediated endocytosis of cholesterol via low-density lipoprotein.

The endosomal vesicle with the LDL in it next fuses with another acidic, membranebound compartment. The lysosome, at pH ~5.0, is even more acidic than the endosome, and it also contains a large complement of acid hydrolases - hydrolytic enzymes
ranging across substrates (incl. proteases, lipases, glycosidases, nucleases) that operate
optimally in acidic conditions, and minimally in the neutral or slightly basic conditions
in the cytoplasm. In part, this is a safety mechanism — leakage of digestive enzymes
from the lysosome will not result in wholesale digestion of the cell because the enzymes have little or no activity in the cytoplasm. The lysosomal membrane, in addition
to having proton pumps to acidify the internal environment, also incorporates many
transporter proteins to aid in moving the digestion products of the acid hydrolases out
of the lysosome so that the cell can make use of the amino acids, sugars, nucleotides,
and lipids that result. Back to our example, that means that the cholesterol esters are
broken apart into individual cholesterol molecules, and the lipoprotein is broken down
into lipids and amino acids. Interestingly, these transporter proteins are not digested
by the lysosomal proteases because they are very heavily glycosylated, which shields
potential proteolytic sites from the proteases.
Since it depends greatly on the contents of the endosome(s) that fused with it, the size
and contents of lysosomes can vary greatly. In fact, the lysosome may also degrade
internal cellular components through the process of autophagy. Usually, this is initi-

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

Lysosomal enzymes are specifically tagged by a mannose-6-phosphate that is added in the cis Golgi. This is a two-step process
in which N-acetylglucosamine phosphotransferase adds a phospho-GlcNAc to a mannose residue, connecting via the phosphate
group, then a phosphodiesterase removes the GlcNAc, leaving
the mannose-6-P. This specifically targets lysosomal enzymes because they all have specific protein recognition sequences that
the phosphotransferase binds to before transferring the P-GlcNAc.
Although the lysosomal enzymes are tagged in the cis Golgi, they
do not sort until the trans Golgi, when mannose-6-P receptors
bind to the lysosomal enzymes and form lysosomal vesicles that
will bud off and travel to late endosomes and lysosomes to deliver their acid hydrolase payload. Again, the pH change is important: in the somewhat acidic (pH 6.5) environment of the trans
Golgi, the receptor binds the mannose-6-P-tagged enzymes, but in
the more acidic lysosome, the acid hydrolases are released to do
their work.
When one or more acid hydrolases do not function properly or
do not make it into the lysosome sue to improper sorting, the
result is incomplete digestion of the lysosomal contents. This in
turn leads to the formation of large inclusions of partially digested material inside the lysosomes. This accumulation of material
can be cytotoxic, and genetic disorders that affect the expression
or sorting of lysosomal hydrolases are collectively referred to as
lysosomal storage diseases. These fall into several categories depending on the types of molecules accumulated.
A common and easily treatable disease of glycosaminoglycan accumulation is Hurler’s disease, which can be effectively treated
and non-neurological effects even reversed by enzyme replacement therapy. Hurler’s others in its class affect a wide variety of
tissues because glycosaminoglycans are ubiquitous. On the other
hand, because the brain is enriched in gangliosides, lysosomal
storage diseases like Gaucher’s disease show defects primarily in
the CNS. Many lysosomal storage diseases have similar presentation: developmental abnormalities, esp. stunted bone growth,
lack of fine facial features, and neuromuscular weakness.

Page 173

ated under starvation conditions which lead to inhibition of mTor, and subsequent
expression of autophagic genes. These then interact with mitochondria and other cellular components, and promote the formation of a double-membraned autophagosome
around them. The origin of the membranes is unclear, although the ER is suspected.
Finally, the autophagosome fuses with a lysosome, and the acid hydrolases break down
the cell parts for energy. A variation on this called microautophagy can also occur, in
which the lysosome itself invaginates a bit of cytoplasmic material and internalizes an
intralysosomal vesicle that is then broken down.
Finally, it should be noted that the large vacuoles of plant cells are in fact specialized
lysosomes. Recall that vacuoles help to maintain the turgor, or outward water pressure
on the cell walls that lead to a rigid plant part rather than a limp, wilted one. One of
the ways in which this occurs is that the acid hydrolases inside the vacuole alter the osmotic pressure inside the vacuole to regulate the movement of water either in or out.
Another example of receptor-mediated endocytosis is the import of iron into a mammalian cell. As with serum cholesterol, iron is not generally imported into the cell by
itself. Instead, it is bound to apotransferrin, a serum protein that binds two Fe3+ ions.
Once it has bound the iron ions, the apotransferrin is now referred to as transferrin,
and it can be recognized and bound by transferrin receptors (TfR) located on the extracellular surface of cell membranes. This initiates receptor-mediated endocytosis just as
described above. However, in this case, the lysosome is not involved. As the transferrin
and transferrin receptor reach the early endosome, they do not dissociate, but rather
the Fe2+ releases from the transferrin, and then exits the endosome via DMT1, a divalent
metal transport protein to be used in heme groups or other complexes. This leaves the
apotransferrin-TfR complex, which is recycled back to the cell membrane via vesicle.
Once the vesicle fuses with the extracellular space, the acidity of the endosome is dissipated and the apotransferrin no longer binds to TfR. Apotransferrin can thus go back
to its duty of finding iron ions and bringing them back to the cell.

Chapter 11, Post-Translation, version 1.0

The most severe, I-cell disease (mucolipidosis type II) occurs when
nearly all lysosomal enzymes are missing in the fibroblasts of the
affected individual. There is severe developmental delay and early
growth failure, neuromuscular problems, and malformations in
early skeletal development. The severity of this disorder is due to
the almost complete lack of lysosomal enzymes, which is caused
by a deficiency of GlcNAc phosphotransferase. Without it, no enzymes are tagged for sorting to the lysosome.
Other relatively common disorders include Tay-Sachs and Niemann-Pick diseases. Tay-Sachs is caused by an accumulation of
gangliosides in the brain and is usually fatal by 5 years of age.
Niemann-Pick, on the other hand, may manifest as Type A with
an even shorter life expectancy, or as Type B, in which symptoms
are relatively minor. The major difference is that Type A patients
have very little (<5%) of their sphingomyelinase activity, while
Type B patients have only slightly less than normal (~90%) activity.

Page 174

Cytoskeleton :

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.

Structure and Movement

When a eukaryotic cell is taken out of its physiological context and placed in a plastic or glass
Petri dish, it is generally seen to flatten out to some extent. On a precipice, it would behave
like a Salvador Dali watch, oozing over the edge. The immediate assumption, particularly in
light of the fact that the cell is known to be mostly water by mass and volume, is that the cell
is simply a bag of fluid. However, the cell actually has an intricate microstructure within it,
framed internally by the components of the cytoskeleton.
As the name implies, the cytoskeleton acts much like our own skeletons in supporting the general shape of a cell. Unlike our skeletons though, the cytoskeleton is highly
dynamic and internally motile, shifting and rearranging in response to the needs of
the cell. It also has a variety of purposes beyond simply providing the shape of the
cell. Generally, these can be categorized as structural and transport. While all three
major components of the cytoskeleton perform each of these functions, they do not
do so equally, as their biophysical characteristics are quite different. With respect to
structure, at some point in the life of every cell, it must change shape, whether simply
increasing or decreasing in size, or a more drastic alteration like the super-elongated
form of neurons with axons, the cytoskeleton must be able to respond by dynamically
increasing and decreasing the size of the internal structures as needed. Structure also
applies to the relative position of internal cellular elements, such as organelles or proteins, to one another. In many highly specialized cells, the segregation of particular
structures within certain parts of the cell is crucial for it to function. Transport refers
to the movement of molecules and organelles within the cell as well as movement of
the cell as a whole. We just discussed intracellular movement of proteins and lipids by
way of vesicles in the last chapter. Those vesicles, as we will see in this chapter, are
not just floating from one place to another; they are moved purposefully and directionally along the cytoskeleton like cargo on highways or railroad tracks. With respect
to whole cell movement, this can range from paddling or swimming by single-celled
organisms to the stereotyped and highly coordinated crawling of many cells from their
point of origin to their eventual destination during the development of a metazoan
organism or the movement of fibroblasts to heal a cut in your skin.
Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Although the genes are not particularly well conserved, a combination of genetic similarity and protein structure have confirmed
the presence of prokaryotic proteins that are related to eukaryotic cytoskeletal proteins in both form and function. Compared
to the eukaryotic cytoskeleton, study of prokaryotic proteins is
very recent, and for a long time, there was an assumption that
prokaryotes did not have or need cytoskeletal architecture. FtsZ,
the bacterial equivalent of tubulin, was discovered in 1980 but
most of the work on it has occurred in the last decade. MreB is
an actin-like protein, first compared to actin in 1992, and crescentin, an intermediate filament class protein, was only described in
2003. For comprehensive review of prokaryotic cytoskeleton proteins, see Graumann, P.L., Ann. Rev. Microbiology 61:589-618, 2007.

Page 175

= Microtubules
= Intermediate Filaments
= Actin Filaments

Figure 1. Cytoskeletal element distribution in a prototypical eukaryotic cell. The purple ball is the nucleus.

The three major components of the cytoskeleton are microtubules, microfilaments, and
intermediate filaments. Each of these are polymers composed of repeating subunits in
specific arrangements. With just a quick glance (fig. 1), it is very clear that the intermediate filaments will likely play a significantly different role from either microtubules
or microfilaments. Because the IF’s are made of long fibrous subunits that coil around
one another to form the filament, there is clearly a great deal of contact (which facilitates formation of hydrogen bonds, aka molecular velcro™) between subunits providing great tensile strength. It is very difficult to break these subunits apart, and thus the
IF’s are primarily used for long-term or permanent load-bearing purposes. Looking at
the other two components of the cytoskeleton, one can see that with the globular instead of fibrous shape of the subunits, the maximum area of contact between subunits
is greatly limited (think of the contact area when you push two basketballs together),
making it easier to separate the subunits or break the microfilament or microtubule.
The cell can use this characteristic to its advantage, by utilizing these kinds of cytoskeletal fibers in dynamic situations where formation or destruction of intermediate
filaments would take far too long. We now address these three groups of cytoskeletal
elements in more detail.

Intermediate Filaments
“Intermediate filaments” is actually a generic name for a family of proteins (grouped
into 6 classes based on sequence and biochemical structure) that serve similar functions in protecting and shaping the cell or its components. Interestingly, they can even
be found inside the nucleus. The nuclear lamins, which constitute class V intermediate
filaments, form a strong protective mesh attached to the inside face of the nuclear
Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Most intermediate filaments fall between 50-100 kDa, including
keratins (40-67 kDa), lamins (60-70 kDa), and neurofilaments (62110 kDa). Nestin (class VI), found mostly in neurons, is an exception, at approximately 240 kDa.
Page 176

membrane. Neurons have neurofilaments (class IV), which help to provide structure for
axons — long, thin, and delicate extensions of the cell that can potentially run meters
long in large animals. Skin cells have a high concentration of keratin (class I), which
not only runs through the cell, but connects almost directly to the keratin fibers of
neighboring cells through a type of cellular adhesion structure called a desmosome
(described in the next chapter). This allows pressure that might be able to burst a single
cell to be spread out over many cells, sharing the burden, and thus protecting each
member. In fact, malformations of either keratins or of the proteins forming the desmosomes can lead to conditions collectively termed epidermolysis bullosa, in which the
skin is extraordinarily fragile, blistering and breaking down with only slight contact,
compromising the patient’s first line of defense against infection.
NH2

Monomer

COOH

Figure 2. Intermediate filaments
are composed of linear subunits
that wrap around each other and
interact very tightly.

Coiled-Coil Dimer

Tetramer

Structurally, as mentioned previously, all intermediate filaments start from a fibrous
subunit (fig. 2). This then coils around another filamentous subunit to form a coiled-coil
dimer, or protofilament. These protofilaments then interact to form tetramers, which
are considered the basic unit of intermediate filament construction. Using proteins
called plectins, the intermediate filaments can be connected to one another to form
sheets and meshes. Plectins can also connect the intermediate filaments to other parts
of the cytoskeleton, while other proteins can help to attach the IF cytoskeleton to the
cell membrane (e.g. desmoplakin). The most striking characteristic of intermediate filaments is their relative longevity. Once made, they change and move very slowly. They
are very stable and do not break down easily. They are not usually completely inert, but
compared to microtubules and microfilaments, they sometimes seem to be.

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Epidermolysis bullosa simplex is a collection of congenital diseases
caused by mutations to the keratin genes KRT5 or KRT14, or to the
plectin gene PLEC1. These mutations either weaken the polymerization of keratin into filaments, or the interaction between keratin filaments. This leads to the inability of each individual cell to
maintain structural integrity under pressure. Another type of EB,
junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB), is caused by mutations to
integrin receptors (b4, a6) or laminins. This includes JEB gravis or
Herlitz disease, which is the most severe, often leading to early
postnatal death. JEB is also related to dystrophic epidermolysis
bullosa (DEB) diseases such as Cockayne-Touraine, each of which
s due to a mutation in collagen type VII. The gene products involved in JEB and DEB are discussed in more detail in the next
chapter. They play a role in adhering the cells to the basememnt
membrane, and without them, the disorganization of the cells
leads to incomplete connections between the epidermal cells, and
therefore impaired pressure-sharing.
Some forms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease, the most common
inherited peripheral nerve disease, are also linked to mutations
of intermediate filament genes. This disease, also known as peroneal muscular atrophy or hereditary motor sensory neuropathy,
is a non-lethal degenerative disease primarily affecting the nerves
of the distal arms and legs. There is a broad variety of CMT types
and causes, the most common being malformations of Schwann
cells and the myelin sheath they form. CMT type 2 is characterized by malformations of the peripheral nerve axons, and is linked
to mutations of lamin A proteins and of light neurofilaments.
The causal mechanism has not yet been established; however,
the neurofilaments are significant elements in maintaining the
integrity of long axons.

Page 177

Actin Microfilaments
Microfilaments are also known as actin filaments, filamentous actin, and f-actin, and
they are the cytoskeletal opposites of the intermediate filaments. These strands are
made up of small globular actin (g-actin) subunits that stack on one another with relatively small points of contact. You might envision two tennis balls, one fuzzy and the
other covered in velcro hooks. Even if you push hard to mush them together, the area
of contact between the balls (i.e. the area available for H-bonding between subunits) is
fairly small compared to the overall surface area, or to the area of contact between IF
subunits. They will hold together, but they can also fall apart with relatively little force.
Contrast this with intermediate filaments, which might be represented as two ribbons
of velcro hooks or loops. Considerably more work is required to take them apart. Because there are fewer H-bonds to break, the microfilaments can be deconstructed very
quickly, making it suitable for highly dynamic applications.
Low G-actin Concentration

_

+

Figure 3. Actin microfilaments have a (+)
and (-) end. When the free (globular) actin concentration is low, actin is primarily added to the (+) end, and lost from the
(-) end. However at high levels of g-actin,
new monomers can potentially add onto
the filament from either end.

High G-actin Concentration

_

+

When the actin subunits come together to form microfilaments, they interact directionally. That is, subunits have a “top” and a “bottom”, and the top of one subunit
always interacts with the bottom of another. If we go to the “bottom”-most subunit
of a filament, the open end is called the minus (-) end, while the opposite end, which
incidentally sees more additive action, is called the plus (+) end. Microfilaments are also
said to have polarity, but again this is only in the sense of having directionality, and
has nothing to do with electrical charge. Individual microfilaments can exist, but most
microfilaments in vivo are twisted pairs. Unlike DNA; however, microfilament pairs are
not antiparallel: both strands have the same directionality.

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 178

The formation of filaments from g-actin is an ATP-dependent process, although not in
the conventional sense of utilizing the energy released in hydrolysis. Instead, the globular actin subunits will only bind with another g-actin subunit if it has first bound an
ATP. If the g-actin has bound ADP, then it must first exchange the ADP for ATP before
it can be added onto a filament. This alters the conformation of the subunit to allow
for a higher-affinity interaction. A short time later, hydrolysis of the ATP to ADP (with
release of Pi) weakens the affinity but does not directly cause dissolution of the subunit binding. The hydrolysis is brought about by the actin itself, which has this ATPase
enzymatic activity built in.
Although f-actin primarily exists as a pair of filaments twisted around each other, addition of new actin occurs by the addition of individual g-actin monomers to each filament (fig. 3). Accessory proteins can be used to help or hinder either the building or
breakdown of the filaments, but the primary mechanism is essentially self-regulating.
When free g-actin levels are high, elongation of actin filaments is favored, and when the
g-actin concentration falls, depolymerization of f-actin predominates. Under average
physiological conditions, though, what is often seen in actin microfilaments is an effect
called treadmilling. Since actin is mostly added onto one end but removed from the
other, the net effect is that any given actin monomer in a filament is effectively moving
from (+) end to (-) end even if the apparent length of the filament does not change.
In most cell types, the greatest concentration of actin-based cytoskeletal structures is
found in the periphery of the cell rather than towards the center. This fits well with
the tendency of the edges of the cell to be more dynamic, constantly adjusting to sense
and react to its environment. Clearly, the polymerization and depolymerization of actin filaments is much faster than for intermediate filaments. The big exception to the
actin-in-periphery rule is found in muscle cells. Actin filaments, and the myosin motor
proteins that work on them, are the basis for muscle cell contraction, and fill up most
of the muscle cells, not just the periphery. We will discuss the role of actin in both
types of cell movement later in the chapter.

Microtubules
Microtubules are made up of two equally distributed, structurally similar, globular
subunits: a and b tubulin. Like microfilaments, microtubules are also dependent on a
nucleotide triphosphate for polymerization, but in this case, it is GTP. Another similarity is that microtubules have a polarity in which the (-) end is far less active than the
(+) end. However, unlike the twisted-pair microfilaments, the microtubules are mostly

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Microtubule stability is temperature-dependent: if cooled to 4°C,
microtubules fall apart into ab-tubulin heterodimers. Warmed
back up to 37°C, the tubulin repolymerizes if there is GTP available.

Page 179

found as large 13-stranded (each strand is called a protofilament) hollow tube structures. Also, the a and b tubulin used for building the microtubules not only alternate,
but they are actually added in pairs. Both the a-tubulin and b-tubulin must bind to GTP
to associate, but once bound, the GTP bound to a-tubulin does not move. On the other
hand, GTP bound in the b-tubulin may be hydrolyzed to GDP. GDP-bound ab-dimers
will not be added to a microtubule, so similar to the situation with ATP and g-actin,
if the tubulin has GDP bound to it, it must first exchange it for a GTP before it can be
polymerized. Although the affinity of tubulin for GTP is higher than the affinity for
GDP, this process is usually facilitated by a GEF, or guanine nucleotide exchange factor.
As the signal transduction chapter will show in more detail, this type of nucleotide exchange is a common mechanism for activation of various biochemical pathways.
Figure 4. Microtubules exhibit dynamic instability.
GTP-bound ab-tubulin dimers are added onto the microtubule. Once the GTP is
hydrolyzed, the conformational shift strains the microtubule, which will tend
to break apart unless new
tubulin dimers are added to
stabilize the structure.

GTP

GTP

GTP GTP GTP
GTP GTP
GTP GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
G
P
T
P
GT
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GDPGTP TP
GTP
G
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDPGDP GDP GDP GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDPGDP GDP GDP GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP GDP GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDPGDP GDP GDP GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDPGDP GDP GDP GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP GDP GDP

GDP GDP
GDP
GDP GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP GDP GDP GDP
GDP
GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

DP
GDP G

GDP GDP

GDP GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP GDP

GDP GDP
GDP GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP GDP

GDP

GDP GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP GDP

GDP GDP GDP
GDP

GDP GDP

GDP

GDP GDP

GDP

GDP GDP

GDP GDP
GDP
GDP

GD

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

P

GDP

GDP
GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP GDP

GDP

GDP
GDP

P

GDP

GDP

GD

GD

P

GDP
P

GD

GDP GDP

GDP GDP
GDP GDP
GDP GDP

GDP

GDP
GDP

P

GD

GDP

GDP
P
GD
GDP GDP GDPGDPGDP
GDP

GDP
GDP GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP GDP GDP
GDP
GDP

GDP GDP GDP

GDP
GDP

GDP GDP GDP

GDP
GDP

GDP GDP GDP

GDP

GD

P

GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP
GDP

Again like actin, the tubulin itself has enzymatic activity, and over time, the GTPase
activity hydrolyzes the GTP to GDP and phosphate. This changes the attachment between b-tubulin of one dimer and the a-tubulin of the dimer it is stacked on because
the shape of the subunit changes. Even though it isn’t directly loosening its hold on the
neighboring tubulin, the shape change causes increased stress as that part of the microtubule tries to push outward. This is the basis of a property of microtubules known
as dynamic instability. If there is nothing to stabilize the microtubule, large portions of
it will fall apart. However, as long as new tubulin (which will have GTP bound) is being added at a high enough rate to keep a section of low-stress “stable”-conformation
microtubule (called the GTP cap) on top of the older GDP-containing part, then it stabilizes the overall microtubule. When new tubulin addition slows down, and there is
only a very small or nonexistent cap, then the microtubule undergoes a catastrophe
Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 180

in which large portions rapidly break apart. Note that this is a very different process
than breakdown by depolymerization, which is the gradual loss of only a few subunits
at a time from an end of the microtubule. Depolymerization also occurs, and like with
actin, is determined partially by the relative concentrations of free tubulin and microtubules.
From a physical standpoint, the microtubule is fairly strong, but not very flexible. A
microfilament will flex and bend when a deforming force is applied (imagine the filament anchored at the bottom end standing straight up, and something pushing the tip
to one side). The microtubule in the same situation will bend only slightly, but break
apart if the deforming force is sufficient. There is, of course, a limit to the flexibility of
the microfilament and eventually, it will also break. Intermediate filaments are slightly
less flexible than the microfilaments, but can resist far more force that either microfilaments or microtubules.

Microtubule Organizing Centers
Microtubules, like microfilaments, are dynamic structures, changing in length and interactions to react to intra- and extra-cellular changes. However, the general placement of microtubules within the cell is significantly different from microfilaments,
although there is some overlap as well as interaction. Microfilaments do not have
any kind of global organization with respect to their polarity. They start and end in
many areas of the cell. On the other hand, almost all microtubules have their (-) end
in a perinuclear area known as the MTOC, or microtubule organizing center and they
radiate outward from that center. Since the microtubules all radiate outward from
the MTOC, it is not surprising that they are concentrated
more centrally in the cell than the microfilaments which, as
mentioned above, are more abundant around the periphery
of the cell. In some cell types (primarily animal), the MTOC
contains a structure known as the centrosome. This consists of a centriole (two short barrel-shaped microtubulebased structures positioned perpendicular to each other)
and a poorly defined concentration of pericentriolar material (PCM). The centriole is composed of nine fibrils, all
connected to form a cylinder, and each also connected by
Figure 5. An electron micrograph
radial spokes to a central axis. The electron micrograph depicting the cross-section of
in figure 5 shows a cross-section of a centriole. In it, each a centriole in an embryonic
brain cell. L. Howard and M.
fibril is shown to actually be a fused triplet of microtubules. mouse
Marin-Padilla, 1985
Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Inhibition of g-tubulin function by antibody blocking, RNA interference of expression, and gene knockout confirm that without
g-tubulin function, the microtubule structures did not form. In
addition, it appears to be play roles in coordination of late mitosis
(anaphase onwards).

Page 181

However, in each triplet, only one is a complete microtubule (designated the A tubule), while the B and C tubules
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP GTP
GTP
do not form complete tubes (they share a wall with the A
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
and B tubules, respectively). Interestingly, the centrioles
GTP GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
do not appear to be connected to the cellular microtubule
GTP
GTP
GTP GTP
GTP
network. However, whether there is a defined centrosome
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
GTP
or not, the MTOC region is the point of origin for all microγ
GTP
γ γ
γ γ
tubule arrays. This is because the MTOC contains a high
γ γ
γ γ γ γ
concentration of g-tubulin. Why is this important? With all
of the cytoskeletal elements, though it is most pronounced
Figure 6. g-tubulin ring com- with microtubules, the rate of nucleation, or starting a miplex facilitates microtubule crotubule is significantly slower than the rate of elongating
nucleation.
an existing structure. Since it is the same biochemical interaction, the assumption is that the difficulty lies in getting the initial ring of dimers
into position. The g-tubulin facilitates this process by forming a g-tubulin ring complex
that serves as a template for the nucleation of microtubules (fig. 6). This is true both
in animal and fungal cells with a single defined MTOC, as well as in plant cells, which
have multiple, dispersed sites of microtubule nucleation.
GTP

GTP

GTP GTP GTP GTP
GTP
GTP

Transport on the Cytoskeleton
While it can be useful to think of these cytoskeletal structures as analogous to an animal skeleton, perhaps a better way to remember the relative placement of the microtubules and microfilaments is by their function in transporting intracellular cargo from
one part of the cell to another. By that analogy, we might consider the microtubules
to be a railroad track system, while the microfilaments are more like the streets. By
the same analogy, we can suggest that the microtubule network and microfilament
network are connected at certain points so that when cargo reaches its general destination by microtubule (rail), then it can be taken to its specific address by microfilament. Let’s extend this analogy a bit further. If the microtubules and microfilaments
are the tracks and streets, then what are the trains and trucks? Ah, an astute question,
Grasshopper. On the microtubules, the “trains” are one of two families of molecular
motors: the kinesins and the dyneins.
We can generalize somewhat and say that the kinesins drive towards the (+) end (toward periphery of cell) while the dyneins go toward the (-) end (toward the MTOC). On
actin microfilaments, the molecular motors are proteins of the myosin family. At this
point, the analogies end, as the functioning of these molecular motors is very different
Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 182

from locomotion by train or truck. Finally, one might question the biological need for
such a transport system. Again, if we analogize to human transport, then we could say
that transport via simple diffusion is akin to people carrying packages randomly about
the cell. That is to say, the deliveries will eventually be made, but you wouldn’t want
to count on this method for time-critical materials. Thus a directed, high-speed system
is needed to keep cells (particularly larger, eukaryotic cells) alive.

= Microtubules
= Actin Filaments
= Myosin V

= Dynein

Although this type of transport occurs in all eukaryotic cells, a
particularly well-studied case is axonal transport (also called axoplasmic transport) in neurons. Here, the transport of materials
from the cell body (soma) to the tips of the axons can sometimes traverse very long distances up to several meters in larger
animals, and must do so in a timely manner. Axonal transport
is generally classified as anterograde (from soma to axon terminal) or retrograde (from terminals back). The types of material
transported in these two directions is very different: much of
the anterograde transport is protein building blocks for extending the axon or synaptic vesicles containing neurotransmitters;
retrograde transport is mostly endocytic vesicles and signaling
molecules. Axonal transport is also categorized as fast and slow.
Slow transport is primarily the movement of proteins directly
bound to the motors, and they can move from from 100 mm per
day (SCa, slow component a) up to 3mm/day (SCb). In comparison, fast transport is generally movement of vesicles, and can vary
from 50 to 400 mm/day. The mechanism of slow transport had
been debated for over a decade until 2000, when direct visualization of fluorescently labeled neurofilaments in transport showed
that the actual movement of the proteins was very similar to the
movement in fast axonal transport, but there were many pauses
in the transport, a “stop and go” mechanism rather moving from
source to destination continuously.

= Kinesin
= Vesicle

Figure 7. Transport on microtubules and microfilaments.

All of the kinesins and dyneins have a few key commonalities. There is a catalytic energy-releasing “head” connected to a hinge or neck region allowing the molecule to flex
or “step”, and there is a cargo-carrying tail beyond that (fig. 8). The head of a kinesin
or dynein catalyzes the hydrolysis of ATP, releasing energy to change its conformation
relative to the neck and tail of the molecule, allowing it to temporarily release its grip
on the microtubule, swivel its “hips” around to plant itself a “step” away, and rebind to
the microtubule (fig. 9). On the actin microfilaments, the myosins, of which there are
also many types (some depicted in fig. 10) are the molecular motors. Their movement
is different from dyneins and kinesins, as will be described in the next section, but also
uses the energy of ATP hydrolysis to provide energy for the conformational changes
needed for movement. We have introduced the motors, but considering the enormous
diversity in the molecules that need to be transported around a cell, it would be imposChapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 183

sible for the motors to directly bind to all of them. In fact, the motors bind to their
cargo via adapter molecules that bind the motor on one side, and a cargo molecule or
vesicle on the other. Further examination of the cargo and the routing of the cargo by
address markers (SNAREs) was discussed in the vesicular transport chapter.
Figure 8. Kinesin (A) and Dynein (B) are
motor proteins that move along microtubules. Generally, kinesins move to
the (+) end while dyneins move to the
(-) end. Their motor function requires
ATP hydrolysis. ATP binding sites are
marked in white.

A
Heavy Chain

ATP

Light Chain

ATP

ATP

Heavy Chain

B

ATP

Intermediate Chain

Figure 9. A cargo vesicle (yellow)
can be simultaneously bound by
dynein (green) and kinesin (blue)
via adapter proteins. This top side
also depicts the movement of the
kinesin, in which binding of ATP
causes one “foot” to release, and
hydrolysis of ATP causes the molecule to swivel the other foot in
front.

Light Chain

+

_

Figure 10. Selected Myosins. (A) Type I myosin, primarily for binding membranes to f-actin, including
endocytic vesicles. (B) Type II myosin, binds f-actin
on both ends to slide filaments against each other.
(C) Type V myosin, used in vesicular transport. (D)
Type VI myosin, used in endocytosis. (E) Type XI
myosin, a fast myosin used in cytoplasmic streaming in plant cells.

A

B

C

D

E

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 184

Actin - Myosin Structures in Muscle
The motor proteins that transport materials along the acting microfilaments are similar in some ways, such as the globular head group that binds and hydrolyzes ATP, yet
different in other ways, such as the motion catalyzed by the ATP hydrolysis. Much of
the f-actin and myosin in striated and cardiac muscle cells is found in a peculiar arrangement designed to provide a robust contractile response over the entire length of
the cell. The sarcomere is an arrangement of alternating fibers of f-actin (also known
as “thin fibers” based on their appearance in electron micrographs) and myosin II (or
“thick fibers”). Although we do not normally think of the motor protein as a fiber, in
this case the tails of the myosin II molecules intertwine to form a continuous fiber of
myosin molecules. As the contractile cycle proceeds, the myosin molecules grip the
adjacent actin fibers, and move them. In fig. 11, you can see that a sarcomere is constructed so that the stationary myosin fibers are located centrally, with two parallel
sets of actin fibers interspersed between the myosin fibers, to the left and the right
of the center. Note that the actin fibers do not cross the center line, and that at the

M line
Z
line

H zone
I band

A band

I band

Z
line

Figure 11. Sarcomere. Myosin II is depicted as in fig. 9, but here entwined with other myosins to form the
thick filament. They are supported and anchored by titin (shown as long tangled orange ribbons). The myosin heads act on the actin filaments (blue), pulling them towards each other in a contractile movement.

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Figure 12. Human skeletal muscle is organized into sarcomeres. The dark Z
lines are a clear reference point in comparing this to diagram in fig.11. This electron micrograph placed in the public domain by L. Howard.

Page 185

center, the myosin molecules switch orientation. The physiological effect of this is that
the actin filaments are all pulled inwards toward the center of the sarcomere. The
sarcomere in turn, is merely one of many connected together to form a myofibril. The
myofibrils extend the length of the muscle cell.
When the myosin head is in its resting state, it is tightly attached to the actin filament.
In fact, rigor mortis occurs in dead animals because there is no more ATP being made,
and thus the sarcomeres are locked into place. Rigor begins approximately 2-3 hours
after death in humans, after reserves of ATP are depleted. When the body relaxes again
in about 3 days, it is due to the decomposition and breakdown of the actin and myosin

OK, maybe you’ve watched CSI or Bones, etc enough to already know
this, but pretty neat nonetheless, right?

Ca2+
Ca2+

Ca2+

ATP

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

ATP

ADP

Ca2+
Ca2+

Ca2+

Ca2+

Pi

ADP
ADP Pi

Figure 12. The myosin power stroke. Myosin can only attach to f-actin if there Ca++ available to bind troponin
(green) and move tropomyosin (yellow) out of the binding groove. When ATP binds to the myosin head, it
releases the f-actin. Hydrolysis of the ATP leads to cocking of the myosin head (moving it relative to the
f-actin). As Pi leaves the myosin head, it reattaches to the f-actin, but slightly displaced from its original
binding site. ADPis then released and the myosin undergoes a power stroke in which it springs back to its
original position, moving the f-actin along with it.

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 186

proteins. However, while they are still living animals, ATP is generally available, and it
can bind to the myosin head, causing it to lose affinity for the f-actin, and let go (fig.
12). At this point, no significant movement has occurred. Once the ATP is hydrolyzed
though, the myosin head can reattach to the f-actin a little further down the filament
than it had originally. The energy released is stored in the neck region. The ADP and Pi
are still attached to the myosin head as well. The next step is for the Pi to drop off the
myosin, leading to the power stroke. The neck of the myosin swivels around, leading
to a translocation of the head by approximately 10 nm for myosin II. The distance of
translocation varies depending on the type of myosin, but it is not yet clear whether
the length of the neck is proportional to the displacement of the head. Finally, the ADP
drops off the myosin head, increasing the affinity of the head for the f-actin.
The sarcomere structure described in the first paragraph was incomplete in order to
place the major players clearly in their roles. There are other proteins in the sarcomere
with important structural and regulatory functions. One of the key regulatory components is tropomyosin. This is a fibrous protein that lies in the groove of an actin
microfilament and blocks access to the myosin binding site. Tropomyosin attaches to
the microfilament in conjunction with a multi-subunit troponin complex. When Ca++ is
available, it can bind to troponin-C, leading to a conformational change that shifts the
position of tropomyosin to reveal the myosin binding site. This is the primary point of
control for muscle contraction: recall that intracellular Ca++ levels are kept extremely
low because its primary function is in intracellular signaling. One way that the Ca++ levels are kept that low is to pump it into a reservoir, such as the endoplasmic reticulum.

Low Ca++ in cytoplasm

Ca++ released from SR
binds to troponin-C

Fig. 13. In low Ca++ conditions, tropomyosin (yellow line) is held in the
myosin-binding groove of f-actin (blue) by a tripartite troponin complex
(light green). Once Ca++ levels increase, it can bind to troponin-C, causing
a conformational shift that moves the tropomyosin out of the way so that
myosin (orange) can bind the actin microfilaments.

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 187

In muscle cells, there is a specialization of the ER called the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR)
that is rich in Ca++ pumps and Ca++. When a signal is sent from a controlling nerve cell
to the muscle cell, it causes a depolarization of the muscle cell membrane. This consequently depolarizes a set of membranes called the transverse tubules (T-tubules) that
lie directly on parts of the sarcoplasmic reticulum. There are proteins on the t-tubule
surface that directly interact with a set of Ca++ channel proteins, holding the channel
closed normally. When the t-tubule is depolarized, the proteins change shape, which
changes the interaction with the Ca++ channels on the SR, and allows them to open.
Ca++ rushes out of the SR where it is available to troponin-c. Troponin-C bound to Ca++
shifts the tropomyosin away from the actin filament, and the myosin head can bind to
it. ATP can bind the myosin head to start the power stroke cycle, and voila, we have
controlled muscle cell contraction.
In addition to the “moving parts”, there are also more static, structural, proteins in
the sarcomere (fig. 11). Titin is a gigantic protein (the largest known, at nearly 3 MDa),
and can be thought of as something of a bungee cord tether to the myosin fiber. Its
essential purpose is to prevent the forces generated by the myosin from pulling the
fiber apart. Titin wraps around the myosin fiber and attaches at multiple points, with
the most medial just near the edge of the H zone. At the Z-line, titin attaches to a
telethonin complex, which attach to the Z-disk proteins (antiparallel a-actinin). Titin
also interacts with obscurin in the I-band region, where it may link myofibrils to the
SR, and in the M-band region it can interact with the Ca++-binding protein calmodulin-1
and TRIM63, thought to acts as a link between titin and the microtubule cytoskeleton.
There are multiple isoforms of titin from alternative splicing, with most of the variation
coming in the I-band region.

The SR is a specialization of part of the endoplasmic reticulum,
and contains a high concentration of Ca++ ions because the SR
membrane is embedded with Ca++ pumps (ATPases) to keep the
cytoplasmic concentration low and sequester the Ca++ ions inside the SR. This is regulated by phosphorylation and [Ca++] via
a regulatory protein such as phospholamban (in cardiac muscle).
Phospholamban is an integral membrane protein of the SR that
normally associates with and inhibits the Ca++ pump. However
when it is phosphorylated, or as cytoplasmic Ca++ levels rise, the
phospholamban releases from the Ca++ pump and allows it to
function.

Disturbances to the proper formation of the titin-based support
structure can be a cause of dilated cardiomyopathy, and from
that, congestive heart failure. Some 20-30% of cases of dilated
cardiomyopathy are familial, and mutations have been mapped to
the N-terminal region of titin, where the protein interacts with
telethonin. Defects in titin are also being investigated with respect to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and some types
of muscular dystrophy.

Of course in an actual muscle (fig. 14), what happens is that nerves grow into the
muscle and make synaptic connections with them. At these synaptic connections, the
nerve cell releases neurotransmitters such as acetylcholine (ACh), which bind to receptors (AChR) on the muscle cell. This then opens ion channels in the muscle cell membrane, triggering a voltage change across that membrane, which also happens to affect
the nearby membrane of the transverse tubules subsequently opening Ca++ channels in
the SR. The contraction of sarcomeres can then proceed as already described above.

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 188

Muscle
Neuron

Muscle Fiber

Myofibril

T-tubule

Sarcoplasmic reticulum

Sarcomere

Figure 14. The sarcomere in context. The sarcomere of figures 11 and 12 is one tiny contractile unit within
an array that forms a myofibril. The myofibril is one of many within a muscle cell, surrounded by the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a specialized extension of the ER that sequesters Ca++ until T-tubule excitation causes
its release.

Cytoskeletal Dynamics
In the early development of animals, there is a huge amount of cellular rearrangement and migration as the roughly spherical blob of cells called the blastula starts to
differentiate and form cells and tissues with specialized functions. These cells need
to move from their point of birth to their eventual positions in the fully developed
animal. Some cells, like neurons, have an additional type of cell motility - they extend
long processes (axons) out from the cell body to their target of innervation. In both
neurite extension and whole cell motility, the cell needs to move first its attachment
points and then the bulk of the cell from one point to another. This is done gradually,
and uses the cytoskeleton to make the process more efficient. The major elements in
cell motility are changing the point of forward adhesion, clearing of internal space by

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 189

myosin-powered rearrangement of actin microfilaments and the subsequent filling of
that space with microtubules.
For force to be transmitted, the membrane
Ankyrin
must be attached to the cytoskeleton. In
Band 3
fact, signaling (chap. 14) from receptors in
Spectrin
the membrane can sometimes directly in- Actin
duce rearrangements or movements of the
cytoskeleton via adapter proteins that con- Filamin
nect actin (or other cytoskeletal elements)
Glycophorin
to transmembrane proteins such as inte- Band 3
grin receptors. One of the earliest experimental systems for studies of cytoskeleton- Band 4.1
Adducin
membrane interaction was the erythrocyte
Spectrin
(red blood cell). The illustrations at right Actin
(fig. 15) show some of the interactions of
Figure
linkage
α-integrin 15. Membrane to microfilament β-integrin
an extensive actin microfilament network complexes
in erythrocytes involve spectrin.
Talin
with transmembrane proteins. Ankyrin and
Vinculinthe
spectrin are important linkage proteins between
the transmembrane proteins and
Actin
microfilaments. This idea of building a protein complex around the cytoplasmic side
of a transmembrane protein is ubiquitous, andα-actinin
scaffolding (linking) proteins are used
not only in connecting the extracellular substrate (via transmembrane protein) to the
cytoskeleton, but also to physically connect signaling molecules and thus increase the
speed and efficiency of signal transduction.
Accessory proteins to actin filaments and microtubules were briefly mentioned earlier.
Among other functions, they can control polymerization and depolymerization, form
bundles, arrange networks, and bridge between the different cytoskeletal networks.
For actin, the primary polymerization control proteins are profilin, which promotes
polymerization and thymosin b4, which sequesters g-actin. The minus end capping
proteins Arp 2/3 complex and tropomodulin, and the plus end capping proteins CapZ,
severin, and gelsolin can stabilize the ends of f-actin. Finally, cofilin can increase depolymerization from the (-) end.
Profilin has two activities that promote polymerization. First, it is a nucleotide exchange factor that removes ATP bound to g-actin, and replaces it with ADP. This
sounds counterintuitive, but keep reading through to the next paragraph. Second,
when bound to a g-actin, it increases the rate of addition to actin microfilaments. It
does so by binding to the end opposite the ATP-binding site, leaving that site and that
side open to binding both ATP and the (+) end of a microfilament. Profilin can be found
Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 190

both in the cytoplasm at large, and associated with phospholipids (PIP2) and membrane
proteins, to control such processes as leading edge remodeling of f-actin cytoskeletal
structures.
Thymosin b4 regulates microfilament assembly by controlling the available pool of gactin. We already stated that greater concentrations of g-actin can increase polymerization rates. However, because of the highly dynamic nature of the actin cytoskeleton,
the time constraints of degrading and producing new actin would prevent the fastresponse control necessary. Therefore, the optimal mechanism is to maintain a large
pool of g-actin monomers, but regulate its availability by tying it up with a sequestering protein - thymosin b4. Thymosin b4 has a 50x higher affinity for g-actin-ATP than for
g-actin-ADP, so here is where profilin comes back into the picture. Profilin exchanges
the ATP of a Tb4-g-actin-ATP complex for an ADP. The result is that the Tb4 releases the
g-actin-ADP, allowing it to enter the general pool for building up filaments.
Increased depolymerization and slowing or cessation of polymerization can gradually
break down f-actin structures, but what if there is a need for rapid breakdown? Two
of the capping proteins previously mentioned, gelsolin and severin, have an alternate
mode of action that can sever actin microfilaments at any point by binding alongside
an actin filament and altering the conformation of the subunit to which it is bound.
The conformational change forces the actin-actin interaction to break, and the gelsolin
or severin then remains in place as a (+) end capping protein.

Gelsolin is inhibited by the phospholipid PIP2. Phospholipase C,
which breaks down PIP2 can also increase cytosolic Ca++, which is
an activator of gelsolin. Thus it is possible to rapidly upregulate
gelsolin activity by PLC signaling.

On the microtubule side of things, due to dynamic instability, one might think that
a severing enzyme is not needed, but in fact, spastin and katanin are microtubulesevering proteins found in a variety of cell types, particularly neurons. There is also
a Tb4-like protein for tubulin: Op18, or stathmin, which binds to tubulin dimers (not
monomers), acting to sequester them and lower the working concentration. It is regulated by phosphorylation (which turns off its tubulin binding). Microtubule-associated
proteins MAP1, MAP2, and tau (t) each work to promote assembly of microtubules, as
well as other functions. MAP1 is the most generally distributed of the three, with tau
being found mostly in neurons, and MAP2 even more restricted to neuronal dendrites.
These and some other MAPs also act to stabilize microtubules against catastrophe by
binding alongside the microtubule and reinforcing the tubulin-tubulin interactions.

Mutations in spastin are linked to 40% of those spastic paraplegias distinguished by degeneration of very long axons. The severing ability of spastin appears to be required for remodeling of the
cytoskeleton in response to neuronal damage.

Tau has a complicated biomedical history. Its normal function is
clear - assembling, stabilizing, and linking microtubules. However, it is also found in hyperphosphorylated neurofibrillary tangles
that are associated with Alzheimer’s disease. A cause for Alzheimer’s is not yet known, so it is still unclear whether the tau protein
tangles are play a major role in any of the symptoms.

Finally, with respect to microfilament and microtubule accessory proteins, there are
the linkers. Some of the aforementioned MAPs can crosslink microtubules either into
parallel or mesh arrays, as can some kinesins and dyneins, although they are conventionally considered to be motor proteins. On the microfilament side, there are many
known proteins that crosslink f-actin, many of which are in the calponin homology
Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 191

domain superfamily, including fimbrin, a-actinin, b-spectrin, dystrophin, and filamin.
Although they all can bind to actin, the shape of the protein dictates different types of
interaction: for example, fimbrin primarily bundles f-actin in parallel to form bundles,
while filamin brings actin filaments together perpendicularly to form mesh networks.

FG Syndrome is a genetically linked disease characterized by mental retardation, enlarged head, congenital hypotonia, imperforate
anus, and partial agenesis of the corpus callosum. It has been
linked to mutations in several X chromosome genes, including
filamin A (FLNA, FLN1, located Xq28).

Cell Motility

Mutations in dystrophin, which is a major muscle protein of the
CD-domain superfamily, can result in Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy or the related but less severe Becker Muscular Dystrophy.
The most distinctive feature is a progressive proximal muscular
degeneration and pseudohypertrophy of the calf muscles. Onset
of DMD is usually recognized before age 3 and is lethal by age 20.
However, symptoms of BMD may not present until the 20s, with
good probability of long-term survival. Although it is primarily a
muscle-wasting disease, dystrophin is present in other cell types,
including neurons, which may explain a link to mild mental retardation in some DMD patients. Like FLNA, the dystrophin gene
is also located on the X chromosome (Xp21.2).

There are a number of ways in which a cell can move from one point in space to another. In a liquid medium, that method may be some sort of swimming, utilizing ciliary
or flagellar movement to propel the cell. On solid surfaces, those mechanisms clearly
will not work efficiently, and the cell undergoes a crawling process. In this section,
we begin with a discussion of ciliary/flagellar movement, and then consider the more
complicated requirements of cellular crawling.
Cilia and flagella, which differ primarily in length rather than construction, are microtubule-based organelles that move with a back-and-forth motion. This translates to “rowing” by the relatively short cilia, but in the longer flagella, the flexibility of the structure
causes the back-and-forth motion to be propagated as a wave, so the flagellar movement is more undulating or whiplike (consider what happens as you waggle a garden
hose quickly from side to side compared to a short piece of the same hose). The core
of either structure is called the axoneme, which is composed of 9 microtubule doublets
connected to each other by ciliary dynein motor proteins, and surrounding a central
core of two separate microtubules.
Central Microtubule
Nexin Bridge
(13 protofilaments)
This is known as the “9+2” formation,
although the nine doublets are not the
Microtubule Doublet
same as the two central microtubules. (13 + 10 protofilaments)
The A tubule is a full 13-protofilaments,
but the B tubule fused to it contains
only 10 protofilaments. Each of the
Dynein Arm
central microtubules is a full 13 protofilaments. The 9+2 axoneme extends
the length of the cilium or flagellum
from the tip until it reaches the base,
and connects to the cell body through
a basal body, which is composed of 9
microtubule triplets arrange in a short
barrel, much like the centrioles from
Central Sheath
Radial Spoke
Figure 16. Partial (cutaway) diagram of an axoneme, the
which they are derived.
PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

PDG

PDG

PDG

GDP

GDP

PDG

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

PDG

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

PDG

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

PDG

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

central bundle of cilia and flagella.

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 192

The ciliary dyneins provide the motor capability, but there are two other linkage proteins in the axoneme as well. There are nexins that join the A-tubule of one doublet
to the B-tubule of its adjacent doublet, thus connecting the outer ring. And, there are
radial spokes that extend from the A tubule of each doublet to the central pair of microtubules at the core of the axoneme. Neither of these has any motor activity. However,
they are crucial to the movement of cilia and flagella because they help to transform a
sliding motion into a bending motion. When ciliary dynein (very similar to cytoplasmic
dyneins but has three heads instead of two) is engaged, it binds an A microtubule on
one side, a B microtubule from the adjacent doublet, and moves one relative to the other. A line of these dyneins moving in concert would thus slide one doublet relative to
the other, if (and it’s a big “if”) the two doublets had complete freedom of movement.
However, since the doublets are interconnected by the nexin proteins, what happens
as one doublet attempts to slide is that it bends the connected structure instead (fig.
17). This bend accounts for the rowing motion of the cilia, which are relatively short, as
well as the whipping motion of the long flagella, which propagate the bending motion
down the axoneme.

This section refers only to eukaryotes. Some prokaryotes also
have motile appendages called flagella, but they are completely
different in both structure and mechanism. The flagella themselves are long helical polymers of the protein flagellin, and the
base of the flagellin fibers is connected to a rotational motor
protein, not a translational motor. This motor (fig. 18) utilizes ion
(H+ or Na+ depending on species) down an electrochemical gradient to provide the energy to rotate as many as 100000 revolutions
per minute. It is thought that the rotation is driven by conformational changes in the stator ring, nestled in the cell membrane.

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

Unattached
PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

Force Generation
PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

PDG PDG

Attached
via nexin

Force Generation

Figure 18. The bacteria flagellum is completely different from
eukaryotic flagella. It is moved by a rotary motor driven by
proton or Na+ ion flow down the electrochemical gradient. Illustration released to public domain by M.R. Villareal.

Figure 17. The nexin bridges connecting adjacent microtubule doublets transform
the sliding motion generated by the ciliary dynein into a bending motion.

Although we think of ciliary and flagellar movement as methods for the propulsion of
a cell, such as the flagellar swimming of sperm towards an egg, there are also a number of important places in which the cell is stationary, and the cilia are used to move
fluid past the cell. In fact, there are cells with cilia in most major organs of the body.
Several ciliary dyskinesias have been reported, of which the most prominent, primary
ciliary dyskinesia (PCD), which includes Kartagener syndrome (KS), is due to mutation
Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 193

of the DNAI1 gene, which encodes a subunit (intermediate chain 1) of axonemal (ciliary)
dynein. PCD is characterized by respiratory distress due to recurrent infection, and the
diagnosis of KS is made if there is also situs inversus, a condition in which the normal
left-right asymmetry of the body (e.g. stomach on left, liver on right) is reversed. The
first symptom is due to inactivity of the numerous cilia of epithelial cells in the lungs.
Their normal function is to keep mucus in the respiratory track constantly in motion.
Normally the mucus helps to keep the lungs moist to facilitate function, but if the mucus becomes stationary, it becomes a breeding ground for bacteria, as well as becoming
an irritant and obstacle to proper gas exchange.
Situs inversus is an interesting malformation because it arises in embryonic development, and affects only 50% of PCD patients because the impaired ciliary function causes
randomization of left-right asymmetry, not reversal. In very simple terms, during early
embryonic development, left-right asymmetry is due in part to the movement of molecular signals in a leftward flow through the embryonic node. This flow is caused by
the coordinated beating of cilia, so when they do not work, the flow is disrupted and
randomization occurs.
Other symptoms of PCD patients also point out the work of cilia and flagella in the
body. Male infertility is common due to immotile sperm. Female infertility, though
less common, can also occur, due to dysfunction of the cilia of the oviduct and fallopian
tube that normally move the egg along from ovary to uterus. Interestingly there is also
a low association of hydrocephalus internus (overfilling of the ventricles of the brain
with cerebrospinal fluid, causing their enlargement which compresses the brain tissue
around them) with PCD. This is likely due to dysfunction of cilia in the ependymal cells
lining the ventricles, and which help circulate the CSF, but are apparently not completely necessary. Since CSF bulk flow is thought to be driven primarily by the systole/
diastole change in blood pressure in the brain, some hypothesize that the cilia may be
involved primarily in flow through some of the tighter channels in the brain.

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 194

Cell crawling (fig. 19) requires A
Leading edge advancing
the coordinated rearrangement
of the leading edge microfilaActin polymerization
ment network, extending (by
both polymerization and slidCollagen substrate
Integrins
ing filaments) and then forming B
adhesions at the new forwardAdhesion of
Release of
most point. This can take the
leading edge
trailing edge
form of filopodia or lamellipodia,
and often both simultaneously.
Filopodia are long and very thin
C
Cell body motion
projections with core bundles of
parallel microfilaments and high
Internalization
of receptor
concentrations of cell surface
receptors. Their purpose is primarily to sense the environment.
Lamellipodia often extend be- Figure 19. Cells crawl by (a) extending the leading edge primarily
through remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton, (b) forming new
tween two filopodia and is more adhesive contacts at that leading edge while releasing adhesions
of a broad ruffle than a finger. to the rear, and (c) bulk internal movement forward to “catch
up” with the leading edge.
Internally the actin forms more
into meshes than bundles, and the broader edge allows for more adhesions to be made
to the substrate. The microfilament network then rearranges again, this time opening
a space in the cytoplasm that acts as a channel for the movement of the microtubules
towards the front of the cell. This puts the transport network in place to help move
intracellular bulk material forward. As this occurs, the old adhesions on the tail end
of the cell are released. This release can happen through two primary mechanisms:
endocytosis of the receptor or deactivation of the receptor by signaling/conformational
change. Of course, this oversimplification belies the complexities in coordinating and
controlling all of these actions to accomplish directed movement of a cell.
Once a cell receives a signal to move, the initial cytoskeletal response is to polymerize
actin, building more microfilaments to incorporate into the leading edge. Depending
on the signal (attractive or repulsive), the polymerization may occur on the same or
opposite side of the cell from the point of signal-receptor activation. Significantly, the
polymerization of new f-actin alone can generate sufficient force to move the membrane forward, even without involvement of myosin motors! Models of force generation are being debated, but generally start with the incorporation of new g-actin into
a filament at its tip; that is, at the filament-membrane interface. Even if that might
technically be enough, in a live cell, myosins are involved, and help to push and arrange
filaments directionally in order to set up the new leading edge. In addition, some
Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

One model of microfilament force generation, the Elastic Brownian Ratchet Model (Mogilner and Oster, 1996), proposes that due
to Brownian motion of the cell membrane resulting from continuous minute thermal fluctuation, the actin filaments that push
out towards the edges of the membrane are flexed to varying
degrees. If the flex is large enough, a new actin monomer can fit
in between the membrane and the tip of the filament, and when
the now longer filament flexes back, it can exert a greater push
on the membrane. Obviously a single filament does not geneate
much force, but the coordinated extension of many filaments can
push the membrane forward.
Page 195

filaments and networks must be quickly severed, and new connections made, both between filaments and between filaments and other proteins such as adhesion molecules
or microtubules.
How is the polymerization and actin rearrangement controlled? The receptors that
signal cell locomotion may initiate somewhat different pathways, but many share some
commonalities in activating one or more members of the Ras-family of small GTPases.
These signaling molecules, such as Rac, Rho, and cdc42 can be activated by receptor tyrosine kinases (see RTK-Ras activation pathways, Chap. 14). Each of these has a slightly
different role in cell motility: cdc42 activation leads to filopodia formation, Rac activates
a pathway that includes Arp2/3 and cofilin to lamellipodia formation, and Rho activates
myosin II to control focal adhesion and stress fiber formation. A different type of receptor cascade, the G-protein signaling cascade (also Chapter 14), can lead to activation of
PLC and subsequent cleavage of PIP2 and increase in cytosolic Ca++. These changes, as
noted earlier, can also activate myosin II, as well as the remodeling enzymes gelsolin,
cofilin, and profilin. This breaks down existing actin structures to make the cell more
fluid, while also contributing more g-actin to form the new leading edge cytoskeleton.
In vitro experiments show that as the membrane pushes forward, new adhesive contacts are made through adhesion molecules or receptors that bind the substrate (often
cell culture slides or dishes are coated with collagen, laminin, or other extracellular
matrix proteins). The contacts then recruit cytoskeletal elements for greater stability
to form a focal adhesion (fig. 20). However, the formation of focal adhesions appears
to be an artifact of cell culture, and it is unclear if the types of adhesions that form in
vivo recruit the same types of cytoskeletal components.
α-integrin

β-integrin
Talin

Actin

Vinculin

α-actinin

Figure 20. Focal adhesions form when integrins bind to an artificial ECM surface in cell culture dishes.

The third step to cell locomotion is the bulk movement of the cellular contents forward. The mechanisms for this phase are unclear, but there is some evidence that
using linkages between the actin cytoskeleton at the leading edge and forward parts
of the microtubule cytoskeleton, the microtubules are rearranged to form an efficient
Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Page 196

transport path for bulk movement. Another aspect to this may be a “corralling” effect
by the actin networks, which directionally open up space towards the leading edge.
The microtubules then enter that space more easily than working through a tight actin
mesh, forcing flow in the proper direction.
Finally, the cell must undo its old adhesions on the trailing edge. This can happen in a
number of different ways. In vitro, crawling cells have been observed to rip themselves
off of the substrate, leaving behind tiny bits of membrane and associated adhesion
proteins in the process. The force generated is presumed to come from actin-myosin
stress fibers leading from the more forward focal adhesions. However, there are less
destructive mechanisms available to the cells. In some cases, the adhesivity of the cellular receptor for the extracellular substrate can be regulated internally, perhaps by
phosphorylation or dephosphorylation of a receptor. Another possibility is endocytosis
of the receptor, taking it off the cell surface. It could simply recycle up to the leading
edge where it is needed (i.e. transcytosis), or if it is no longer needed or damaged, it
may be broken down in a lysosome.

Chapter 12, Cytoskeleton, version 1.0

Much of the work on microtubule-actin interactions in cell motility has been done through research on the neuronal growth cone,
which is sometimes referred to as a cell on a leash, because it acts
almost independently like a crawling cell, searching for the proper
pathway to lead its axon from the cell body to its proper synaptic
connection (A.W. Schaefer et al, Dev. Cell 15: 146-62, 2008).

Page 197

ECM and Adhesion :

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.

Cell-Matrix and Cell-Cell Adhesion

Interactions between a cell and its environment or with other cells are governed by
cell-surface proteins. This chapter examines a subset of those interactions: direct cell
contact with either other cells or extracellular matrix (ECM). Extracellular matrix is a
general term for the extremely large proteins and polysaccharides that are secreted by
some cells in a multicellular organism, and which acts as connective material to hold
cells in a defined space. Cell density can vary greatly between different tissues of an
animal, from tightly-packed muscle cells with many direct cell-to-cell contacts to liver
tissue, in which some of the cells are only loosely organized, suspended in a web of
extracellular matrix.
Proteoglycan

Fibronectin

Collagen
Laminin

Integrin
Extracellular

Intracellular

Figure 1. Extracellular matrix (ECM). Typical components include collagen, proteoglycans (with hydration shell depicted around sugars), fibronectin, and laminin. The cellular receptors for a number of these
ECM components are integrins, although the exact integrin ab pair may differ.

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 198

ECM is a generic term encompassing mixtures of polysaccharides and proteins, including collagens, fibronectins, laminins, and proteoglycans, all secreted by the cell. The
proportions of these components can vary greatly depending on tissue type. Two, quite
different, examples of ECM are the basement membrane underlying the epidermis of
the skin, a thin, almost two-dimensional layer that helps to organize the skin cells into
a nearly-impenetrable barrier to most simple biological insults, and the massive threedimensional matrix surrounding each chondrocyte in cartilaginous tissue. The ability
of the cartilage in your knee to withstand the repeated shock of your footsteps is due
to the ECM proteins in which the cells are embedded, not to the cells that are actually
rather few in number and sparsely distributed. Although both types of ECM share some
components in common, they are clearly distinguishable not just in function or appearance, but in the proportions and identitiy of the constituent molecules.

The “basal lamina” and “basement membrane” are frequently
confused by students and professionals alike. The basement
membrane was discovered first as a very thin layer of connective
proteins just beneath an epithelial cell layer. The basal lamina
was not discovered until later because it is not visible by light
microscopy (normally only ~50 nm thick). Technically, the basal
lamina, which consists of multiple layers itself, is a layer of ECM
proteins secreted by the epithelial layer. The basal lamina and a
thick reticular lamina (ECM secreted by other cell types) together
form what is considered the basement membrane.
The basal lamina around glomerular blood vessels in the kidneys
is twice as thick (up to 100 nm) as usual, accomplishing part of
the kidneys’ physiological role in blood filtration.

Collagen
The largest and most prominent of the extracellular matrix proteins, constituting a
quarter of the dry mass of the human body, are the members of the collagen family.
Collagens are polymers that can be categorized into fibrillar (e.g. collagens I, II, III) and
nonfibrillar (e.g. collagen IV) types. The fibrillar collagens are made up of triple helical
monomers of either identical (homotrimer) or different (heterotrimer) subunits. These
monomers are then associated in an offset parallel interaction with other collagen
monomers, leading to the formation of long fibers. Electron microscopic examination of
these long fibers shows a banding pattern, which is indicative of the slight gap between
monomers along the same parallel.
OH

Procollagen

H2N

COOH
OH

OH

Propeptide

Propeptide

Triple helix formation

Figure 2. Collagen is a triple-helical
protein consisting of three fibrillar subunits. Some of the amino acids are hydroxylated (see fig. 3), and the protein is
also glycosylated (represented by purple
hexagons).

H2 N
OH

H2N

OH

OH

H2N

OH

COOH
COOH
COOH

Secretion from cell
Propeptides clipped

OH

OH

Completed collagen molecule
OH

OH

OH

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 199

Like all secreted proteins, collagen I is processed in the ER (fig. 2), but not completely
assembled there: the three pro-a-chains are assembled into a procollagen triple helix,
which is secreted. Extracellularly, they must then be cleaved at both termini to form
the active collagen protein, which is completely fibrillar. Other collagen types do not
have the same cleavage, and may have globular domains at the ends of the fibrils.
Collagens are also interesting for their unusual amino acid makeup. They contain a
high proportion of hydroxylated amino acids, mostly prolines and lysines (fig. 3). This
hydroxylation is necessary for the extensive hydrogen bonding that occurs between
subunits and between monomers. The fibrils are associated with high tensile strength.
An example of this would be the long collagen fibers that run parallel to the long axis
of tendons and ligaments. These high-stress-bearing structures (connecting bone to
muscle, and bone to bone, respectively) require the resilience that collagen fibers can
provide.

NH3+
CH2
OH
H

C

CH

OH
CH2

C C ON
+ H O
H H

H2C

4-Hydroxyproline

H2C
H2C

C

CH2

H

C C
N
+ H O
H H

OH

O-

3-Hydroxyproline

CH2
+H N
3

C

C

H

O

O-

5-Hydroxylysine

Figure 3. Collagens have a high proportion of hydroxylated prolines and lysines.

Conversely, conditions that adversely affect collagen formation can lead to serious
disease conditions. In fact, a form of epidermolysis bullosa (the heritable skin blistering disease introduced in the previous chapter) is caused by mutation in collagen VII
which is primarily produced by epidermal keratinocytes and secreted into the dermalepidermal basement membrane layer. A variety of chondrodysplasias as well as bone
malformations such as osteogenesis imperfecta (which can be perinatally lethal) have
been linked to mutations in various collagen genes. Finally, several symptoms of scurvy
are due to malformation of collagen in the ECM: weak blood vessel walls, bleeding
gums and loose teeth, and fragile bones. Scurvy is a disease of ascorbic acid (vitamin C)
deficiency, and the effect on ECM is due to the need for ascorbic acid as a cofactor for
enzymes that hydroxylate the prolines and lysines of collagen.
Collagen is a major component of the basement membrane and basal lamina. The
basal lamina is strong and flexible, able to serve as structural support for the epithelial
sheets attached to it, as well as providing a semi-permeable matrix/filter that allows
the passage of water and smaller molecules, but excludes larger macromolecules. The
two major protein components to the basal lamina are collagen IV and laminin. Collagen IV has both long fibrillar, alpha-helical domains as well as globular domains that
can interact in different orientations to form the meshwork that sets up the basement
membrane. The laminin network is connected to the collagen network through entactin (nidogen) linker proteins.
An interesting application of collagen fibrils is in the cornea, the protective clear covering of the eye. The cornea is the primary protection against eye injury, and must be
tough. The central layer (stroma, or substantia propria) is composed of approximately
200 layers of tightly packed, regularly spaced parallel collagen fibrils, with adjacent layChapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 200

ers arranged so that the collagen fibrils lie perpendicularly from one layer to the next.
This kind of laminar structure is used in a variety of man-made construction materials
(including the ubiquitous building material, plywood) and provides great strength in
a relatively small mass. Somewhat amazingly, and quite unlike plywood, the cornea
is transparent. That property is thought to come from the regularity of the collagen
lattice, which allows for cancellation of scattered light from one fibril by destructive
interference from the scattered light of another fibril. Somewhat counterintuitively, it
actually gets cloudy (due to refraction) when it absorbs fluid from the aqueous humor,
and has active mechanisms to pump any such fluid back out of the cornea. This is why
the cornea thickens and becomes translucent after death — the pump mechanism no
longer has energy to run, and the aqueous humor diffuses into the cornea.

Proteoglycans
The protein component of proteoglycans are not as large as fibrillar collagens in general, but they often fill a massive volume because of heavy glycosylation. The sugars,
many of which are sulfated or carboxylated, are hygroscopic to begin with, but being
negatively charged, attract positive ions, which in turn brings in more water. Sugars
attached to the core proteins are usually repeating disaccharide units such as chondroitin (d-Glucuronic acid and GalNAc), chondroitin sulfate, heparin (d-Glucuronic acid
and GlcNAc by a/b1-4 bond), heparan sulfate, keratan sulfate (Galactose and GlcNAc), or
hyaluronan (also called hyaluronic acid, composed of d-Glucuronic acid linked by b1-3
bond to GlcNAc). As with all glycoproteins, assembly of the GAGs occurs in the Golgi,
Figure 4. Proteoglycans are composed of
multiple glycosaminoglycans attached to
a core protein. These core proteins are
sometimes attached to a hyaluronic acid
molecule. Negatively charged sugars,
like chondroitin sulfate or heparan sulfate, are depicted in yellow. They attract
positive ions and water, forming a hydration shell around the proteoglycan. This
figure depicts aggrecan, a cartilaginous
aggregate of proteoglycans assembled on
a hyaluronic acid core.

The reasoning behind the use of glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate supplements by people with joint problems is that they are
two of the sugars found in proteoglycans of cartilaginous tissue
such as the meniscus of the knee, and in other joints. Chondroitin
sulfate in particular is the major sugar in articular cartilage proteoglycans. Both are thought to stimulate GAG synthesis, and limite documentation of protease inhibitory and collagen synthesis
effects have been noted. Data from rabbit models (but potential
conflict of interest, Lippiello et al, 2000) suggests a therapeutic
benefit from such supplements. However, human studies have so
far shown no significant improvement in patients already suffering from moderate to severe arthritis and other joint-related ailments (Clegg et al, 2006). A secondary survey analysis suggested
that there was some promise with regard to effects on mild to
moderate cases, but the data was not significant.

Heparin, a hypersulfated form of heparan sulfate, is also used
medically as an anticlotting drug. It does so not by preventing
clots directly, but by activating antithrombin III, which inhibits
clotting.

Hydration shell
Core protein

Glycosaminoglycan

Hyaluronic acid

but beyond that, mechanisms for control of the extent and length of the disaccharide
polymer addition is unknown. Unlike collagens and most other ECM components,
proteoglycans can either be secreted or membrane bound. In fact, of the membrane

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 201

bound proteoglycans, some are actually transmembrane proteins (these are designated
syndecans), while other are bound to the cell surface via glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI) anchor (glypicans). In addition to these three basic varieties of core proteins, proteoglycans exhibit extraordinary diversity in glycosylation, ranging from the addition of
only a few sugars, to well over a hundred. Interestingly, the core protein for chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans in basal lamina of muscle can be a collagen (Type XV)!
One of the paradoxes of proteoglycans is that they can function either as a substrate
for cells to attach to, or due to the hydration shell, they can be very effective barriers
to other cells as well. This is useful during development when there is a great deal of
cell migration, and there needs to be ways to segregate cells both by attracting them
and repelling them. Unfortunately, this can have deleterious consequences in some
situations. For example, when the brain or spinal cord is injured, a glial scar is formed,
and that scar contains a chondroitin sulfate proteoglycan. Unfortunately, this proteoglycan is an inhibitor of neural growth, which contributes to the prevention of neural
regeneration, and for the unlucky patient, likely paralysis or worse depending on location and severity of the lesion.

On the other hand, there is also evidence (Rolls et al, PLoS Med. 5:
e171, 2008) that the CSPG may be needed to activate microglia and
macrophages to promote healing.

Fibronectins
Fibronectin and laminin are significantly smaller than
either collagens or proteoglycans, and play different
roles in the extracellular matrix. Fibronectin is formed
by the joining of two similar polypeptide subunits via a
pair of disulfide bonds near the C-terminal of each (fig.
5). Each subunit is arranged as a linear sequence of 30
functional domains (varies slightly by species). Within
each subunit, each domain acts as a semi-independent
unit with respect to secondary and even tertiary structure. Structurally, there are three major types of domains (Fig. 6) that can be distinguished not only by sequence, but by the binding sites they form. The figure
above shows binding sites for other fibronectins, fibrin,
collagen, heparin, and syndecan. Fibronectin is therefore an excellent linkage protein between these different molecules to stabilize and strengthen the ECM.

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

RGD Sequence

S-S
S-S

Figure 5. Fibronectin. The C-terminus of each subunit is at the bottom
of the figure. The RGD sequence is a
binding site for integrin receptors.

Page 202

Heparan Sulfate
Fibrin
Fibronectin

Collagen

Fibronectin

Integrin

Heparan Sulfate
Fibronectin
Fibrin
Syndecan

C

N

Type I

Type II

Type III

One of the interesting aspects of fibronectin fibril formation is
that the self-association site is generally hidden, but is revealed
when a cell binds to the integrin-binding site. Thus cell-binding
seems to nucleate the formation of fibrils, perhaps helping to
form strong anchors in certain situations in which the cell is not
migrating, but establishing itself permanently.

variable

Figure 6. Each fibronectin subunit is composed of about 30 modular domains, of which there are three
major structural types. Binding sites for other molecules are labeled. The two Type III domains that
are marked with a star are alternatively spliced domains not found in fibronectin that circulates in the
bloodstream, where it helps to promote clotting.

Importantly, in addition to linking a variety of extracellular matrix proteins together,
fibronectin also has a site that binds to integrin receptors on cells. Whereas collagen for the most part acts as a passive substrate that cells are willing to attach to or
crawl on, fibronectin can actively induce cell migration by activation of the integrins.
Fibronectin expression along very specific pathways are crucial for the migration of
neural crest and other cell types in development. In vitro experiments with fibroblasts
and other cell types show a marked preference for areas coated with fibronectin over
areas coated with collagen. This is also true in vivo: an upregulation of fibronectin in
response to injury promotes migration of fibroblasts and cells associated with wound
healing into the lesioned area.
The integrin binding site is charactized by the presence of an arginine-glycine-aspartic
acid (RGD) sequence. If this site is abolished or mutated, the mutant fibronectin does
not bind to cells. Similarly, if cells are treated with high concentrations of short peptides that contain the RGD sequence, those peptides bind to the integrins, and the
cells ignore fibronectin. Finally, in addition to serving as a linker between other ECM
proteins, or even to cells, fibronectin can form fibrils through interaction with other
fibronectins.

Laminins
Although there are many other less abundant proteins in the extracellular matrix, laminin is the final ECM molecule to be discussed in this chapter. Laminins are a family of
secreted glycoproteins that are found in many ECM formations, and like fibronectin,
bind to cells via integrin receptors. The laminin protein is composed of three subunits
(a, b, g) arranged in a cruciform shape. There are multiple isoforms of each subunit

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 203

RGD Sequence

yielding the variety (15) of laminin proteins catalogued to date.
Although laminin contains an RGD sequence like fibronectin,
its role in cell adhesion is not universal. Although some cell
types have been demonstrated to bind to the RGD site, others
clearly bind to other domains of laminin, primarily located on
the opposite end of the protein.

At present, there are 5 a-chain genes, 4 b-chains, and 3 g-chains
known. The a2/b1/g1 combination is known as laminin-2 or
merosin, and is found primarily in the basal lamina of striated
muscle. Mutations that affect the function of this laminin cause
a form of congenital muscular dystrophy.

Laminin plays a crucial role in neural development, where it
acts as a guiding path along which certain axons extend to
find their eventual synaptic targets. One prominent example
is the retinotectal pathway that leads retinal ganglion cell axFigure 7.
The cruciform ons from the eye to the brain. Another example of the role
structure of laminin is com- of laminin in development is the guidance of primordial germ
posed of three subunits.
The arms bind collagens and cells (PGC). These are cells that eventually become the gamsulfolipids, while the foot etes, but need to migrate from the yolk sac, which is outside
contains LG domains that
the embryo proper, to the site of gonad formation. Laminin is
bind integrins and carbohyfound along this pathway. Interestingly, as the PGCs reached
drates.
a stretch of laminin very close to the final destination, the
adhesion to laminin increased, and this adhesion was found to involve not integrin receptors, but an interaction with a cell surface heparan-sulfate proteoglycan. This and
other evidence suggests that migration on laminin may be mediated by integrin receptors, whose adhesivity can be regulated intracellularly, while more static interactions
with laminin may be mediated by other types of binding proteins. Finally, as already
discussed, laminin is an impotant component of basal lamina, able to form fibrils and
networks itself, as well as with collagen IV.

Integrins
The integrins have thus far been introduced as receptors for fibronectin and laminin,
but it is a large family with a wide variety of substrates. For example, the focal adhesion (fig. 8) shows an an integrin receptor bound to collagen. As already discussed
in the previous chapter, focal adhesions are usually transient, and seen as points of
contact as fibroblasts or other migratory cells crawl on a culture dish or slide coated
with ECM proteins. In addition to collagen, fibronectins and laminins are also potential
binding partners for integrins. As table 1 shows, the diversity of subunits and combinations means that integrins are involved in a wide array of cellular processes, and can
bind cell surface proteins as well as ECM. With this variety, it is not surprising that not
all integrins bind RGD sequences, although most do. For example, a2b1 integrins prefer

Subunits

Ligand

Distribution

a1b1

mostly collagens, also laminin widespread

a2b1

mostly collagens, also laminin widespread

a4b1

fibronectin, VCAM-1

hematopoietic cells

a5b1

fibronectin

fibroblasts

a6b1

laminin

widespread

a6b4

laminin

epithelial cells

aLb2

ICAM-1, ICAM-2

T-lymphocytes

fibronectin, fibrinogen

platelets

aIIbb3

Table 1. Integrin receptors, their ligands, and distribution.

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 204

Figure 8. A focal adhesion is
a dynamic point of contact
formed by a cell growing on
a collagen-coated dish.

α-Actinin

Vinculin

Actin

Talin

β
Collagen-coated dish

α

Integrin

Intracellular

Extracellular

YYGDLR or FYFDLR sequences, and aIIbb3 binds both the RGD and a KQAGDV sequence
strongly. Integrin activation has been shown to initiate signaling pathways, beginning
focal adhesion kinase (FAK) or a few other central kinases, which control activities from
cytoskeletal rearrangement to cell survival.
Both a and b subunits are transmembrane proteins that pass through the membrane
just once. Evolutionarily, they are found only in metazoan species, but they are also
found in all metazoan species. All integrins but one, a6b4, connect to the actin microfilament cytoskeleton through the b subunit cyLigand binding
toplasmic domain. The a6b4 integrin links to the
intermediate filament cytoskeleton, in part because
the b4 cytoplasmic domain is very large and extends
Mg2+ binding site
further into the cytoplasm. On the extracellular
side, there is a metal ion coordination site usually
occupied by Mg++, that is necessary for ligand binding. There are also several other divalent ion binding
sites, The receptor can be found in either an inactive
(somewhat bent over towards the membrane) or an
active state (straightened up). In the inactive state,
α subunit
β subunit
the a subunit binds the b subunit closely preventing
interaction with the cytoskeleton. However, once a Figure 9. Integrin receptors are comcytoskeletal element such as talin attaches to the b posed of two polypeptides that each
pass through the membrane once.

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 205

subunit cytoplasmic domain, it displaces the a subunit, causing a slight separation of
the two subunits and leading to activation of the receptor. In fact, integrins demonstrate what is known as “inside-out” signaling, in which a cellular signal (for example,
from the signaling cascade of a growth factor) leads to alterations to the cytoplasmic
domain and which shifts the conformation of the extracellular domain to an active
straightened-up state in which it can more readily bind to ligands. This is why integrins are so well suited to focal adhesions and other “in motion” adhesions that must
adhere and release quickly. Though recycling of receptors also happens, turning them
on or off by inside-out signaling is an effective mechanism for fast movement.
As one might expect from an actin-linked structure, focal adhesions and their in vivo
equivalents are transient, dynamic points of contact between the cell and the substrate
it is crawling over. However, there are many situations in which a cell is not only stationary, it needs to be firmly attached to its substrate in order to gird itself for whatever stressors might come to test its resolve. In these cases, the actin cytoskeleton is
too ephemeral for the task.

Hemidesmosomes

Intermediate filaments

Protein plaque

Laminin-5

Cytoplasm

BP180

β

α

Integrin

Extracellular
Matrix

Figure 10. Hemidesmosomes. (Left) Diagram depicting involvement of intermediate filaments and a dense
protein plaque reinforcing the membrane at the point of contact. (Right) This shows up as the electron dense
areas pointed out by the arrows in this electron micrograph of epithelial cells in mouse trachea. Micrograph
released with creative commons attribution license by Nguyen et al, Respiratory Research 7:28 (2006).

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 206

Hemidesmosomes, particularly those attaching epithelial cells to their basement membrane, are the tightest adhesive interactions in an animal body. This close contact,
and the reinforced structure of these contacts, is crucial for the protective resilience
of epithelial layers. Remember the a6b4 integrin? That would be the one that links
with intermediate filaments instead of f-actin. Intermediate filaments, as we’ve already
noted, are not dynamic, but about as stable as a cellular component can be. They are
also very strong and are used to buttress cellular integrity. So, it is no surprise to see
intermediate filaments and the a6b4 integrin playing roles in hemidesmosomes. The
distinguishing characteristic of hemidesmosomes though, is the electron-dense plaque.
It can be thought of as reinforcement so that when the epithelium is stretched, the
cell does not just pop loose leaving behind part of its membrane. The plaque contains
several proteins, but the primary component are plectins, the linker proteins that help
to bundle intermediate filaments, and connect them to each other as well as other
cytoskeletal elements. Another major element of the plaques is BP230, which connects
the plaque to keratin. On the extracellular side, in addition to the integrin already
mentioned, there is also a transmembrane glycoprotein called BP180, which also binds
to laminin elements of the basement membrane.

BP230 and BP180 are named for bullous pemphigoid, the subepidermal bullous disorder characterized by chronic blistering of the
skin. It is an autoimmune disorder and in which the aberrant
antibody response is to these two hemidesmosomal proteins.

Dystrophin Glycoprotein Complex
Another type of cell-ECM connection is the dystrophin glycoprotein complex (DGC) of
skeletal muscle cells. Similar complexes are found in smooth muscle and in some nonmuscle tissues. Muscle cells, of course are subject to frequent mechanical stress, and
connectivity to the ECM is important in supporting the cell integrity. The DGC uses
the large transmembrane glycoprotein, dystroglycan, as its primary binding partner
to basal lamina laminin. A sarcoglycan
complex and sarcospan are other major
α-Dystrobrevin
NOS
transmembrane components of the DGC,
Syntrophins
Dystrophin
Actin
but their roles do not appear to include
Grb2
Cytosol
direct interaction with basal lamina.
The sarcoglycan complex (consisting of
β δ β α γ
4 sarcoglycans) is postulated to act as
Sarcospan
structural reinforcement for the memα,β-Dystroglycan
Sarcoglycan complex
α
brane at these contact points. The role of
Laminin
sarcospan, a 4-pass transmembrane pro- Basal lamina
tein, has not been demonstrated within
Collagen
the DGC, but homologous proteins in
other cells are found in adhesive com-

Mutations leading to loss of sarcospan have not been linked to
any muscular dystrophies. However, sarcospan is not found in
muscular dystrophy patients who have mutations in the sarcoglycans. It thus appears that the tetrameric sarcoglycan complex is
required for normal membrane localization of sarcospan.

Figure 11. Dystrophin Glycoprotein Complex.

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 207

plexes with integrin receptors, suggesting the same function here. Although the DGCs
are long-lived adhesive contact that have more in common with hemidesmosomes
than focal contacts, the cytoskeletal component attached to the DGC is actin (via dystrophin), not intermediate filaments. However, it is important to note that the actin
cytoskeleton of muscle cells has very different functions from its counterpart in a fibroblast. Mutations to the sarcoglycans, dystroglycan, and dystrophin have all been shown
to cause muscular dystrophies.

Desmosomes
Cells will form adhesive interactions with other cells as well as with ECM. Most of
these interactions utilize a different set of proteins, although integrins have been found
to interact with some cell adhesion proteins. An example of a cell-cell interaction with
many similarities to a cell-ECM interaction, but using different adhesion molecules, is
the desmosome. Like its basal-lamina-attached couterpart, the hemidesmosome, the
desmosome is found in epithelial sheets, and its purpose is to link cells together so that
Intermediate
filaments

Intercellular space

Desmoglein

Desmoplakin

Desmocollin

Plakoglobin

Figure 12. Desmosomes connect the intermediate filaments of adjacent cells
across adhesion molecules strengthened by a protein plaque. Desmoglein and
desmocollin, the adhesion molecules are members of the cadherin family, and
the reinforcing plaque contains plakoglobin, which connects the adhesion molecules to the IF linker, desmoplakin.

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 208

pressure is spread across many cells rather than concentrated on one or a few. Desmosomes are necessary for the structural integrity of epithelial layers, and are the most
common cell-cell junction in such tissues. The primary structural characteristic of the
hemidesmosome, the dense plaque reinforcing the intracellular side of the adhesion,
is also found in desmosomes, although it is composed of different proteins. In desmosomes, the plaque is composed primarily of plakoglobins and desmoplakins. The plakoglobins connect the adhesion molecules to the desmoplakins, and the desmoplakins
link to intermediate filaments such as keratin.
Another similarity to hemidesmosomes, and one predicted by the involvement of keratin, is the permanence of desmosomes. On the other hand, a key difference between
the two types of adhesions is the adhesion proteins involved. The major proteins of
the desmosome are desmoglein and desmocollin, both of which are members of the
cadherin superfamily of Ca++-dependent adhesion molecules.

Mutations in desmoplakin (on chromosome 6p24) are linked to
Carvajal syndrome (also known as dilated cardiomyopathy with
woolly hair and keratoderma). Patients are born with woolly
hair, and palmoplantar keratoderma appears within the first year.
Dilation of the left ventricle and attending weakness in contractility may lead to death from heart failure in teenage years.
Pemphigus vulgaris is another rare disease involving dysfunction
of desmosomes. It is an autoimmune disease targeted to the patient’s own desmoglein proteins. The reduced epithelial adhesion
leads to blistering of skin and mucous membranes.

Cadherins
The cadherin superfamily is comprised of the desmogleins (of which 4 have been identified in humans) and desmocollins (3 in humans), the cadherins (>20), and the protocadherins (~20) as well as other related proteins. They share structural similarity and
a dependence on Ca++ for adhesive activity, and they can be found in most tissues, and
for that matter, most metazoan species. Cadherins are single-transmembrane modular
proteins. On the outside of the cell, the cadherin has five domains of similar but not
identical structure. It was originally thought that Ca++ was used between cadherins to
mediate adhesion, but it is now clear that Ca++ is bound in between each extracellular
domain, apparently coordinating them into a more rigid structure. Cadherins can also
act in cis, i.e. cadherins from the same cell can form dimers. This property allows a
patch of cadherin adhesions such as a desmosome to “zipper” together into very strong
clusters.
The cytoplasmic domain of cadherins characteristically binds to a family of proteins
called the catenins, and this binding can be regulated by phosphorylation of the cadherin. The most common catenins are a and b, usually with the b-catenin acting as
intermediary between cadherin and a-catenin, and the a-catenin linking them to the
actin microfilaments. This kind of arrangement is found in both cells that are motile,
crawling over other cells that are expressing cadherin, as well as stationary cells. Although this is not the arrangement in desmosomes, the desmosomal plaque protein
plakoglobin is a member of the catenin family.

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 209

The primary binding site for cadherins appears to be the N-terminal domain (most
distal extracellular), although there is evidence that as many as three domains can be
involved. Cadherins mostly bind homophilically (E-cadherin binds E-cadherin on another cell, but not P-cadherin), although some cadherins can bind heterophilically (e.g.
N-cadherin can bind to either N-cadherin or E-cadherin). Incidentally, these three, Ecadherin (epithelial), N-cadherin (neural), and P-cadherin (placental) are the best-studied cadherins. Both E- and P-cadherins are important in early embryonic development,
while N-cadherin has been studied in the context of axon guidance in the developing
nervous system. E-cadherin is also a target of scrutiny because it is also important in
the metastasis of cancer. In order for a cancer cell to break from the initial tumor, it
must downregulate its adhesion to neighboring cells before migrating elsewhere. This
is known as the epithelial-mesenchymal transition and is accompanied by decreased
E-cadherin expression.
Intercellular space

α-catenin
α-actinin

Cadherin

β-catenin

Actin

Figure 13. Adherens Junction. This type of cell-cell adhesion is based on interaction of cadherins, which are connected intracellularly to the actin cytoskeleton through the linker proteins a- and b- catenin. Also depicted here is the actin bundling protein a-actinin.

With the patch of cadherin interactions, the adherens junction (fig. 13) looks very similar to the desmosome (fig. 12). Adherens junctions serve some of the same purposes as
desmosomes: providing connectivity to neighboring cells, and reinforcing and shaping
the cells. However, adherens junctions are mostly localized near the apical surface of
epithelial cells, and instead of intermediate filaments, they are connected to actin microfilaments that form a circumferential belt that produce tension and shaping forces
in conjunction with myosins that associate with it.
Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 210

Tight Junctions
Sometimes, holding cells together, even with great strength, is not enough. In epithelia especially, a layer of cells may need to not only hold together but form a complete
seal to separate whatever is in contact with the apical side from whatever is in contact
with the basal side. That would be a job for The Tight Junction! Well, more accurately,
for many tight junctions in an array near the apical surface. Perhaps the best example
of the utility of tight junctions is in the digestive tract. The tight junctions that form
between cells of the epithelial lining of the gut separate the food and its digestion
products from the body at large, forcing macromolecule nutrients to be transported
through the epithelial cell by endocytosis/transcytosis to the bloodstream where they
can be most efficiently distributed. The tight junctions also form in blood vessels to
prevent leakage of blood, and in a variety of organs where liquids must be contained.
A.

B.

Figure 14. Tight Junctions. (A) Tight junctions are usually present in arrays that seal
off one side of an epithelial layer from the
other multiple times. (B) Each tight junction is formed by very small transmembrane proteins, claudins and occludins, so
that the membranes of opposing cells can
come into extremely close contact .

Extracellular

Intracellular
1

Intracellular
2

An individual tight junction is formed by the interaction of claudins and occludins.
They are each 4-pass transmembrane proteins with both N- and C-termini on the cytoplasmic side; the extracellular side has a very low profile, consisting of one (claudin) or
two (occludin) small loops. Because of their small size, when they interact, the membranes are brought together very closely. In order to actually form a seal between cells
though, tight junctions must be lined up in close order all the way around the cell, and
in fact, usually there are multiple lines, which one could think of as “backup” in case
one line develops a leak. Claudin molecules have relatively small cytoplasmic domains
and it is not clear whether there are significant interactions with other proteins. However, occludin has a large C-terminal cytoplasmic domain that contains a PDZ-binding
domain. PDZ is a protein interaction motif of approximately 80-90 amino acids found
in a number of signaling proteins, most often in use to hold signaling complexes near
the membrane by interacting with a transmembrane protein, as would be the case here
with occludin. These PDZ-containing proteins both have signaling functions and can

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 211

act as adapters to the cytoskeleton, primarily the actin filaments. Finally, although an
exact mechanism is unclear, elevated levels of Ca++, either extracellularly or perimembranously, is associated with tight junction assembly.

Ig Superfamily CAMs
In addition to occludin and claudins, junction adhesion molecules (JAMs) have recently
been found in tight junctions. These molecules are members of a gigantic superfamily of cell adhesion molecules known as the Ig (immunoglobulin domain) superfamily
because all of these proteins contain an immunoglobulin loop domain that plays an important part in the adhesion mechanism. The purpose of immunoglobulins (antibodies)
is to recognize and adhere to other molecules, so it makes sense that such a structural
motif would also be used for other kinds of adhesion. Ig loops fall into two primary
categories, again based on the loops of an immunoglobulin molecule. These are the
variable (V) loop and the constant (C1) loop. Some IgSF molecules contain a C2 loop,
which has amino acid homologhy to the V loop, but structural/size similarity to the C1
loop. The size of IgSF molecules ranges greatly, and the number of Ig loop domains and
other domains (e.g. fibronectin Type III domains) can also vary significantly.
FN type III

IgC2

NCAM
P0
L1

Figure 15. Ig superfamily cell adhesion molecules NCAM, P0, and L1 (top to bottom) are built with fibronectin
Type II domains and Ig C2-like domains..

IgSF molecules are involved in a number of cellular processes requiring adhesion. The
most obvious, of course, is the immune response in which an immunoglobulin, either
secreted or on a cell, binds to a molecule foreign to the body. However, there are many
other interactions outside of the immune system that involve IgSF molecules. One
well-studied area is in neural development, where IgSF members L1 (L1CAM), NCAM and
numerous others are expressed in specific patterns to control the routing of axons as

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 212

they make their way from the neuronal cell body to their eventual connections. This
path can often be very long, crossing many different cell types, and taking several turns,
so a robust guidance system is crucial to make a normal functioning nervous system.
Specific combinations of cell adhesion molecules (also called axon guidance molecules
in this case) direct these processes even through the extraordinary density of potential
(but incorrect) nerve cell targets in the brain. IgSF molecules have been found to bind
both homophilically and heterophilically, and for that matter, not just to other IgSF
molecules, but to adhesion molecules of other structural families such as integrins.

Selectins
The last major cell adhesion molecule family to discuss is the selectins. Selectins bind
heterophilically to oligosaccharide moieties on glycoproteins. In fact the name of the
family is based on lectin, a generic term for proteins that bind sugars. The selectins, like
cadherins and IgSF molecules are modular glycoproteins that pass through the membrane once. From C-terminus to N-terminus, the selectins are composed of a relatively
short cytoplasmic domain, a single transmembrane domain, a series of CR (consensus
repeat) or structural domains (from 2 in L-selectin to 9 in P-selectin), an EGF (epidermal
growth factor) -like domain, and a lectin-like domain. The lectin-like domain binds a
fairly specific oligosaccharide composed of sialic acid, galactose, GlcNAc, and fucose, of
which the sialic acid and fucose are most important for recognition. Selectin-mediated
adhesion is a Ca++ dependent process.

L-selectin
E-selectin
P-selectin
Figure 16. Selectins (L-, E-, and P-) are composed of between 2 and 9 short consensus repeat domains (purple),
an EGF-like domain (orange), and the lectin-like binding domain (teal).

L-selectin, which is found on leukocytes, was the first discovered, by virtue of an interesting phenomenon called lymphocyte homing, in which lymphocytes were removed
from various peripheral lymph nodes, labeled, and then injected back into the animal.

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 213

These lymphocytes would migrate back to the tissues from which they were derived
without regard for the site of re-injection. The other two known selectins are E-selectin, which is expressed primarily on endothelial cells, and P-selectin, which is expressed
on platelets and endothelial cells. The best-characterized ligand for selectins is PSGL-1,
creatively named P-selectin glycoprotein ligand -1. Both E- and P-selectin are an important part of the inflammatory response, mediating the invasion of neutrophils from the
bloodstream into the area of injury (fig. 17).

1

2

Signals from
damaged tissue

3

Selectin upregulation

4

Platelet activating factor released

5

Invasion

= ICAM

= Integrin

= E/P-selectin

= Platelet activating factor

Figure 17. Neutrophil activation and invasion in the inflammatory response. First, endothelial cells in the
blood vessel walls are activated by nearby damaged cells. These endothelial cells then begin to express E- and
P- selectins, which bind onto neutrophils that are tumbling by in the bloodstream. This interaction slows
the neutrophils down so that they are just rolling more slowly in partial contact with the endothelial cells.
The endothelials release platelet activating factor, which activates a1b2 and amb2 integrins on neutrophils.
Those integrins can bind onto the ICAM (and IgSF molecule) on the endothelial cell surface, stopping their
movement. Finally the neutrophil binds to ICAMs on two adjacent cells, then remodels its cytoskeleton as it
squeezes between the two to exit the bloodstream and move to the lesion site.

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 214

Gap Junctions
Unlike the other types of cell-cell adhesion, the gap junction (sometimes called a nexus)
connects not only the outside of two cells, it connects their cytoplasm as well. Each
cell has a connexon (aka hemichannel) made of six connexin proteins. The connexins
may be all of the same type, or combinations of different ones, of which there are
20 known in humans and A.
B.
Extracellular
mice. The connexon interacts with a connexon on
an adjacent cell to connect
the cytoplasm of both cells
in a gap junction.
Intracellular
1

Intracellular
The gap junction pore size
2
varies depending on the
type of connexins, but generally, the molecules under 1 kDa are able to pass
through while larger ones
Figure 18. Gap Junctions.
can not. Therefore, cells
connected by gap junctions are electrically connected (ions can freely pass), they can
share cellular energy (ATP), and second messenger signaling molecules like Ca++ or
IP3, but not most proteins or nucleic acids. The pores are not always open, but are
controlled by phosphorylation of several serines in the intracellular domains of each
connexin.

When most people, including most biologists, think about neuronal connections and synapses, they think of chemical synapses
in which one cell signals to another by release of neurotransmitters. However, it is now well established that in the CNS,
electrical synapses through gap junctions are a significant part
of the repertoire of neural communication. The retina is an excellent example with numerous gap junctions between neurons.
In fact, light-activated neurotransmitters can activate protein
kinase pathways that phosphorylate connexins, thus altering
conductance through the gap junctions. A striking example is
the gap junction-based electrical coupling of cone photoreceptor neurons. They are coupled near the base of the cells, so that
excitation of one drives excitation of several others. This is important in generating a clear visual signal because the primary
reaction, phototransduction, is a dirty process. Due to the simple
presence of random photons bouncing about, the signal to noise
ratio of light-induced excitation is very low. However, because
electrical coupling sums up the signal of near neighbors but not
the background noise, the signal output from these neurons has
an improvement in signal to noise ratio of ~77%! This topic is
reviewed in Bloomfield and Volgyi, Nature Reviews (Neuroscience),
10:495-506, 2009.

Although they have now been found in most metazoan tissue types, they are particularly important in heart muscle. Here, the gap junctions insure efficient propagation
of contractile signals so that the cardiac muscle can contract in synchrony. It is also
important in cardiac development: gene knockout of connexin43, the primary heart
connexin, leads to delayed looping of the ascending limb of the embryonic heart tube,
which means malformations especially in the right ventricle, tricuspid valve, and subpulmonary outflow tract.

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 215

Figure 19. An overview of cellular adhesions. From top to bottom, there are tight junctions (purple), adherens
junctions with f-actin (blue), desmosomes (orange) connected to intermediate filaments, and gap junctions
(blue). There are also hemidesmosomes (orange) on the basal surface attached to the basement membrane.

Chapter 13, ECM & Adhesion, version 1.0

Page 216

Cell Communication :

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.

Signal Transduction

Metazoan organisms are not just conglomerations of cells that happen to stick together.
The cells each have specific functions that must be coordinated with one another in order to
assure the survival of the organism and thus the shared survival of the component cells. If
coordination is required, then a method of communication between cells is also required. In
fact, it is even more complicated than that because the communications between the cells
only scratches the surface (yes, bad pun intended) and the intracellular communication that
goes on to coordinate multiple cellular activities in response to an external signal is usually
far more complex than the initial transmission of that signal.
There are three primary modes of intercellular communication. These are (1) direct
contact between signaling molecules bound to the membranes of two adjacent cells, (2)
short-range soluble signals that diffuse over short distances, and (3) long-range soluble
signals that are secreted into the circulation to be carried anywhere in the body.
An example of juxtacrine signaling is exemplified by the activity of some cell adhesion or
ECM proteins, such as laminin,
that do not just allow a cell to
move over them, but act as signals to promote increased motility. This likely happens by
activation of integrin receptors
on the moving cell, which then
initiate and coordinate changes
through the rest of the cell to
accomplish the change in activity. Another example is the
Delta-Notch pathway used in
embryonic patterning. Delta, a
Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

A

B

Undifferentiated epithelial cells

Signaling cell

Delta
Notch

Protease

Receiving cell

Developing nerve cell
expressing inhibitory Delta signal

Protease
Nucleus

p300

CSL
Transcription

Inhibited epithelial
cell expressing
Notch receptor

Figure 1. Delta-Notch signaling.

Page 217

transmembrane protein on the signaling cell, binds to Notch, a receptor on the receiving cell. Notch alters its conformation, allowing its cytoplasmic domain to be cut off by
g-secretase. The cytoplasmic domain then translocates into the nucleus, where it acts
as an activating transcription factor by binding with CSL. In the example sketched in
fig. 1B, stochastic upregulation of delta in one cell activates notch in the surrounding
cells, which then activates a specific differentiation pathway for them. Thus the central
cell may be a sensory neuron, like a hair cell, while those immediately surrounding it
are support cells like glia. This type of signaling imposes a spacing pattern on the expression of neurons (or other cell).
Diffusion limited signals from near neighbors is called paracrine signaling, and sometimes the signals can act on receptors right on the cell that secreted the signal, which
would be autocrine signaling. Paracrine signals are only active if they can bind to a
cell above a critical concentration to activate a signaling pathway. Therefore, as the
signals diffuse away from the source, there is a cutoff, beyond which the concentration
of signal is insufficient to activate a receiving cell. Growth factors are often paracrine
signals. Although they do often encourage growth, they are also often survival factors.
In that context, Nerve Growth Factor (NGF) is secreted by target cells that then reward
the neurons that make the right connections by providing NGF for their survival.
Those neurons that head off in the wrong direction, are unable to obtain NGF, and they
do not survive, promoting efficiency and a better signal:noise ratio within the nervous
system.

The Delta-Notch pathway is well characterized and somewhat
more complicated than portrayed in the paragraph to the left.
The cleavage of Notch involves two proteases and two sites.
Once the Notch cytoplasmic domain binds to CSL, it displaces a
number of co-repressors bound to the CSL, and also recruits MAM
(Mastermind-1) as a coactivator. MAM recruits histone acetylases
to allow further increase transcription of targeted genes, but also
recruits kinases that initiate the process of targeting the Notch
cytoplasmic domain for ubiquitin-mediated destruction. The
expression of Notch-controlled genes is thus self-regulated and
shuts off soon after Delta is no longer available. Reviewed in R.A.
Kovall, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 17: 117-27, 2007.

Endocrine signaling is essentially whole-body signaling. A signal produced by a hormone-producing gland is secreted into the bloodstream, where it becomes accessible to
nearly any cell in the body. Of course, not every cell will respond to the hormone: like
every other case of intercellular signaling, response is wholly dependent on receptors,
so only the cells that have receptors to recognize the signal will react. For example,
estrogen is released into the circulation, but in females, only some organs show significant impact when estrogen levels are significantly altered. Most tissues are unaffected.
Endocrine signals may circulate in other extracellular fluids such as lymph.

Receptors and Ligands
A protein that happens to bind something is not necessarily a receptor. A receptor is
defined as a protein that binds to an extracellular ligand, and then undergoes a conformational or biochemical shift in such a way that it initiates a chain of intracellular
events by which the cell reacts to the extracellular signal. What are these ligands and
their receptors?

Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

Page 218

Intercellular signals span a very wide range of molecule types. Some are simple gases,
like NO, while others are amino acids or derivatives, including glutamate, dopamine,
or epinephrine. Lipids such as steroids (e.g. estrogen, cortisol) or eicosanoids (e.g.
prostaglandins, leukotrienes) can be intercellular messengers. Finally many signals are
peptides or even complex proteins (recall our juxtacrine signaling example). Although
most are recognized by cell surface receptors, this is not always the case since, for example, steroids are lipid-soluble and can diffuse through the plasma membrane.
Receptors are a far less varied group of molecules, since they are all proteins, though it
must be said that they represent many different protein structures and functions. In
general, receptors are very specific for their ligands, but the specificity is not mutual:
ligands can be rather promiscuous and bind with multiple receptors. This is part of the
coordination aspect of signaling, though as a single ligand can initiate different effects
in different cells depending on what receptor is expressed. The remainder of this chapter will delve into some of the intracellular signaling cascades that are characteristic of
particular receptor types.
Because receptors, even at high density, represent only a minute fraction of the surface
area of the cell, and therefore an even tinier fraction of the volume of the cell, the activation of a receptor must be amplified in order for it to initiate cellular activities (e.g.
locomotion, growth, cell cycle progression). Thus one of the first things a receptor does
upon activation is to initiate a signaling cascade. This aptly named sequence of events
begins with the receptor activating an enzyme. The enzyme may be the cytoplasmic
domain of the receptor itself, or it may be an independent protein but closely linked
to the receptor. The enzyme does what enzymes do: it rapidly converts substrate molecules into product molecules. In this case, sometimes the product is an activator for
another enzyme, and sometimes, the substrate is an inactive enzyme and the product
is an activated enzyme. Either way, because of the high activity rates, the single activation of the receptor has increased first to tens or hundreds of enzyme activations, and
each of those activates hundreds, and so on, so that the effect of the receptor can be
rapidly distributed throughout the cell.

7-TM receptors (G-protein-coupled)
The 7-transmembrane receptors, or G-protein-coupled receptors are, unsurprisingly, a
family of proteins that pass through the cell membrane 7 times. The amino terminal
is extracellular and the carboxyl terminal is intracellular. Figure 2 shows the transmembrane regions spread out for clarity, but the transmembrane domains actually
Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

Page 219

form together in more of a cylindrical shape. 7-TM proteins are used as receptors for
neurotransmitters such as epinephrine (b-adrenergic receptor), acetylcholine (muscarinic receptor), and serotonin, as well as hormones like glucagon or thyroid-stimulating
hormone, and even non-molecular ligands such as light! Rhodopsins are a class of 7-TM
receptors that are activated when they absorb a photon (fig. 5). Activating this family
of receptors, whether by photon or by more conventional ligand binding, induces a
conformational change in the cytoplasmic domain that alters the interaction between
the receptor and a protein complex known as a heterotrimeric G protein.

NH3+

Extracellular

Intracellular

COO-

The heterotrimeric G protein consists of an a, b, and g subunit, of which the a subunit
can bind either GTP or GDP, and can hydrolyze GTP to GDP. When the 7-TM receptor
is inactive, the G protein complex is usually nearby associated with the membrane by
myristoylation or palmitoylation of the a subunit and farnesylation or geranylgeranylation of the g subunit. Once the 7-TM receptor is activated, it associates with the
heterotrimeric G-protein, which causes the Ga to let go of the GDP and bind to a GTP.
This then dissociates the Ga from the other two subunits. It can then associate with
and activate an enzyme to expand the signaling cascade. One of the two classical pathways starts with Ga activation of adenylate (adenylyl) cyclase. Adenylate cyclase (AC)
converts ATP to cAMP. Since ATP is plentiful and AC is a relatively fast enzyme, the first
amplification of the signal comes with generation of the “second messenger” molecule

A

B

Ligand

7-transmembrane
G-coupled
receptor

Adenylate
cyclase

Gγ Gβ

Gα

Ligand
7-transmembrane
G-coupled
receptor

Gγ Gβ

Adenylate
cyclase

Gα

Trimeric G protein

Trimeric G protein

GDP

C

Figure 2. 7-TM receptor.

GTP

GDP

Ligand

7-transmembrane
G-coupled
receptor

Adenylate
cyclase

Gγ Gβ
Gα
Trimeric G protein

GTP
PKA

cAMP

ATP

Enzyme phosphorylation

Figure 3. The heterotrimeric G-protein can act as a timed activator of adenylate cyclase.

Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

Page 220

cAMP. Each cAMP molecule can then activate other enzymes, the primary one being
protein kinase A. PKA can then phosphorylate a variety of substrates to alter cellular
activity by gene expression, molecular motors, or metabolic changes.
The other classical pathway for 7-TM receptors is the activation of phosphlipase Cb, also
by Ga. PLCb actually produces two second messenger molecules: it hydrolyzes phosphatidylinositol into diacylgylcerol (DAG) and inositol triphosphate (IP3). IP3 primarily
induces the release of Ca++ from the endoplasmic reticulum. The DAG can activate
protein kinase C. PKC is also activated by Ca++ and both Ca++ and DAG can activate PKC
synergistically. Protein kinase C is an important central kinase that has been shown to
phosphorylate and control the activity of numerous other enzymes from cytoskeletal
elements to transcription factors.
A

B

Ligand

7-transmembrane
G-coupled
receptor

Gα

Rod cell
. .

.

. .. .

.
.

.

PLCγ
Gγ Gβ

Gα

..

To
optic
nerve

.
. .
.

Disk membrane
Opsin
(inactive)

Trimeric G protein

Opsin
(active)
Gγ Gβ

GDP

GTP

Gγ Gβ

Gα

Trimeric G protein

GDP

GTP

Gα

γ

Trimeric G protein

γ

Gα

γ

γ

Trimeric G protein

GTP

GTP

αβ

GDP

αβ

Gα
Trimeric G protein

GTP

PDE (active)

PDE (inactive)

Ligand

7-transmembrane
G-coupled
receptor

.

.

Rhodopsin disks

Trimeric G protein

C

LIGHT

Ligand
7-transmembrane
G-coupled
receptor

PLCγ
Gγ Gβ

An interesting variation from the classic 7-TM pathways starts
with the rhodopsin receptors in rod cells. These receptors bind
photons for activation, and engage a heterotrimeric G protein.
The Ga-GTP then binds to the g subunit of phosphodiesterase
(PDE), activating it and catalyzing conversion of cGMP to GMP.
As cGMP decreases, ion channels close, polarizing the membrane
and changing the signal from the rod cell to the brain (via connecting neurons).

High cGMP,
ion channels open

PLCγ
PI

PKC

Gα
Trimeric G protein

GTP

Cytoplasm
(low Ca++)

Endoplasmic reticulum
(high Ca++)

DAG

Rod cell membrane
Enzyme
phosphorylation

IP3

GMP cGMP
(Cytosolic cGMP levels reduced)
Intracellular

X

Gγ Gβ

Low cGMP,
ion channels closed

Na+

Ca++

Na+

Ca++

Extracellular

Figure 5. Activation of the 7-TM receptor rhodopsin by light.

Ca++

Ca++ release

Figure 4. G-protein activated Phospholipase C. (A) The G-protein is inactive with GDP bound. (B)
Upon ligand binding, G-protein binds receptor, exchanges GDP for GTP, and Ga dissociates. (C) GaGTP activates PLCg, whic produces DAG and IP3. The latter induces Ca++ release into the cytoplasm
and together with DAG, activates PKC.

Second messengers must have two properties. They must be small enough to diffuse
effectively, and the cell must be able to generate them quickly. Ca++ and cAMP fall into
this category. Furthermore they can both be removed from circulation fairly quickly:
the former by Ca++ pumps in the ER and Golgi, and the latter by phosphodiesterase activity. When the G-protein-pathway was discovered, the use of lipid second messengers
Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

Page 221

was surprising. Membrane phospholipids were largely ignored at the time as simple
static components of membranes. It is now clear that some of the phospholipids are
biochemically active, with several enzymes that modify them, including phospholipases,
phospholipid kinases, and phospholipid phosphatases. Some of these enzymes have a
variety of functions because their substrate of product may be an important messenger
molecule. For example, PI3K (phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase) is a central signaling kinase
because its product, PIP3 (phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-triphosphate) is an activator for
Akt/PKB and other enzymes that can activate several signaling pathways.
Plasma
membrane

O

C

C O

O

O O
H2C

C

O H
-O

H

OH
OH
H

C

C O

O

ATP

OH
H
HO

OH

-O

P O

ADP

O H

H

PI kinase

H

H

OH
OH
H

C

C O

C

O

O O
H2C

CH2

O H
-O

P O
O H

C

O O
H2C

CH2

ATP

OH
H
HO

ADP

O-

P O

O P O-

O H

O

H O

H

OH
OH
H

C O

O O
H2C

CH2

O H

H

PIP kinase

C

H
HO

C

CH2

HO H

diacylglycerol
(DAG)

H

O-O

H O

O P O-

O P O-

O-

O-

Phospholipase C

O-

P O

O P O-

O H

O

OH
OH

H

H

H
HO

H

H O
O P OO-

phosphatidylinositol
[PI]

PI 4-phosphate
[PI(4)P]

PI 4,5-bisphosphate
[PI(4,5)P2]

inositol
1,4,5-triphosphate
[IP3]

Cytoplasm

Figure 6. Modifications of Phosphatidylinositol generate various biologically active species.

The activation must eventually end, and it does so when Ga hydrolyzes the GTP bound
to it. In this way, the Ga acts as a kind of timer for the signaling cascade. This is important because for signaling to be effective, it must be tightly controlled. Very early in
this course, it was pointed out that Ca++ is kept at a very low concentration in the cytoplasm of the cell because we want Ca++-sensitive mechanisms to be able to react quickly to an influx of calcium, but we equally want to be able to quickly turn off the signal
as needed, and that is obviously much easier to do by sequestering a small amount of
Ca++ than a lot of it. Similarly, if sustained activity of a recipient cell is called for, it is
accomplished by continuous activation of the receptor and not by a long-lasting effect
Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

Page 222

from a single activation. This ensures that if a cellular effect must be
abruptly and quickly cut off, it can
be accomplished without a significant lag period between cessation of
hormone secretion and cessation of
intracellular signaling.
The receptor is a part of another
shutoff mechanism as well: to prevent overstimulation, the receptors
are desensitized for a short time after they have activated. G-proteincoupled receptor kinase (GRK) phosphorylates the 7-TM receptor. The
phosphorylation creates recognition
sites for arrestins. The arrestins have
a variety of functions, the simplest
of which is to act as a competitive
inhibitor of G-protein binding by the
receptor. This is a relatively shortlived desensitization.
For longer desensitization, arrestin
binds to AP2 and clathrin, nucleating
formation of a clathrin-coated endocytic vesicle. This removes the receptor from the cell surface, desensitizing the cell for a much longer period
of time than simple competition between arrestin and G-protein.

A

Ligand
7-transmembrane
G-coupled
receptor

β-Arrestin

AP2

GDP

Clathrin

Trimeric G protein

B
7-transmembrane
G-coupled
receptor

P

β-Arrestin

P

AP2

C

GTP

Trimeric G protein

Clathrin

GTP

Trimeric G protein

Endocytic vesicle

Figure 7. (A) After GRK phosphorylates a 7-TM receptor, arrestin can bind. In some cases, arresting can also bind AP1
and clathrin, (B) nucleating the formation of a clathrin-coated
vesicle and endocytosis of the receptor (C).

A

Ligand
7-transmembrane
G-coupled
receptor

AJK-1

β-Arrestin
JNK-1

MKKY

GDP

Trimeric G protein

B
7-transmembrane
G-coupled
receptor

P

P

β-Arrestin

GTP

Trimeric G protein

AJK-1 MKKY JNK-1

Jun

The arrestins have another potential
function. They can act as scaffolding proteins that bring a completely
different signaling complex to the
7-TM receptor. Figure 8 shows an
example in which the 7-TM receptor
is used to activate a Jun transcription factor.
Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

Jun

P Jun
P Jun

Jun P

P

5’

3’

Transcription

Nucleus

Figure 8. Interestingly, arrestins can also act to initiate a
completely different type of signaling cascade from a 7-TM
receptor. Here, the Jun transcription factor is activated.

Page 223

The b-arrestin brings AJK-1, MKKY, and JNK-1 to activate JNK-1, which can then phosphorylate Jun. This allows translocation of phospho-Jun into the nucleus and subsequent
dimerization, converting it into an active transcription factor.
What are some of the cellular actions that can be evoked by 7-TM receptor activation?
Ca++ dynamics will be addressed in a separate section. IP3 has been shown to evoke
contraction of smooth and skeletal muscle, actin polymerization and cell shape changes, calcium release from intracellular stores, opening of potassium channels, and membrane depolarization. cAMP has been implicated in control of glycogen breakdown
and gluconeogenesis, triacyglycerol metabolism, secretion of estrogens by ovarian cells,
secretion of glucocorticoids, and increased permeability of kidney cells to water.

Receptor Tyrosine Kinases
In contrast to the 7-TM receptors, the receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) pass through the
membrane only once, and have a built-in enzyme domain - a protein tyrosine kinase.
RTKs must dimerize to be functional receptors, although individual RTKs can bind to
their ligands. The ligands also dimerize, and when a dimerized receptor is activated,
the kinase domains cross-phosphorylate the cytoplasmic domain on the other receptor
Ligand

RAS

P Y
Y

P

RTK

GDP

Y

Y P
Y

P

P

Membrane-bound
Raf

RAS

Grb2

GTP
Sos

MAPKKK

P
Soluble
Raf

MAPKK

Nucleus

P

TF

P

ERK

MAPK

P

ERK

P

5’

MEK

MEK

TF

3’

P

ERK

P

Transcription

= Inactive enzyme
= Active enzyme

Figure 9. Receptor Tyrosine Kinases can activate the MAP pathway.

Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

Page 224

unit. This phosphorylation is necessary to form recognition sites for scaffolding or
effector proteins. Figure 9 shows an example of an adapter protein, Grb2, which binds
to a phosphorylated SH2/SH3 type domain on the receptor as well as to Sos (a guanine
nucelotide exchange factor), which binds to and activates the GTPase Ras by exchanging a GDP for a GTP. This is the start of a very common RTK intracellular signaling
pathway, the MAP kinase pathway. Following activation of Ras, it can activate Raf by
phosphorylation and translocating it from the cytoplasm to the inner surface of the
plasma membrane. Raf is a Ser/Thr kinase (also known by the unwieldy but fun to say,
MAP kinase kinase kinase) that phosphorylates MEK (aka MAP kinase kinase). MEK
is interesting because it is a dual-specificity kinase, phosphorylating both Ser/Thr sites
as well as Tyr sites. The targets we are particularly interested here though, are MAP
kinases (mitogen activated protein kinase), also known as ERKs (extracellular signal
regulated kinases).
Each kinase along the canonical MAP kinase pathway has other potential substrates
besides the next one in the MAPK sequence, so the variety of cellular responses that can
be initiated by this pathway is very broad. There are at least 20 classes of RTK by structural similarity, including the fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) class, epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) class, neurotrophin receptor (Trk) class, and insulin receptor class. Some growth factors not only induce growth, but survival, and sometimes
proliferation. In fact, mutations to growth factors can be oncogenic (cancer-causing).
Insulin

Glucose

Insulin receptor
(receptor tyrosine kinase)

P Y
Y
P

Y
P

IRS-1

GTP

Grb2
Sos

P
P

Other
signalling
pathways

GLUT4

RAS

Y P
Y
P

P

PI3K

Other
signalling
pathways

P

PDK1
PKB
Other signalling pathways

Insertion
in
membrane

Cytoplasmic
vesicle with
glucose
transporters

GLUT4

Figure 10. Insulin receptor signaling pathways.

Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

Page 225

One of the aspects of cell signalling that make studying it both fun and frustrating is
the immensity of possibilities. The insulin receptor example above (fig. 10) demonstrates this. When the receptor is activated, the IRS-1 scaffolding protein binds to it, and
brings with it binding sites to recruit a number of different signaling molecules such as
Grb2-Sos-Ras to head down the MAPK pathway, but also PI3K, which can lead to activation of PDK1 and Protein Kinase B, important in regulation of glucose transport. PKB
(also known as Akt), is also an important mediator of cell survival (by inhibiting BAD),
cell proliferation, and angiogenesis.
IFNγ

JAK

JAK

JAK

JAK

P
STAT

STAT

3

2

1

STAT

JAK

P

P

JAK

JAK

P

P

P

P STAT STAT P

STAT

4

Dimerization

P STAT
P STAT

JAK

P

P

5’

3’

Transcription
Nucleus

Figure 11. The JAK-STAT pathway.

Activation of cytokine receptors can initiate the JAK-STAT pathway. Cytokines are
generally immunomodulatory signals, some of which act as hormones and others in
a paracrine fashion. Interferon-g is an example (fig. 11) of a cytokine, and the inactive
RTK receptor binds to JAK (Janus kinase) in the inactive state. Upon ligand binding to
the dimerized receptor, the JAK units are activated and the phosphorylate the receptor.
This receptor phosphorylation leads to binding of STATs (the creatively named “signal
transducers and activators of transcription”), which are then phosphorylated by the
still-active JAK. Upon phosphorylation, the STAT-P proteins dissociate from the receptor and dimerize in the cytoplasm, where they are bound by importins and translocated
into the nucleus where they act as transcription factors.

Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

Page 226

Ca++ Signaling
Signaling by increasing cytosolic calcium is an important and ubiquitous intracellular
coordination mechanism. We already saw that release of Ca++ in muscle cells is required to allow contraction of each sarcomere, and the positioning of the sarcoplasmic
reticulum makes possible rapid changes in concentration nearly simultaneous across
the entire cell. Another extremely important physiological mechanism that relies on
calcium is fertilization. Immediately upon penetration of the egg by the sperm, a
wave of intracellular Ca++ increase spreads across the egg starting from the point of
fertilization. This activates CaMKII (a kinase) and calcineurin (a phosphatase). Both
are needed to overcome meiotic arrest and may also be necessary in initial embryonic
development by control of chromatin decondensation, nuclear-envelope formation, and
the movement and fusion of the two nuclei.
The aforementioned CaMKII is Ca++/calmodulin-dependent kinase II, and illustrates a
fairly common theme, which is the use of Ca++-binding proteins as intermediate Ca++
sensing activators. Calmodulin is a ubiquitous calcium-binding protein in eukaryotes
and its importance is highlighted by the extraordinarily high homology across species. In normal cytosolic Ca++ levels, the relatively low affinity of the 4 Ca++ binding
sites on calmodulin are unfilled. But when Ca++ concentrations rise, they occupy the
sites, causing a conformational change in calmodulin and allowing it to interact with
other proteins. In addition to calmodulin, troponin-C, and PKC, a few other important
calcium-sensitive proteins are calsequestrin, a Ca++ buffer protein, gelsolin, the f-actin
severing enzyme, the protease calpain, and calretinin, an activator of guanylyl cyclase
(which makes the second messenger cGMP).
Guanylate (guanylyl) cyclase is also an important player in signal transduction by nitric
oxide (NO). Nitric oxide is a gas produced by the action of nitric oxide synthase (NOS)
on the substrate amino acid arginine. It is used as a super-soluble signal that passes
through cells easily. However, it requires relatively high concentrations for physiological effect, so it is strictly a paracrine factor working on near neighbors. Perhaps
the best studied example of NO signaling is vasodilation, in which the NOS-expressing
endothelial cells of a blood vessel release NO to the smooth muscle cells surrounding
them. The NO binds to and stimulates guanylate cyclase. The resulting increase in
cGMP concentration leads to relaxation through multiple targets of protein kinase G.
Finally, no discussion of signal transduction would be complete without at least a fleeting mention of the extraordinary crosstalk (fig. 12) that can occur between the different
pathways mentioned.

Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

Sildenafil (Viagra) and its chemical siblings take advantage of this
pathway by inhibiting cGMP-specific phosphodiesterases (PDE5)
which normally break down cGMP to limit the response to NO.
However, it should be noted that though PDE5 expression is limited, it is expressed not only in the genitalia but in the retina as
well.

Page 227

Figure 12. Signal transduction in actin dynamics.

This figure comes from Cell Signaling Technology, Inc.

The figure represents only one small part of the signaling that happens inside a moving
cell. Not only are some parts of the cell forming filopodia to help determine where to
go, other parts or ruffling up the lamellipodia, and still others inducing motor proteins
to rearrange the cytoskeleton in the proper way to facilitate bulk transport internally
even as the leading edge of the cell is thrusting forward to make contacts externally.
All of this must be coordinated by crosstalk between signaling systems as depicted, not
to mention signaling related to metabolism, or gene expression, or even cell cycle, all
of which are happening simultaneously inside the cell.

Chapter 14, Signaling, version 0.1

Page 228

Cell Cycle :

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.

Life cycle of the cell and Gametogenesis

The Prokaryotic Cell Cycle
Cells, whether prokaryotic or eukaryotic, eventually reproduce or die. For prokaryotes,
the mechanism of reproduction is relatively simple, since there are no internal organelles. The process consists of three distinct but short phases: first, a growth phase in
which the mass of the cell is increased, then the chromosomal replication phase, and
finally the chromosomes are separated and the cells are physically split into two independent new cells. In bacteria, these are referred to as the B, C, and D periods, respectively. Initiation of the reproductive process appears to be primarily a function of cell
size. The length of the overall cell cycle is determined by the B period, as the C and D
periods have relatively fixed time constraints. The length of B is determined, in part,
by environmental conditions and the gain in cell mass. Generation times for bacteria
can vary from under half an hour to several days, although most bacterial cultures in
laboratory settings and nutrient-rich media have generation times under a day.
DNA replication has already been covered in detail in chapter 7. In bacteria, the process is initiated at the origin of replication by DnaA. However, in archaea, synchronous
initiation of replication at multiple sites on the chromosome as well as recognition
proteins homologous to eukaryotic ORC proteins suggests that there are similarities
between archaebacterial and eukaryotic DNA replication to be explored.
Once the DNA is replicated and moved to opposite sides of the cell, the midcell septum
forms to split the cell. At least 9 gene products are involved in this process including
FtsZ, the prokaryotic tubulin homologue that forms a circumferential ring, FtsI, a peptidoglycan synthetase involved in septum formation, FtsL, whose function is unclear but
is involved in ingrowth of the cell wall at the septum, and ZipA, which anchors the FtsZ
ring. The ring contracts, pulling the membrane in with it. Eventually the membrane is
pinched in enough to fuse and generate two completely separate cytoplasmic compartments. Other septation enzymes make cell wall components that fill in as the septum
forms simultaneously with membrane/FtsZ contraction, and the cells separate.
Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 229

The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle
Most eukaryotic cells undergo a reproductive cycle to generate either another copy of
themselves or to generate gametes (sex cells), and in doing so require a complex mechanism to govern the safe and accurate replication of their much larger (than prokaryote)
genomes. Immediately following mitosis, the newly created cells are in the G1 phase.
This is largely a growth phase, during which there is a lot of biosynthesis of proteins,
lipids, and carbohydrates. However, there is no synthesis of new DNA at this time. G1
is the longest of the cell cycle phases in many cell types, and most of the physiological
activity of a cell happens during G1. Following G1, the next phase of the cell cycle is the S
phase, during which synthesis of new DNA occurs. In other words, the genome is being
replicated during this phase; thus at the end of S phase, the cell has twice the normal
amount of DNA. After S phase, the cell proceeds into G2, which provides an opportunity
for the cell to perform a self-assessment and make final preparations (such as more cell
growth, repairs of DNA) as necessary before it finally heads into mitosis. Mitosis, or M
phase, is primarily (1) the breakdown of the nucleus, (2) re-distribution of the DNA to
opposite sides of the cell, and (3) formation of two new nuclei around that DNA, and
cytokinesis, the final splitting of the cell itself.
G2 - M Checkpoint
-DNA fully replicated?
-Environment?

M Phase

Mitosis and Cytokinesis

Metaphase Checkpoint

-Chromosomes attached to spindle?

G2 Phase

Further Cell Growth and Development

G1 Phase
Cell Growth and Development

S Phase

DNA Replication

G1 - S Checkpoint

Figure 1. The Eukaryotic Cell Cycle.

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

-Environment?
-Cell large enough to divide?
-DNA quality?

Page 230

As the cell progresses through the various phases of mitosis, and for that matter, the
phases of the cell cycle overall, it does so in a specific and controlled manner, with
checkpoints that “ask” if the cell is ready for the next step: is it big enough, is the DNA
healthy, etc. so that the cell has the best chance of generating healthy daughter cells.
For example, if the cell cycle runs too rapidly through each phase, then there is not
enough time for the cell to build up its mass in preparation for reproduction, and that
leads to abnormally small daughter cells, and potentially even daughter cells that are
too small to survive. If a cell undergoes mitosis with damaged or mutated DNA, then
that may increase the likelihood of a pathological mutation surviving and harming the
organism by turning into a cancerous tumor.

Controlling the Cell Cycle
There are three major checkpoints for cell cycle control (fig. 1). The first regulates the
transition from G1 to S phase. Recall that G1 can be a very long phase, even (in the case
of G0) as long as the lifespan of the cell. However, once the cell reaches S phase, it is
committed to going through S, G2, and M phases to reproduce. This is because once S
phase has begun, there is more than the normal diploid complement of DNA inside the
cell. Over time this would confuse the cell (e.g., by overexpression of duplicated genes)
as it tried to use the DNA to direct RNA and protein synthesis, and it could become
sick and die. The second major checkpoint regulates entry into mitosis. Once mitosis
begins, most of the metabolic activity of the cell is shut down, and the cell concentrates its resources on dividing the nuclear and cellular material equally to support the
life of both resulting daughter cells. If the cell needs more time to make final repairs
on the DNA or even to bulk up a little, this checkpoint can hold the cell in G2 a little
longer for those things to happen. Finally, the third major checkpoint occurs during
mitosis, and regulates the transition from metaphase into anaphase. Since the sister
chromatids are being split apart and moved to opposite poles to form the new nuclei,
it is important that all of them are perfectly lined up at metaphase and the proteins
holding them together have dropped off. If they do not split evenly, the daughter cells
will have abnormal numbers of chromosomes (aneuploidy) usually leading to deleterious consequences.
What is the molecular mechanism that regulates the progress of the cell cycle? While
many of the checkpoint sensing mechanisms are still unclear, they seem to converge
on two sets of proteins that act together to trigger cell cycle advancement. These proteins are known as the cyclins and the cyclin-dependent kinases (cdk). As the names
suggest, the cyclins are proteins that regulate progression through the cell cycle, and

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 231

must be present in sufficient concentration to help activate the appropriate cdk. The
cyclin-dependent kinase is the active, enzymatic, half of the partnership, and activates
other enzymes by phosphorylation. Although the cyclins appear to be necessary for
cdk activation, they are not sufficient, as there are intermediate phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation steps required to activate the cdk after cyclin binding. Both the
cyclins and the cdk’s are families of related proteins, and they can combine in different
ways to govern particular points in the cell cycle (fig. 2). Interestingly, the intracellular
level of cdks is fairly constant. The level of cyclins, on the other hand, fluctuates dramatically depending on the state of the cell with respect to the cell cycle.
G2 - M Checkpoint
-DNA fully replicated?
-Environment?

M Phase

Mitosis and Cytokinesis

Metaphase Checkpoint

-Chromosomes attached to spindle?

G2 Phase

Further Cell Growth and Development

Cyclin B
Cdk1

Cyclin D
Cyclin A
Cdk2

Cdk4,6
Cyclin E
Cdk2

G1 Phase
Cell Growth and Development

S Phase

DNA Replication

G1 - S Checkpoint

-Environment?
-Cell large enough to divide?
-DNA quality?

Figure 2. Cyclins are involved in control of the cell cycle.

The methodology of some of the early experiments is perfectly suited to explaining how
this works. The seminal paper in this field was a 1971 paper in J. Exp. Zool. by Masui
and Markert. In it, they examined frog (Xenopus laevis) eggs that were arrested at G2.
The oocytes arrest for about 8 months naturally in order to build up the mass needed
to start a new organism once it has been fertilized. The basic question being asked is
what is causing the eggs to come out of G2 and into M phase? It was already known
Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 232

that the hormone progesterone can trigger this transition, but what are the intracellular players in the change in cell state? Masui and Markert decided to test whether
there was a cytoplasmic molecule that was responsible. They took a small amount of
cytoplasm from an M-phase egg and injected it into a G2-arrested egg. This triggered
the maturation of the G2-arrested egg and pushed it into M phase, even without progesterone. The activity was called maturation promoting factor (MPF), and was hypothesized to be a soluble, cytosolic protein.
In later experiments, other investigators attempted to find the specific protein trigger,
and from there, presumably, the rest of the mechanism. Fractionating the M-phase
oocyte cytoplasm by column chromatography, a protein, named cyclin B, was found to
rise and fall in concentration in direct synchronization with MPF activity. Furthermore,
addition of cyclin B alone was sufficient to rescue MPF activity from M-phase cytoplasmic extract that had been depleted by RNase treatment (preventing synthesis of any
new proteins, including cyclin B, and abolishing MPF activity). This clearly places cyclin
B in the forefront of the maturation mechanism, but there was one major issue: cyclin
B had no enzymatic activity. How was it effecting the changes needed for progress
from G2 to M phase?
This problem was answered by experiments on a very different organism, the fission
yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Because they have a very short cycle time, a relatively small genome, and they can be given random mutations en masse by irradiation
or chemical treatment, yeast are excellent model organisms for many types of biological study. After random mutation of a population of yeast, they can be screened for
mutations of particular types, such as cell division cycle (cdc). When the mutations are
sequenced and identified, they are often named by the type of mutation and order of
discovery. Cdc2, it turns out, showed two interesting phenotypes when mutated in opposite directions. Mutations that knocked out function of cdc2 caused the formation of
extremely large yeast that do not undergo cell division, while mutations that made cdc2
overactive caused the formation of rapidly dividing very small cells. The interpretation
was that when cdc2 is missing or inactive, the cells cannot progress to mitosis, so they
stay in G2 accumulating bulk material in preparation for a cell split that never comes.
Conversely, when cdc2 is overactive, it drives the cell quickly into mitosis, even if it has
not been in G2 long enough to synthesize enough mass to form two normal-sized cells.
This ties cdc2 nicely to cell cycle regulation, and it even has an enzymatic activity: it is
a kinase. This made it a perfect candidate as a first-order coordinator of cellular events
because phosphorylation is fast, phosphorylation usually activates some other enzyme,
and kinases usually act on an array of targets, not just one. So we now have a cyclin
(identified as cdc13 in S. pombe) and a cyclin-dependent kinase that work together to
promote cell cycle progression into M phase.
Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 233

Activation and inactivation of the cyclin-cdk complex
As more mutant yeast were being screened
for changes to their cell cycle, two other
Mitotic cyclin
Cyclin-dependant kinase (CDK)
genes were found in which mutations gave
rise to similar phenotypes. Nonfunctional
cdc25 or overactive wee1 mutants generated the overly large cells with a single
INACTIVE
MPF
nucleus, and conversely, overactive cdc25
Tyr
Thr
or inactive wee1 generated many severely
P
Wee1 kinase
undersized cells. Both cdc25 and wee1
gene products interact with cdk, and in
fact, they are positive and negative regulaINACTIVE
tors of cdk, respectively. Acting together
MPF
Thr
P
with one more enzyme, CAK (cdk-activating kinase), they activate the cdk (fig.
P
CDK-activating kinase
3). Using the mitotic cyclin/cdk complex
as an example, the cyclin (cdc13) and cdk
(cdc2) come together to form an inactive
INACTIVE
MPF
complex. The cdk is then phosphorylated
P
P
by wee1, a kinase. The phosphate it puts
on tyrosine-15 is needed for the rest of the
Cdc25 phosphatase
P
activation sequence, but it is inhibitory:
it actually prevents final activation. But
once Tyr-15 is phosphorylated, CAK can
ACTIVE
MPF
phosphorylate a neighboring threonine
Tyr
P
(Thr-161), which is required for activation.
Figure 3. Activation of mitotic cyclin/cdk complex.
Finally, cdc25, a protein phosphatase, removes the phosphate on Tyr-15, allowing activation of the cdk by the phosphorylated
Thr-161, and the MPF is finally on its way. There is self-amplification of the activation
as well, because one of the targets of MPF is cdc25, so there is a positive feedback loop
in which the activity of cdc25 is upregulated by phosphorylation.
Tyr

Tyr

Thr

Thr

As you will see in a later section of this chapter, MPF performs many functions, some
of which prevent progress of mitosis past anaphase. Therefore, there must be a way
to turn off MPF (and for that matter, any cyclin/cdk complex) quickly and completely
when the cell reaches the appropriate stage of the cell cycle. This is borne out by timecourse studies of MPF activity, which show a precipitous drop in activity in anaphase.
This coincides with a depletion of the cyclin B (cdc13 in S. pombe) due to a combina-

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 234

tion of turning off transcription of the gene, and specific proteolytic degradation. The
degradation pathway is now well understood, and is an interesting example of a sort
of feedback regulation.
Figure 4. MPF activity and cyclin B
protein expression rise as the cell enters mitosis but drop just before anaphase. However, cdk levels remain
steady throughout the cell cycle.

Concentration

cdk

cyclin

In
te
r

ph
as
e
Pr
op
ha
se
M
et
ap
h
An ase
ap
ha
se
Te
lo
ph
as
In
e
te
rp
ha
se
Pr
op
ha
se
M
et
ap
ha
An se
ap
ha
se
Te
lo
ph
as
In
e
te
rp
ha
s
e
Pr
op
ha
se
M
et
ap
h
An ase
ap
ha
se
Te
lo
ph
as
e

MPF

Mitosis 1

Mitosis 2

Mitosis 3

Essentially, MPF ensures its own destruction: one of its phosphorylation targets is
cdc20. Upon phosphorylation, cdc20 is activated and then activates anaphase promoting complex (APC). APC is a ubiquitin ligase (type E3) that polyubiquitinates the cyclin
of the MPF complex, making it a target for proteolytic degradation by a proteosome.
Note that only the cyclin is destroyed, while the kinase is left alone. Without the cyclin,
the kinase is inactive and must wait for cyclin levels to rise again before it can be reactivated by a fresh round of phosphorylation and dephosphorylation.
Active MPF
Mitotic Cyclin
Activation

P

CDK
Thr
P

Ub

Inactive
APC

Ub

Ub

P

Cdc20

Ub

Polyubiquitination

+
Active
APC

Mitotic Cyclin
Ub

Ub

Ub

Ub

CDK
P

Degradation by proteasome

Figure 5. MPF and other cyclin/cdk complexes
are inactivated by destroying the cyclin.

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

CDK

Page 235

G1/G0 phase
The G1 phase is the state a cell is in immediately following cytokinesis. At that point,
the cells will be somewhat undersized, and need to take up materials and energy
sources, and convert them to cellular components in order to support the eventual cell
division. During this time, the cell goes about doing its “normal” business - an endocrine cell makes and secretes hormones, an intestinal epithelial cell absorbs nutrients
from the gut and passes them on to the bloodstream, a neuron conducts signals, etc.
Most types of cells spend the majority of their cycle in G1, although there are exceptions, such as the frog oocytes mentioned earlier. The length of G1 is generally constant
for a given cell type under normal conditions, but can vary greatly between different
cell types. Post-mitotic cells, which have left the cell cycle and will no longer divide,
are in G1 until they die, barring reactivation of the cell cycle by stress conditions. This
continuous G1-like state is referred to as G0.
For those cells preparing to move from G1 into S, cyclins D and E, and cdk 2, 4, and 6
predominate, with activation of cyclin D complexes preceding activation of cyclin E
complexes. Two major questions are asked by the cell: is the DNA undamaged and
complete, and is the extracellular environment favorable for cell division? The cellular
sensors for these conditions then link to cyclin complexes effect restriction points on
cell cycle progression. The extracellular environment questions can be a tricky one,
because this can include more than just assessment of nutrient availability or predatory
threats; it can also be a requirement for an external trigger such as a mitogenic hormone or paracrine signal. In fact, nearly all normal animal cells require an extracellular
signal to progress through the G1/S checkpoint. The cyclin E/ cdk2 combination is the
principal regulator of entry into S phase and DNA replication.

S phase

The active cyclin E/cdk2 complex phosphorylates the tumor suppressor protein Rb (retinoblastoma), which causes E2F to translocate to the nucleus and turn on genes needed for entry into S
phase.

The mechanisms of DNA replication were discussed in chapter 7. It is important to note
that once a cell has entered S phase, it has essentially committed to going through cell
division. Cells do not cope well with extra copies of chromosomes, and a cell that went
through S phase without going through mitosis would likely have major malfunctions
in gene regulation. For similar reasons, the cell must only undergo DNA replication
once per cell division. The cyclinA/ cdk2 complex plays a key role in initiation of replication by activating the pre-replicative complex. It also phosphorylates cdc6, causing
it to dissociate from the ORC, and consequently the rest of the pre-RC. This prevents
immediate re-use of this origin of replication, and since the phosphorylation of cdc6
allows it to be recognized by a ubiquitin ligase complex, it is tagged for proteolysis.
Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 236

In addition to DNA replication, S phase is also the cell cycle stage in which centrosomes
are duplicated in animal cells. The cyclin E/cdk2 combination licenses the duplication
of centrosome, phosphorylating nucleophosmin, which then dissociates from the centrosome. This helps to trigger the centrosome duplication. Nucleophosmin does not
reassociate with centrosomes until telophase, when it is no longer phosphorylated.
Plk4 (Polo-family kinase 4) activity is necessary for centriole duplication, and appears
to initiate the centriole assembly mechanism.

G2 phase

The ubiquitin ligase complex, SCF, is made up of three major proteins and several minor species. Skp1 (S-phase kinase-associated
protein 1) can be an RNA polymerase elongation factor, but in this
complex links the other two proteins together. Cul1 (Cullin 1) is
an E3 type ubiquitin ligase. Finally, an F-box family protein like
Rbx1 (Ring-box 1), that heterodimerizes with cullin-1 and may also
recruit E2 ubiquitinating enzyme.. In addition to cdc6, it also recognizes and ubiquitinates CKIs (cyclin complex kinase inhibitors)
such as p27, which is involved in processes such as DNA repair
and error-checking.

The G2 phase begins when DNA replication has completed. Having said that, before
the cell is allowed out of G2 and on to M phase, it must pass a DNA fidelity checkpoint,
ensuring that not only has replication been fully completed, but that there are no major errors. G2 is a relatively short phase (compared to G1) in most cell types, and it is
spent building up energy and material stores for cell division and checking the DNA. If
everything is ok, and the cyclin B/ cdk1 complex has been activated, the cell proceeds
to M phase.

Mitosis
Mitosis consists of prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase, with distinct cellular
activities characterizing each phase. This completes the duplication of the nucleus, and
is followed by cytokinesis, in which the cell divides to produce two daughter cells.
Interphase (G2)

1. Prophase (early)

2. Prophase (late)

4. Anaphase

3. Metaphase

5. Telophase

Interphase (G1)

Figure 6. Mitosis. During mitosis, the nuclear envelope breaks apart to allow the spindle access
to the chromosomes. Once they have been moved to opposite ends, the nuclear membrane reforms around each set. Finally, cytokinesis divides the cell into two new daughter cells.

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 237

Prophase is the preparation of each component for this complex cellular dance. The
DNA condenses (it is wrapped around itself tightly to make it a smaller and stronger
package) so that it is less susceptible to breakage during movement across the cell. In
doing so, most of the DNA becomes transcriptionally inactive. The Golgi bodies and
the endoplasmic reticulum begin to break apart into membranous vesicles that can be
more easily and evenly distributed across the cell so that both daughter cells receive
about the same. The centrosomes (in animal cells) move from their original position
near the nucleus toward opposite sides of the cell, to establish the poles of the mitotic
spindle.
Figure 7. The mitotic spindle. The spindle is
made of microtubules that originate from the
centrosomes, which have migrated to opposite
sides of the cell. There are three types of spindle
microtubules: the kinetochore microtubules
(K), polar microtubules (P), and astral microtubules (A).

K

A

P
K

A

P

MPF phosphorylates microtubule motor proteins and microtubule associated proteins
(MAPs) to alter the normal microtubule dynamics and allow the massive reorganization into a mitotic spindle to occur. For example, one target of MPF is PRC1, a bundling
protein that is inactivated by phosphorylation, thus allowing individual microtubules
to move to new locations more easily than a large bundle could. Other effects are
inactivation of stabilizing MAPs, which leads to greater lability of microtubules due
to increased incidences of catastrophe. The motor protein targets of MPF are in the
kinesin family and the phosphorylation is necessary for some of them to bind to the
mitotic spindle.
Prometaphase is sometimes considered a separate phase but is also referred to as late
prophase, and is primarily defined by the breakup of the nuclear envelope. This process is induced by MPF phosphorylation of the nuclear lamins. Adorned with negative
charges from the phosphates, the lamins refuse to associate with one another any
longer, leading to the breakdown of the nuclear lamina. As the lamins dissociate, the
nuclear envelope remains bound to them, and fragments. This nuclear fragmentation
must happen so that the mitotic spindle can reach inside and attach to the chromosomes.

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 238

Some of the microtubules of the mitotic spindle attach to the chromosomes via the
kinetochore proteins, which link the spindle microtubules to the centromere region of
each chromosome. These are known as kinetochore microtubules (fig. 8). There are
two other types of microtubules in the mitotic spindle (fig. 7): the polar microtubules
that reach across the cell and interact with one another to help maintain the separation of the centrosomes and defining the overall length of the spindle, and the aster microtubules that are generally short, radiating out from, and stabilizing the centrosome.
Remember that the DNA replicated earlier in S phase, and thus sister chromatids are
still partially attached. Visually, the centromere region appears narrower or more
compressed than the rest of the chromosome, and generally lies near the middle. The
centromere contains repeated sequences that are involved in kinetochore binding and
assembly.

Inner
Kinetochore
Layer

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

GDP

CENP-E

GDP

MCAK

In primates, the repeating motif is known as alpha satellite DNA,
which is made of multiple instances of tandem repeats of a core
~170bp sequence over a centromeric DNA span over a megabase
in length. Similar repeats are found in various other vertebrates
as well. In other eukaryotes, the size and sequence may vary; for
example, much shorter repeats of ~5bp are found in centromeric
DNA measuring 200-600kb in Drosophila chromosomes, and S.
pombe has centromeric DNA well under 10kb.

Kinetochore Microtubule

Outer
Kinetochore
Layer

Dynein

Fibrous Corona
Chromosomal DNA

Figure 8. The kinetochore assembles on the centromere of the chromosome. Spindle microtubules attach to the fibrous corona of the kinetochore through kinesins and dyneins.

The kinetochores attaching to the centromere DNA are trilaminar protein structures
consisting of an inner layer, an outer layer, and a fibrous corona. The kinetochore
microtubules of the mitotic spindle are primarily attached to the fibrous corona. As
depicted in the figure, it is attached through CENP-E, a kinesin, and dynein motor proteins that bind along the barrel of the microtubule. In fact, sometimes the first contact
between a chromosome (via the kinetochore) and a spindle microtubule is somewhere
Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 239

in the middle of the microtubule, and a combination of microtubule dynamics and motor protein activity move the chromosome to the distal end of the microtubule. This is
facilitated by MCAK (mitotic centromere-associated kinesin), which is associated with
the kinetochore core proteins and plays a role in depolymerizing microtubules near
the (+) end.
As the nuclear envelope is breaking apart, the mitotic spindle microtubules are undergoing increased dynamic instability, cycling between periods of growth spurts (polymerization) and rapid shortening (catastrophic disassembly), searching for chromosomes
to connect to. Once the kinetochore microtubules
connect to the chromosomes, the microtubule dynamics shift. The microtubule will primarily undergo
shortening if it is beyond the center of the spindle and
primarily lengthening if it is short of center. Since
eventually each set of sister chromatids is connected
to microtubules on both kinetochores, each chromatid is connected to one shortening and one lengthening microtubule. As the chromosomes approach the
center of the mitotic spindle, the rate of microtubule
shortening/lengthening slows. The sister chromatids
are pushed and pulled by the spindle microtubules Figure 10. A cell at metaphase. Miare stained green, f-actin
until they are all lined up along the midline of the mi- crotubules
is stained red, and chromosomes,
totic spindle, which in most (but not all) cases is also with centromeres lined up along the
the midline of the cell. Once they are all lined up, the midline, are stained blue. Note the
surrounding cells, which are not in
cell is considered to have reached metaphase. Unlike mitosis, with their MT and MF cythe other phases, metaphase is a relatively static phase toskeletons more overlapped. This photo
released to public domain by the US goverment.
- it is a checkpoint for lining up the chromosomes.

The transition from the interphase microtubule cytoskeleton
to a mitotic spindle require a number of molecular motors to
move the centrosomes, align the microtubules, and expand the
spindle. These are depicted in fig. 9. Initially, as the duplicated
centrosomes move away from each other along with some of the
cytoskeletal microtubules, the microtubules will interact at various angles. Because the polar microtubules that help to expand
or maintain the spindle width must ineract in parallel, cytoplasmic dyneins bind to the eventual polar microtubules and by moving one along the other, bring them into parallel (9a). Once in
that position, BimC and other kinesins take over as the primary
motors along polar microtubules. They create an outward pushing force by holding onto a microtubule facing one direction, and
driving along a parallel MT facing the opposite direction towards
the (+) end (9b). Finally, cytosolic dyneins attached to cortical
cytoskeleton pull on the astral microtubules, which pulls the
spindle ends further from center (9c).

A

B
(+)

(+)
(+)

(-)

(-)

(-)

C
(+)

The chromosomes must be properly aligned to ensure that both daughter cells receive
the proper complement of chromosomes. How does the cell know when the chromosomes have reached the center of the spindle? An elegantly simple experiment
demonstrated that the general mechanism is a tension check - if the two microtubules
connecting to the pair of sister chromatids from each side are of the same length, they
should be exerting equal tension on the chromosomes. If the microtubule-kinetochore
connection is severed at metaphase, the cell will be prevented from progressing (Nicklas, R.B., et al, J. Cell Biol. 130: 929-39, 1995). However, if an equivalent tension is applied
by tugging on the chromosome with a glass microneedle, progression of mitosis is
restored!

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

(-)
(+)

(-)
(-)

(+)

(-)
(-)

(+)
(+)

Figure 9. Molecular motors set up the mitotic spindle.

In fact, there appear to be two mechanisms at work: the bub1/
bub2 system works in the tension sensing pathway, while another
metaphase protein, mad2 appears to be important in suspending
mitosis upon disconnection of the kinetochore with the spindle
microtubule.
Page 240

In addition to the tension check, there is another condition that must be met for continuation of mitosis: the MPF must be inactivated. As outlined earlier, MPF in part leads
to its own inactivation by activating the anaphase-promoting complex (APC), which
polyubiquitinates the cyclin, leading to its destruction and thus MPF-cdk inactivation.
APC also tags securin for destruction. Securin is a protein that binds and inhibits the
proteolytic enzyme, separase, the activation of which is needed to allow the sister chromatids to separate, which in turn, is necessary for anaphase to proceed.
Barring pathological situations, if and only if the chromosomes all line up at the metaphase plate will the cell proceed to the next stage of mitosis: anaphase. The sister chromatids separate and are pulled toward opposite poles of the mitotic spindle. Somewhat
perversely, even as the chromosomes move towards the spindle poles, the poles themselves move outward slightly. Separation of the sister chromatids requires the dissociation of the molecular “glue” holding them together: the cohesin proteins. The cohesins
bind to both molecules of DNA and hold them together shortly after replication back
in S phase. As anaphase approaches, the enzyme separase is activated, which then cuts
the cohesin molecules. Once all of the cohesin molecules are cut, the sister chromatids
can finally be separated. The removal of the cohesins proceeds roughly inwards from
the distal points of the chromosomes to the centromere, which is generally the last
region of attachment.
Anaphase can actually be divided into two stages, sometimes referred to as early and
late or A and B. At first, the kinetochore microtubules are shortening from both ends,
and kinesin-family motors pull the microtubules back toward the spindle poles. As late
anaphase starts, polar microtubules elongate, and an additional chromatid-separating
force is applied by kinesin-family motor proteins [kinesin-5] that push the polar microtubules against one another to increase the separation between the poles. Dyneinfamily motors help to direct movement of the poles as well, through their attachment
to the aster microtubules and the cortical (peripheral) cytoskeleton.

A cohesin is a multimer of four subunits, Scc1, Scc3, Smc1, and
Smc3 in yeast. An additional protein has also been observed in
Xenopus. The SCC1 protein is cleaved by separin in yeast, but in
metazoans, SCC1 may be removed from chromosomes by another
method as well. It is phosphorylated, which decreases its affinity
for DNA, and may expose a site for separase-catalyzed hydrolysis.
Separase also promotes anaphase by activating Cdc14, a phosphatase needed to dephosphorylate the cdk substrates that had
been phosphorylated by the cyclin-cdk complexes of early mitosis.
In addition, Cdc14 is also required for cytokinesis in the yeast S.
cerevisiae and nematode C. elegans.

When both sets of chromosomes arrive at their respective poles, telophase begins.
Technically, it was slowly building up since anaphase: when MPF was inactivated by
APC, its ability to phosphorylate nuclear lamins was ended. Protein phosphatases in the
cell remove the phosphate groups, allowing the lamins to once again interact with one
another, and by telophase they are reconstituting the nuclear lamina and the nuclear
envelope. Since the lamins and other nuclear membrane proteins also interact with
DNA, the nuclear membrane fragments dispersed back in late prophase now coalesce
around each set of DNA to form the new nuclear envelopes. The other fragmented
membranous organelles (ER, golgi) also start to re-form. By the end of telophase, the
product is a single large cell with two complete nuclei on opposite sides. The next and
Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 241

last step, cytokinesis, splits the cell into two separate and independent daughter cells.
In animal cells, cytokinesis is similar to the tightening of a drawstring in the middle of
the cell, pulling the “waist” in until all edges meet, and two separate cells result. This
contractile ring is composed of actin (structural) and myosin (motive) subunits. These
proteins, using ATP for energy, ratchet themselves closer and closer together similar to
the actin-myosin “power stroke” described for muscle cell sarcomeres, also primarily
made from actin and myosin. This mechanism is universal for animal cells, but the
placement of the ring is not always in the center of the cell. The ring often coincides
with the center of the cell, but is in fact positioned by the metaphase plate (i.e. the center of
mitotic spindle). The most obvious example of a
metaphase plate that does not coincide with the
center of the cell is found in the formation of
egg cells. Because the purpose of an egg cell is
to provide all of the material necessary to make
a viable new organism upon fertilization (the
sperm contributes negligible biomass beyond
the genetic material), it divides asymmetrically,
with the mitotic spindle located far to one side Figure 11. Telophase/ Cytokinesis. The contracring and other actin structures are stained
of the cell (fig. 19). When cytokinesis occurs, tile
green, the microtubules are orange, and the
one daughter cell, the presumed oocyte, is very chromosomes are blue. Photo released to public dolarge, while the other cell, called a polar body, main by US government.
has minimal cytoplasmic material surrounding
the nucleus. The contractile ring works in animal cells because the cell membrane is flexible.
In plant cells, the cell membrane is firmly at- A
B
tached to a rigid cell wall, and thus cannot be
pulled in. So, the plant cell ingeniously builds a
wall down the middle of the cell using specialized vesicles that originate from part of the Golgi, and which contain the materials necessary to
form a cell wall. The vesicles travel along the
C
phragmoplast, a structure built from the mitotic
spindle microtubules, and as the vesicles line
up along the middle of the cell, they begin to
fuse to form bigger vesicles and then a large
disk-like vesicle, the cell plate. Eventually they
reach the cell membrane itself, and fusing with Figure 12. Cytokinesis in plant cells. Golgivesicles filled with cell wall material
that leads to formation of a new cell wall, and derived
travel along the phragmoplast and fuse in the
two complete and independent cells.
center to form a new cell wall.
Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

The contents of the vesicles traveling along the phragmoplast are
not well described. Callose, a glucose polysaccharide with b1-3
linkages is known to be present in the developing cell plate, but
has not been found in the Golgi or vesicles. Interestingly, once
the cell plate has fused completely with the existing cell walls,
callose gradually disappears. It is thought that the same enzyme
system that synthesized callose may switch to synthesizing cellulose as the cell plate matures.

Page 242

Cell Death
A cell may die either intentionally (usually referred to as apoptosis or programmed cell
death, though also once known also as “cellular suicide”), or unintentionally (necrosis).
The microscopic observation of these two processes shows strikingly different mechanisms at work. In apoptosis, the cell begins to shrink and lose shape as the cytoskeleton is degraded, then the organelles appear to pack together, except for the nucleus.
Inside the nucleus, the chromatin condenses and attaches to the nuclear envelope,
which then loses its integrity and starts to break apart. The cell membrane begins to
show irregularities, descriptively known as blebs, and eventually, the cell breaks apart
into vesicles that are neatly cleaned up by phagocytes drawn to the site by apoptotic
signals emitted by the dying cell. Necrosis, on the other hand, is quite literally a mess.
The cell appears to swell and the plasma membrane begins to lose its integrity. It is
soon catastrophically leaking cytoplasm, and leaves behind cell debris that can accumulate and trigger necrotic death of adjacent cells.

A

B

Figure 13. (A) A cell underdying by necrosis is disorganized, generally bursts and leaks its
contents. (B) A cell undergoing apoptosis first subdivides itself, digesting itself in an orderly
fashion and compartmentalizing everything for scavenging by phagocytes.

Apoptosis is ultimately put into action by a cascade of caspases, a family of proteolytic
enzymes. This family of enzymes is generally produced as proenzymes that are activated by other members of the caspase family. Thus a cascade effect occurs, after the
initial trigger activating one set of caspases, they can then cleave a variety of proteins
including procaspases that are thereby activated and can hydrolyze even more proteins, including yet another type of procaspase, and so on. Of course, other enzymes
are also activated and participate by widening the response, activating other groups of
proteases and apoptotic enzymes. Triggering the apoptotic cascade is usually one of
two general pathways: an internal trigger, arising from damage to the mitochondria,
and an external trigger, started by binding an extracellular signal molecule to activate

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 243

a “death receptor”. Although there are many variations on both triggers, they follow
similar paths to the examples we will use here.
If you recall the section on electron
Mitochondrion
transport in oxidative phosphorylation,
Apaf-1
then you may also recall the soluble electron carrier, cytochrome c. This protein
is exclusively found in the mitochondrial
matrix under normal circumstances, so
cytochrome c
its presence in the cytoplasm can be takGrouping of Apaf-1
en to indicate mitochondria in distress.
and cytochrome c
Given the importance of mitochondria
in providing the energy for most aerobic cells to carry out their normal life, Cascade leading
to apoptosis
such distress is an early indicator that
Procaspase 9
Caspase 9
the cell will die soon. The diagram at
right shows a sample pathway that can
cause cytochrome c leakage from the
Procaspase 3
Caspase 3
mitochondria, but mitochondria can
also just “get old”, and if the cell is “proProcaspase 6
Caspase 6
grammed” (by transcription factors) not
to replace failing components, then as
the mitochondrial membranes lose in- Figure 14. Apoptotic signaling cascades may be initiated
by leakage of cytochrome c into cytoplasm.
tegrity and allow cytochrome c out, it
is a clear signal to initiate termination protocols, to use the parlance of science fiction
novels. The cytochrome c is bound by APAF-1 (apoptotic protease activating factor 1)
which oligomerizes to form an apoptosome made of 7 APAF-1 moecules and 7 cytochrome c molecules. The apoptosome binds and activates procaspase-9 to initiate a
caspase cascade that continues with activation of procaspase-3. When the mitochondria leaks cytochrome c, it also leaks another apoptotic protein, SMAC/Diablo. This protein, among other functions, inhibits IAP (inhibitor of apoptosis) -family proteins. The
IAP proteins normally inhibit caspase activation both directly and indirectly to prevent
cell death, and SMAC/Diablo blocks that inhibition.
When death receptors are activated, the subsequent caspase cascade does not involve
the mitochondria or APAF-1. The best studied case, FasR (Fas receptor) activates caspases 2, 8, and 10 by clipping procaspases and by releasing caspases from inhibiting complexes. These activate caspases 3, 6, and 7, which leads to the final stages of apoptosis.
In both internally and externally triggered apoptosis, the final steps are the same: some
of the final targets of the caspases are the nuclear lamins and ICAD (inhibitor of casChapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 244

TNF-α

TNFR

pase-activated DNase). Destroying the nuclear
lamins leads to fragmentation of the nuclear
envelope, while removing ICAD activated the
caspase-activated DNase (CAD) which then begins to digest the DNA.

Why does the apoptosis mechanism exist?
There are two major (and many other) reasons
TRADD
for apoptosis. The first is developmental. In
FADD
the development of an organism, the most effective strategy is often to have overgrowth of
Cascade leading
Procaspase 8
Caspase 8
to apoptosis
cells that are then pruned back to the proper
formations. Examples of this are the apoptotic
death of tissue between initially connected finProcaspase 3
Caspase 3
gers and toes (we humans start with webbed
fingers and toes embryonically), and death of
unconnected or improperly connected neurons.
Procaspase 6
Caspase 6
The latter case also illustrates a fundamental
Figure 15. Apoptotic signaling cascades may be principle in mammalian cell biology, and most
started by external activation of a “death recepother vertebrates as well: cells require signals
tor” such as FasR.
(trophic factors) to stay alive. In this example,
the neurons that do not make proper connections to a target cell do not receive the
necessary trophic factor (secreted by the target). This leads to apoptotic death of the
unconnected neuron. In fact, if apoptosis is blocked due to mutation to a gene in the
pathway, there is severe overgrowth of the brain and spinal cord, causing serious malfunction and craniofacial deformities. Thus in development, apoptosis is necessary to
control the growth of different parts of a metazoan organism.
DD

The other major function for apoptosis is to kill dangerous cells. In some cases, these
may be cells infected by a pathogen. In others, the cells have accumulated mutations
that do have affected the DNA error-correction system or cell-cycle checkpoints. When
the former occurs, each generation has an increased likelihood of even more mutations.
It is important to activate apoptosis in such cells before they have a chance to acquire
errors that removes all cell cycle checkpoints, allowing unchecked cell proliferation.
This could lead to tumor formation and potentially cancer (see next chapter). When
such cells need to be killed for the benefit of the organism, it may happen by the triggering of an internal sensor such as mitochondrial damage, or by external means, such
as an immune system cell recognizing an infected cell.

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 245

Meiosis
In metazoa, there are two situations in which a cell gives rise to daughter cells. The
first, and by far most common, is mitosis. The second is meiosis. Meiosis is the process
by which gametes (sex cells) are generated. Animals and plants are generated by sexual
reproduction (if this is news to you, please consider majoring in something other than
biology). These organisms start life through the fusion of two cells: a sperm and an
egg. Both contribute genetic material to the new organism. In order to maintain the
proper number of chromosomes in each generation, the gametes each contribute one
set of chromosomes, so that the fertilized egg and all other cells in the organism have
two sets of chromosomes — one from each parent. The purpose of meiosis, and its primary difference with mitosis, is not generating daughter cells that are exact replicates,
but generating daughter cells that only have half the amount of genetic material as the
original cell.
Let us take a look at this situation selfishly: meiosis in human beings. Almost every cell
in your body has a nucleus containing 46 chromosomes, a set of 23 from your father,
and a set of 23 from your mother. The only exceptions are the gametes: the spermatocytes in men and the oocytes in women. The somatic cells are said to be 2n or diploid,
that is having 2 sets of chromosomes, and the gametes are 1n or haploid, having only
one set of chromosomes. Sometimes, meiosis can be a little confusing to students
because it occurs in the same part of the cell cycle as mitosis, which is to say after G2.
Because of this, the cell entering meiosis actually has 4 sets of chromosomes, since the
DNA has already undergone replication in S phase.

Mature red blood cells contain no nucleus, and some muscle cells,
while multinucleated because they form from the fusion of several myoblasts, nevertheless have 46 chromosomes in each of the
nuclei.
Polyploidy, while uncommon in humans, is a normal state for
many organisms. The frog, Xenopus laevis, a common research
animal, is tetraploid.

Meiosis consists of two consecutive meiotic divisions each of which has phases similar
to mitosis: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, telophase, and each of which finishes with
complete cytokinesis. Note that immediately following meiotic telophase I, the cell
divides, and both daughter cells are immediately in prophase II. There is no intervening G1, S, or G2 phase.
Prophase I of meiosis begins very similarly to prophase of mitosis: MPF (mitotic-cdk)
activation, chromosome condensation, spindle formation and nuclear envelope breakdown. However, compared to mitosis, meiotic prophase I lasts for a very long time
and can be subdivided into five stages: leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene, and
diakinesis. During leptotene, the two sets (maternal and paternal) of sister chromatids
for each chromosome condense, align and form a structure known as a bivalent. To
clarify, this bivalent consists of four copies of a given chromosome: two copies each of
the maternal chromosome and of the paternal chromosome. Because the maternal and

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 246

paternal versions of a given chromosome are kept in extremely close proximity for an
extended period of time, there is a greater chance of a recombination, or crossing over
and exchange of homologous pieces of each chromosome.
1 Leptotene

3 Pachytene

2 Zygotene

4 Diplotene

5 Diakinesis

Figure 16. The five stages of Meiotic Prophase I.

Recombination occurs when a piece of the paternal chromosome is swapped for the
homologous piece of DNA on the matching maternal chromosome (or vice versa). Note
that sister chromatids (i.e. exact copies) do not recombine - only homologous non-sister
chromatids can recombine. Obviously, this kind of a DNA swap must be done carefully
and with equivalence, so that the resultant DNA on each side contains all the genetic
information it is supposed to, and no more information than it is supposed to. In order
to ensure this precision in recombination, the non-sister homologous chromatids are
held together in a synaptonemal complex (SC). This ladder-like complex begins to form
in the zygotene stage of prophase I and completes in pachytene. The complete SC consists of proteinaceous lateral elements (aka axial elements) that run along the length of
the chromatids and a short central element composed of fibrous proteins forming the
rungs of the ladder perpendicular to the two lateral elements. The central element is
formed of transverse filament dimers that interact with one another in offset fashion,
as well as with the lateral elements. These filament proteins (e.g. SCP1 (mouse), Zip1p
(yeast)) have central coiled-coil regions that function as protein interaction domains.
Although SCP3 and therefore complete lateral element formation are unnecessary for
a functional synaptonemal complex, condensin and cohesin do appear to be necessary
for proper transverse filament attachment of the lateral elements.
Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Lateral elements are composed several proteins, including condensins and cohesins. The cohesins are meiosis-specific variants,
with substitutions for the Scc1 and Scc3. Likewise, condensin
subunits also have meiosis-specific alleles. In addition to the
condensins and cohesins, which other than their meiotic-specific
variants, are common chromosomal proteins, there are SC-specific proteins, including SCP2 and SCP3. Both are localized to condensed chromosomes in early meiosis, and SCP3 has been show
by knockout analysis to be necessary for lateral element formation. However, it is not necessary for recombination.

Page 247

5’
3’

3’
5’

3’
5’

5’
3’

5’
3’

3’
5’

3’
5’

5’
3’

5’
3’

5’

3’
3’

5’

3’
5’

5’
3’

5’
3’

3’

5’

5’

3’
5’

3’
5’
5’
3’

5’
3’

3’
5’

3’
5’

5’
3’

DNA repair enzymes fill in gaps

3’
5’

Double strand break in one duplex

Gap is widened,
leaving two 3’ overlapping tails

One single-stranded 3’ tail invades
the other DNA duplex

5’
3’
3’
5’

5’
3’

3’
5’

5’
3’

3’
5’

5’
3’

3’
5’

2nd end capture forms DNA heteroduplex, branch migration,
two Holliday junctions resolve
5’
3’

3’
5’

5’
3’

3’
5’

5’
3’

3’
5’

Crossover

Homologous DNA duplexes align

3’
5’

Single Holliday junction resolves by reversing invasion

5’
3’

3’
5’

DNA repair enzymes fill in gaps

5’
3’

3’
5’
5’
3’

No Crossover

Figure 17. Recombination of homologous chromosomes.

Recombination may occur with or without the formation of double-strand breaks, and
in fact, can occur without the formation of the synaptonemal complex, although the SC
probably enhances the efficiency of recombination. In S. pombe, meiosis occurs without
the formation of a synaptonemal complex, but there are small discontinuous structures
somewhat similar to parts of the SC. In the fruit fly, Drosophila melanogaster, females
undergo meiosis using a synaptonemal complex, but males do not undergo meiotic
recombination, and their chromosomes do not form synaptonemal complexes. In most
cases, recombination is preceded by the formation of recombination nodules, which are
protein complexes that form at potential points for recombination. The best studied
mechanism for meiotic recombination involves a double-stranded break of one of the
chromosomes initiated by the meiosis-specific endonuclease, Spo11. The 5’ ends (one in
each direction) of this cut are degraded slightly to form 3’ single-stranded overhangs.
This leads to the formation of Holliday junctions with a strand from one chromosome
acting as a template for a missing portion of the homologous cut chromosome. This
may be resolved one of two ways, with or without a crossover, as illustrated (fig. 17).

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 248

The recombination is initiated in pachytene and completes in diplotene, at which time
the synaptonemal complex breaks down. As the chromatids begin to separate, chiasmata become apparent at some of the recombination sites. As prophase completes, the
chiasmata resolve from the center of the chromosomes to the ends.
As the cell goes from meiotic prophase I to meiotic metaphase I, another difference
between mitosis and meiosis is revealed: the chromosomes line up at the metaphase
plate as tetrads rather than as pairs. Because of this, when they pull apart in anaphase,
sets of sister chromatids segregate to opposite poles. Of course, due to recombination,
the sister chromatids are unlikely to still be identical.

Prophase I (early)

Prophase II

Prophase I (late)

Metaphase II

Metaphase I

Anaphase II

Anaphase I

Telophase II

Telophase I

Haploid
Daughter Cells

Figure 18. Meiosis generates 4 haploid daughter cells from one diploid precursor. To do so, it undergoes a
two rounds of meiotic nuclear and cell division,

After a conventional anaphase and telophase, the cell splits, and immediately the daughter cells begin the second meiotic division (fig. 18, right side). In some cell types, chromosomes do not decondense in meiotic telophase I, but if they have, they re-condense
Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 249

in meiotic prophase II. Prophase II proceeds similarly to mitotic prophase, in that there
is no formation of synaptonemal complexes or recombination. At metaphase II, the
sister chromatids line up along the metaphase plate just as in mitosis, although now
there are only 2n chromosomes in the cell, while in mitosis there would have been 4n
(because the DNA has replicated). Again, finishing the rest of the division almost exactly like mitosis, the sister chromatids pull apart in anaphase II, the nucleus reforms
in telophase II, and the final cytokinesis generates a total of four cells from the original
one that entered into meiosis, each containing 1n chromosomes.
Egg cells, as genetic and bulk material donors, need to be large but sperm cells, as genetic donors only, do not. The diagram below depicts the generation of the egg cells.
Only one oocyte is generated from a meiotic event; the other three daughter cells are
termed polar bodies, and contain so little cytoplasmic material that they are only viable
for a short time. The asymmetric distribution of cytoplasm in the first meiotic division
for oocytes is due to the position of the meiotic spindle in the periphery of the cell
rather than centered. Since the center of the spindle determines the position of the
contractile ring for cytokinesis, this leads to unevenly sized daughter cells.
Oogonium
Mitotic division
Primary oocytes

Arrested in prophase I of meiosis

Primary oocyte

Peripheral positioning of meiotic spindle

Meiotic division I

Arrested in metaphase II of meiosis

Polar body + Secondary oocyte

Meiotic division II

Polar bodies + Mature ovum

Figure 19. Oogenesis.

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 250

The generation of the very small sperm is a different mechanism altogether. In the
meiotic steps of spermatogenesis, the cell divisions are equal, with the meiotic spindle
aligned with the center of the cell, and the cells have equal amounts of cytoplasm, much
like an average cell that has undergone mitosis. The streamlined, minimal-cytoplasm
mature sperm is a product of post-meiotic differentiation, in which it gains the flagellar tail, and ejects most of its cytoplasmic material, keeping only some mitochondria
to power the flagella, and an acrosomal vesicle, that contains the enzymes and other
molecules needed to reach and fuse with (i.e. fertilize) an egg.
Type A1 spermatogonia
Type A2 spermatogonia
Type A3 spermatogonia
Mitotic divisions

Type A4 spermatogonia
Intermediate spermatogonia
Type B spermatogonia
Primary spermatocytes
Meiotic division I

Secondary spermatocytes
Meiotic division II

Spermatids

Spermatids

Differentiation

Residual bodies
and
Mature sperm

Figure 20. Spermatogenesis

Not all organisms reproduce with the human-like egg and sperm mechanism, i.e. gametic meiosis. As just described, in a gametic meiosis life cycle, meiosis generates haploid gametes, which then fuse/fertilize to become a diploid zygote. The zygote becomes
a multicellular diploid organism, and once it reaches sexual maturity can make more
haploid gametes via meiosis. The only multicellular state is diploid, and the gametes
are haploid.
Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 251

A common variation is sporic meiosis, used in all plants and many types of algae. In this
usage, “spore” refers to eukaryotic spores, and not to bacterial endospores, which are
simply dormant bacteria. Sporic meiosis does not directly produce gametes. Instead,
meiosis produces haploid spores, which can develop by mitosis in haploid multicellular
organisms. These organisms (termed gametophytes) can produce (still haploid) gametes by mitosis, that when fused/fertilized form a diploid zygote. This zygote can then
develop into a diploid multicellular form called the sporophyte. Finally, the sporophyte
is able to generate more spores by meiosis.
Haploid (n)

Gametophyte

Haploid (n)
Gametes

mitosis
Gametes
(egg)

(sperm)

Spores

meiosis

meiosis

fertilization

fertilization

Zygote

Zygote

Sporophyte

Diploid (2n)

Adult individual
Diploid (2n)

Figure 21. Gametic meiosis (left) and Sporic meiosis (right).

An example of this type of life-cycle and the role of meiosis is found in moss. What we
think of as the body of the moss is actually a gametophyte, made up of haploid cells
generated by mitotic division of a haploid spore. These gametophytes generate either
sperm or eggs in specialized structures in their distal tips, and under the right conditions (e.g. rain) the sperm is carried to the eggs and fertilization occurs. The fertilized
(diploid) egg now develops by mitotic division and differentiation into a sporophyte. In
this case, the sporophyte is a specialized reproductive structure on the tip of the moss,
and is also diploid. On the tip of the sporophyte is the sporangium, which is where
meiosis takes place to generate haploid spores. The spores may then be dispersed (by
wind or rain) and begin the cycle again by dividing and forming a new gametophyte.

Chapter 15, Cell Cycle, version 1.0

Page 252

Advanced Topics :

Using this book: This book is designed to be used in both introductory and advanced
cell biology courses. The primary text is generally on the left side of the vertical divider,
and printed in black. Details that are usually left to an advanced course are printed in
blue and found on the right side of the divider. Finally, additional biomedically relevant
information can be found in red print on either side of the divider.

Viruses, Cancer, and the Immune System

At this point, you should be fairly comfortable with the basic concepts of cell biology. The
purpose of this chapter is to build on that basic knowledge and put it together into more
complex systems. In addition, we will introduce some more advanced variations on some of
the mechanisms and structures that were discussed in earlier chapters. The three topics,
viruses, cancer, and immunity, are not only relevant as current news topics, but relate to one
another through multiple pathways, which is why they are lumped together.

Viruses
Though a virus has both genetic material and protein components, it is not a living
organism. It does not contain the capability of self-replication, and is completely reliant on the cellular biochemistry of whatever host cell it has infected. The minimal
definition of a virus is a nucleic acid genome inside of a protein shell, or capsid. There
are variations of this, such as virions (infectious viral unit) that have a membrane coat
outside of the capsid, or some that have enzymes inside of the capsid alongside the
genome. Again, none of these viral variations are able to fully replicate without cellular
machinery. The cells that viruses can infect range across most living organisms. There
are viruses specific for humans, some that only infect particular animals, some that infect plants, and even viruses that use bacteria as hosts. In current media reports of viral
outbreaks in recent years, HIV, avian flu, swine flu, much is made of the origin of the
virus with respect to its host/target organisms. However, most viruses are very specific
about the cells that they infect. The narrow host range may be not only to particular
species, but particular cell types within a particular species. Viruses with a broad host
range are relatively rare. However, this does not preclude the possibility of new strains
of virus evolving with different host ranges from their ancestral virii.

Viroids are also infectious non-living particles, but they are only
genetic material, RNA, and have no protein capsid. To date, they
are only known to infect plant hosts, and apparently spread by
direct or extremely close contact with an infected plant. These
infectious pathogenic RNA molecules are single-stranded and circular, and relatively small, roughly 200-400 nucleotides.

Viruses may have either RNA or DNA genomes, that may be linear or circular, and single
or double -stranded. There are fewer variations of capsid structure. In general, capsids
fall into two categories: helical and icosahedral. Helical capsids are actually made up
of globular subunits that associate into a helical cylinder, with the genome lying inside
Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 253

an interior groove of the helix (fig. 1c). The icosahedral capsids are also made up of
many subunits that together form an approximately 20-sided polygon made from sides
that are equilateral (or nearly so) triangles. If you play Dungeons and Dragonstm or
know someone who does, then you have probably seen dice (a “d20”) of this shape. Of
course with capsids, but not dice, there can be some variation in the number of sides,
the shape of the triangles, and the number of subunits that make up each face.
A

B

D

C

E

0.1 µm

Figure 1. Viruses. (A) a T-4 bacteriophage, (B) adenovirus, (C) tobacco mosaic virus, (D) human immunodeficiency virus, (E) influenza virus.

Viruses in all categories (ICTV class or Baltimore type) that can
cause human disease. Some of the major ones are listed here.
Virus		
Class		
Adenovirus	
Adeno		
				
Epstein-Barr	
Herpes		
Hepatitis A	
Picorna		
Hepatitis B	
Hepadna	
				
				
Hepatitis C	
Flavi		
Herpes Simplex			
	
Type 1	 Herpes		
Herpes Simplex			
	
Type 2	 Herpes		
HIV		
Retro		
Influenza	
Orthomyxo	
Measles		
Paramyxo	
Mumps		
Paramyxo	
HPV		
Papilloma	
				
Poliovirus	
Picorna		
Rabies		
Rhabdo		
Rubella		
Toga		

Disease
Febrile respiratory disease
Pharyngoconjunctival fever
Infectious mononucleosis
Acute hepatitis
Acute/chronic hepatitis
Hepatic cirrhosis
Hepatocellular carcinoma
similar to Hepatitis B
Cold sores, pharyngitis
Gingivostomatitis
Aseptic meningitis
Genital herpes
AIDS
Influenza
Measles
Mumps
Cervical cancer
Genital warts
Poliomyelitis
Rabies
German measles

External to the capsid, some viruses also have a membrane coat (viral envelope). As will
be more clearly explained soon, this phospholipid bilayer comes from viruses that exit
a host cell by exocytosis. Because it came from a host cell, the membrane can be used
as a ruse by the virus to fool other potential host cells into misrecognizing the virus as
a normal cell or cell debris, based on the receptors that recognize cellular proteins on
the membrane. It may then be taken into the cell by receptor-mediated endocytosis in
a mistaken attempt to recycle old cell debris, where it can proceed to infect the overgenerous host.
There are two classification systems for viruses, the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) has a Linnaean-like taxonomic system based on shared structural or biochemical properties (but not host specificity). Another system, also in use, is
the Baltimore classification, in which viruses are classified into seven categories by the
mechanism of mRNA production. That is, type I are the dsDNA viruses that make mRNA
the “normal” way by direct transcription of the genome, type II are ssDNA viruses that
Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 254

must first make a complementary strand to become dsDNA before transcription, type
VI are ssRNA viruses that use reverse transcriptase (detailed later in this section) to first
convert the RNA to a DNA intermediate before transcription, and so on.

Lytic “life” cycle of viruses
Viruses can interact with their hosts in two distinct ways: the lytic pathway and the
lysogenic pathway. Some viruses are able to switch between the two pathways while
others only use one. The distinguishing characteristic of the lytic life cycle is catastrophic death of the host cell by lysis and simultaneous release of viral particles. In
figure 2, the stages of the lytic pathway are depicted. In this case, a T4 bacteriophage
(the term “phage” is used for bacterial viruses) is used as an example. In step 1, the
virus attaches to the cell wall. In step 2, the virus injects its genetic material (dsDNA)
into the cytoplasm of the bacteria. In step 3, the viral DNA is being replicated and the
genes on the viral DNA are being transcribed and translated into viral proteins. Expression from the host genomic DNA is arrested. In step 4, viruses are assembled from the
proteins and DNA. And finally, once the viral factory has used up the cell’s energy and
material resources in making more viruses, it performs a final coup de grace, as cell is
destroyed to free the viruses to exit and find more host cells. The T4 phage used in this
example only undergoes this pathway and not the lysogenic pathway.

1

2

3

4

Figure 2. The Lytic Pathway

5

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 255

In eukaryotes, the mechanism is slightly more complicated by the nucleus. The DNA
is transported into the nucleus, where the transcription and replication take place. Although the viral mRNA is transported out to the cytoplasm for translation as expected,
the resulting capsid proteins are then imported back into the nucleus, where the virion
particles are assembled. Lytic plant and animal viruses with RNA genomes can bypass
the nucleus altogether, and the genome replication, protein synthesis, and particle assembly all occur in the cytoplasm.
Influenza virus

= Host DNA

Poxvirus

= Viral DNA

= Viral RNA

= Viral proteins

Figure 3. Lytic viruses in eukaryotes: an RNA virus (influenza) replicates completely in the cytoplasm, while the DNA virus (poxvirus) uses both cytoplasm and nucleus.

The lytic pathway can produce a huge number of viral particles between infection
and lysis, as many as several tens of thousands, for example from a rabies-infected
cell. Therefore, this pathway is well suited for conditions in which potential host cells
are plentiful. On the other hand, this is a waste of resources if there are relatively
few potential hosts. Imagine a few bacteria that have floated off from the colony: if
a phage infected a bacteria in the main colony, commandeering the bacteria to create
thousands of viral particles, most of those particles would infect new hosts and make
many thousands more soldiers in this viral army. But if the virus infected one of the
breakaway bacteria, then once it killed its host by lysis, the viral particles would have
few, if any, other potential hosts, and eventually all the viral particles just break down
from various environmental conditions. What would a better survival strategy for the
virus in such a situation?

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 256

The Lysogenic Pathway
A better option for some bacterial viruses is called the lysogenic pathway. The bacteriophage that have this option, as well as a lytic pathway, are known as temperate phage.
In this pathway, the virus goes into dormancy by integrating into the host genome,
and remaining transcriptionally quiescent until environmental conditions change and
reflect a likelihood of more host cells to infect (fig. 4). Lambda (l) is an example of a

1

2

3

4

5

6

Figure 4. The lysogenic pathway.

temperate bacteriophage. The initial stages of infection and genome injection are the
same as the lytic cycle, but under conditions that encourage lysogeny, the viral genome
is integrated into the host genome in step 3. In l integration into E. coli, this occurs
by reciprocal recombination at a 15-base pair sequence known as the att l site and is
facilitated by the Int gene product. As long as the environmental conditions are not
conducive to bacterial reproduction (and thus limited number of possible host cells),
the viral genome remains mostly hidden and inactive. The only significant exception is
a gene encoding a l repressor that prevents the next step and keeps the virus dormant.

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 257

That next step is the excision of the l phage DNA from the host chromosome, and subsequent replication and transcription of the viral DNA (fig. 4, Step 4). Then, like before,
the final steps are assembly and accumulation of virions, and eventual breakdown of
cellular structure and release of the viral particles.
Although it is not referred to as lysogeny, some animal viruses can behave similarly.
The most prominent example is the Baltimore Class VI viruses - commonly known as
retroviruses, one of which is HIV. The path of a retrovirus through a eukaryotic host
cell is depicted below (fig. 5). HIV has an envelope, which is studded with transmem-

In order for packaging into the tight space constraints afforded by
capsids, viral genomes must be highly economical. For example,
the HIV genome (fig. 6) has several genes that overlap.
5’ LTR

gag

vif
pol

vpr
vpu

2

nef

Figure 6. The HIV genome.

Or, in the case of curtoviruses, ssDNA
plant viruses (e.g. beet curly top virus), the genome not only has overlapping genes, it is even bi-directional (fig. 7) encoding gene products in
both strands of DNA after the ssDNA
has been converted to dsDNA.

1

3’ LTR

rev
tat
env

C4

V2
Rep

Curtovirus
genome

MP

CP
C2

REn

Figure 7. A curtovirus genome.
6

3

8

5

10

7
4
9

Figure 5. Infection and reproduction pathway of retrovirus in a eukaryotic host cell.

brane proteins that are recognized by the host cell, binding the virus to the cell surface
and initiating receptor-mediated endocytosis (1). After the endocytosis, the membrane
envelope of the virion and the vesicular membrane fuse to release the capsid and its
contents (2). After the capsid dissociates in the cytoplasm, the two strands of viral
RNA are released along with a special polymerase: reverse transcriptase, which reads
an RNA template and synthesizes DNA. Reverse transcriptase also uses that new DNA
to synthesize a complementary DNA strand so that it eventually produces a doublestranded DNA version of the viral genome (3). This viral dsDNA is transported into the
nucleus where it integrates into the host genome using another viral protein, integrase
Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Given the need for economy, what genes are found in viruses?
One of the most studied viral genomes, bacteriophage l, contains
genes encoding five transcriptional control proteins (which ones
are expressed depends on whether the phage is in a lysogenic
or lytic mode), a binding protein that controls degradation of a
transcriptional activator, 17 capsid proteins, an excisionase that
controls excision and insertion of the phage genome in the host
genome, an integration protein that inserts the phage genome
into the host’s, and 3 genes participating in lysis of the host cell.
The HIV genome depicted above is much smaller than l, at around
9 kilobases compared to 48 kb, but again, the theme is to use cellular proteins when possible, and encode viral genes if necessary.
So, gag encodes capsid proteins, pol encodes reverse transcriptase,
integrase, and HIV protease (which cleaves the gag and pol gene
products into their functional proteins), vif acts against a common host cell antiviral enzyme, vpr regulates nuclear import, tat
strongly increases transcription of HIV genes, rev exports viral
RNA from the nucleus, vpu is needed for budding of particles from
the host, env encodes viral envelope glycoproteins, and nef promotes survival of infected cells. The LTR regions are very strong
promoters to drive high expression of these genes.
Page 258

(4). The integrated viral DNA is called a provirus. The provirus can lay dormant, but if it
is activated, then it is transcribed and the resulting viral RNA is transported out of the
nucleus (5). Some of the viral RNA encodes enzymes like reverse transcriptase and integrase, or capsid proteins, all of which are made in the cytoplasm (6), but some encode
membrane bound glycoproteins, which are translocated into the ER (7) and eventually
processed through the Golgi and incorporated into the plasma membrane (9). Once the
virion has been assembled (8), it binds to the viral transmembrane proteins, nucleating
an exocytic “vesicle” (10) which is the virion complete with viral envelope.
In considering viruses with respect to the rest of this integrative chapter, there are two
overriding ideas to keep in mind. First, viral survival is based on numbers: it needs
to make huge numbers of its components to cast as wide a net for new host cells as
possible. To do this, viral promoters are usually much stronger than host cell promoters, simultaneously driving more viral gene expression while preventing host gene
expression (by dedicating cellular resources to virus production). Second, because of
fast generation times, the rate of viral mutation and evolution is far faster than normal
eukaryotic genomes. In addition, if the virus uses its own polymerase (such as reverse
transcriptase or RNA replicase), the mutation rate rises even more because there is no
error-checking by viral polymerases.

Recent structural examination of the HIV genome suggests that
the structure of HIV RNA itself may play a significant role in its
propagation inside of host cells. Figure 8, from Watts et al, Nature
460:711-716, 2009, shows a predicted secondary structure of the
genome. The authors suggest that the RNA structure actually
may interact with ribosomal elongation to control the folding
of the viral proteins. They also postulate the extension of this
argument to include important genetic information encoded not
just in the nucleotide sequence, but the secondary structure and
tertiary structure of any RNA virus.

Cancer
Cancer encompasses a set of genetic diseases that lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation in multicellular organisms. The discussion of cancer also happens to be useful in
a cell biology course, because it ties together many of the concepts that you just spent
most of the semester learning. Although it can be caused in part by an outside agent,
the development of cancer is essentially a series of uncorrected mistakes by a cell’s
regular processes. It can strike plants as well as animals, and because of intense re-

Figure 8. Secondary structure of HIV-1.

(reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers

Ltd: Nature 460:697, 2009)

Figure 9. (left) A tumor on a cypress branch. (right) A tumor of the small intestine.

Cypress

tumor photo by W. Calder, cc licensed 2009. Small bowel tumor by E. Uthman, public domain 1999.

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 259

search and subsequent deeper understanding of the cellular events that lead to cancer,
it can now be treated in humans with some degree of success, depending on the type,
location, and progression of the tumor.
Abnormal replication of a cell generally leads to the formation of a tumor, which is
simply a solid mass of abnormally growing cells, usually clonal colonies of one or a few
original tumorigenic cells. However, a tumor is not necessarily cancerous. A benign
tumor is one that is ensconced within an extracellular matrix sheath, does not spread
beyond that sheath, and whose growth is slow or limited. In contrast, a cancerous or
malignant tumor grows quickly due to uncontrolled proliferation, expands significantly
beyond its original boundaries, invading new tissue, and can metastasize, spreading
through the circulatory system. Once this happens, not only is it no longer possible to
remove all of the cancerous cells by surgical excision of the primary tumor, it is also
nearly impossible to know how many secondary tumors have formed or where they
formed, since the metastatic cancer cells in the bloodstream may theoretically exit
almost anywhere. However, in reality, certain tumors metastasize preferentially to
particular target tissues/organs, presumably based on molecular markers on the surface
of the cells or in the extracellular matrix. Metastasis is considered the greatest medical
problem with respect to cancer treatment. If cancer is detected after metastasis has
occurred, the chances of survival drop dramatically.
At the cellular level, cancerous cells differ from normal cells in a number of important
ways. Normal cells are regulated by the cells around them, and by adulthood, most
cells are inhibited from proliferation by contact with their neighboring cells. In vitro,
this can be demonstrated by the observation that non-cancerous proliferative cells such
as epithelial cells can proliferate until the culture dish bottom is completely covered

Figure 10. Normal human breast cells in culture at left. At right, similar cultured cells that have
been transformed (i.e. they are now cancerous). Note the irregularity of both cell and nuclear
morphology. Membranes are arbitrarily stained in different colors; chromosomes are stained
blue in both panels. Photos from Ince et al, Cancer Cell 12:160-170, 2007.

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 260

(confluence), but once that happens, proliferation stops. This phenomenon is known as
contact inhibition. If cancerous cells are allowed to proliferate in culture, they do not
stop after the surface is covered, and instead can mound up on one another. The cell
surface and internal cellular organization of cancer cells is often disorganized in comparison to normal cells. Finally, cancer cells usually appear de-differentiated in comparison to their original cell type. If the original cell type was a flat cell, the cancerous
cell would be more rounded and three-dimensional. This is an expected consequence of
becoming a cancerous cell. Not only is proliferation deregulated, cell surface protein
expression is altered to promote metastasis.

Differentiation is a key part of normal metazoan development.
All cells come from the fertilized egg, and even after several divisions, the cells are very similar. Eventually, though, they begin to
specialize for their particular physiological functions, whether as
lung cells, brain cells, or bone cells, and that process of specialization is differentiation. In cancer cells, this process is partially
reversed, as the cell reverts to a less specialized, more primitive
state.

Cancer is considered a genetic disease because it is caused by alterations to the DNA.
However, it is rarely an inherited disease. An inherited disease would mean a disease
that can be passed from one generation to the next, implying that the disease-causing
DNA mutation is found in the gametes (sperm or egg) of the stricken adult. Most cancers are due to spontaneously arising mutation in the DNA of one or a few somatic
cells, and not a systemic aberration. Spontaneous mutation in the germ cells are possible, but most potentially cancer-causing ones lead to non-viable offspring. So, although
it is exceedingly rare for cancer to be inherited, however, it is much more common to
inherit a predisposition or increased chance of developing a cancer.

1. Polyp grows on colon wall
2. Benign tumor

3. Class II adenoma (benign)

Loss of DNA methylation

RAS oncogene activated

4. Class III adenoma (benign)

5. Malignant carcinoma

6. Metastasis

DCC gene tumor
suppression lost

p53 gene tumor
suppression lost

PRL3 oncogene activated,
Further mutations

APC gene tumor suppression lost

Figure 11. Development of colon cancer takes time and multiple mutations.

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 261

An individual cancer-causing mutation generally creates a problem that can be corrected by some other cellular mechanism. Therefore, development of cancer comes about
through the accumulation of multiple mutations and not the acquisition of just one.
The best studied example of this gradual development of cancer is colon cancer (fig.11).
There is a fairly characteristic progression of mutations in the genes APC, RAS, DCC,
TP53, and PRL3. Note that the progression depicted here is not inevitable: the presence
of polyps does not lead invariably to colon cancer. Furthermore, intervention can be
highly successful if it occurs early in the progression, so oncologists need to consider a
range of risk factors in weighing the cost and benefits of medical intervention. RAS and
PRL3 are oncogenes, while APC, TP53, and DCC are tumor suppressor genes.

Oncogenes
Regulatory Protoregion oncogene

Normal protein

1

4
2

Mutation
or
deletion
Gene
duplication

3
Translocated
enhancer/promoter
increases transcription

Protein
with
increased function

Translocated
gene forms
fusion gene

Fusion protein
not under
normal control

More copies of
normal protein
More copies of
normal protein

Figure 12. Conversion of protooncogenes to oncogenes. (1) Due to mutation of the coding region, the protein
has higher physiological activity. (2) Gene duplication leads to multiple copies of the gene each expressed
normally, making many more copies of the protein than normal. (3) Mutation of the regulatory region or
translocation of a stronger enhancer or promoter to the protooncogene can lead to enhance transcription,
and therefore more protein. (4) Translocation of another gene inline with part of the coding region, can put
the activity of the protooncogene under the control of modifiers of the translocated gene, and thus lead to
overactivity.

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 262

Oncogenes are generally dominant gain-of-function mutations of normal cellular genes
called protooncogenes. These protooncogenes are themselves positive regulators of
the cell cycle, but they are regulated by other factors, either extracellular signals or
intracellular mechanisms. Mutations that turn them into oncogenes specifically remove all or some of this regulation. They thus become overactive, and try to push
the cell cycle forward leading to increased proliferation. These mutations can also be
classified into a few general mechanistic categories. These (fig. 12) are mutations to the
coding region that increase physiological activity, gene duplications resulting in more
copies of the gene at the DNA level
Proto-oncogene
growth factor receptors
and thus more at the protein level,
mutations to the regulatory region
of the gene or that alter regulation
of gene expression, thus increasing
copy number of the protein, and
finally, translocations that replace
Amino acid change
Deletion of extracellular
in transmembrane region
ligand-binding domain
part of the coding region, resulting
in a chimeric protein whose activity may be under a different control
scheme than normal.
Constitutively active
Examples of two types of mutations
P
P
P
P
oncoprotein
growth factor receptors
P
P
P
P
are illustrated to the right (fig. 13)
P
P
(ligand-independant)
with a mitogen receptor as the protooncogene. In the first case, the Figure 13. Conversion of a mitogen receptor protooncogene
into an oncogene by point mutation leading to amino acid
transmembrane portion of the re- change in the transmembrane region (left) or by truncation
ceptor has been mutated, causing of ligand-binding domain.
an amino acid change that alters
the conformation not just of the transmembrane region, but of the cytoplasmic kinase
domain, which becomes constitutively active, regardless of whether a ligand has bound
outside or not. In the second case, the entire extracellular domain has been removed
due to a mutation of an amino acid codon into a stop codon or translocation, and the
resulting receptor is always active, also independent of ligand binding.

Some kinds of retroviral infection can accomplish the conversion of a protooncogene
to an oncogene by inserting viral DNA near the promoter region of the protooncogene.
Because the viral promoters tend to be very strong, they can induce overexpression of
the protooncogene product. In avian species, avian leukosis virus is known to cause
tumors by insertion near the c-myc oncogene, while in humans, another retrovirus,
HTLV (human T-lymphotropic virus), can cause acute disease (tropical spastic paraparesis), but may also cause T-cell leukemia and lymphoma.
Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 263

What functions are characteristic of protooncogenes? Mitogen receptors, as already
described above, and exemplified by the receptor tyrosine kinases EGFR (epidermal
growth factor receptor), VEGFR (vascular endothelial growth factor receptor), RON (recepteur d’origine nantais, a macrophage stimulating protein receptor), and ErbB2 (also
HER2/neu, another human EGF receptor). Growth factors themselves may also be protooncogenes, such as FGF-5, one of several oncogenes in the fibroblast growth factor
family, or c-sis, an oncogenic form of PDGF (platelet-derived growth factor). Signal
cascade proteins, often either tyrosine or serine/threonine kinases or other regulatory
enzymes, are a large group of protooncogenes (e.g. Src family tyrosine kinases, BTK
family tyrosine kinases, cyclin-dependent Ser/Thr kinases, Ras-family small GTPases).
Finally, various transcription factors (e.g. Ets, Myc, E2F families), can effectively be mutated into oncogenes.

Tumor Suppressor Genes
Tumor suppressor genes normally do
Regulatory
Tumor suppressor
region
gene
Normal protein
what would be expected from their name.
Whereas the oncogenes mostly drive the
cell cycle forward, the tumor suppressor
1
2
genes’ primary functions are to temporarily
Mutation or deletion
stall the cell cycle so that DNA repair mech- Mutation or deletion
in regulatory region
in coding region
anisms can have time to work. However, if
repair is unsuccessful after a few attempts,
the tumor suppressor gene product may
then trigger apoptosis rather than allow a
damaged cell to replicate and potentially
create another genetically damaged cell.
Thus, the presence of an oncogene in a cell
will not necessarily lead to development of
Protein with
cancer because a functioning tumor supimpaired function
pressor gene might prevent the cell from Figure 14. Tumor suppressor gene mutations can lead
to cancer.
replicating. Equally, if a tumor suppressor
gene is knocked out but there is no oncogene present, then the cell is unlikely to be immediately cancerous because although a cellular “emergency brake” is nonfunctional, if
there is nothing to drive the cell through its cycle any faster or more frequently than
usual, then the “brake” is never needed anyway.

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 264

Like oncogenes, tumor suppressor genes can work (or not work, as would be the case
in cancer) in several ways. Here is an example with the breast cancer-associated genes,
BRCA1 and BRCA2. These gene products are involved in DNA repair (chapter 7). When
BRCA1 or BRCA2 is knocked out, the cell loses its ability to use that DNA repair pathway. There are other repair pathways, and even if there weren’t there may not be any
serious lesions to the DNA, so the cell could behave normally for the time being. What
is important from a cancer standpoint, is that each safety/repair mechanism that is
lost increases the likelihood that an additional mutation may cause the cell to become
cancerous.
Cytoplasm

Ionizing Radiation

Nucleus

DNA strand break

ATM

Chk2 P

Chk2

Failure

BRCA1

Success

BRCA2

ATM

RAD51

Active

UV Radiation

Inactive

DNA strand break

Cdc25

Active
Cdc25

P

Repaired DNA

p53

Increased
Transcription

p21 mRNA

Inactive

Bax mRNA

Bax

Apoptosis

p21
Cyclin

Cdk
P

ATM

P

p53

Chk1 P

Inactive

Cdc25

Stable
p53 P

P

Active

Sequestered
(Inactivated)

p53
Transient

ATR

Chk1

BARD1

Chk2 P

Chk2

P P

Inactive

Cyclin

Cdk
P

Active

Cdk
p21

Inactive

Cell Cycle Arrest
Normal Cell Cycle

Figure 15. Cell cycle arrest due to DNA damage. ATM detects the double strand break, and
activates Chk2 and BRCA1. Chk2 also activates BRCA1, which with BRCA2 forms a repair complex. However, if BRCA1 is not immediately available, the cell needs to go into a holding pattern until one becomes available. Therefore, Chk2 activates p53, which induces transcription
of p21, which binds to cdk, preventing association with cyclin, and thus preventing cell cycle
progress. If this continues for long, some of the p53 activates transcription of Bax, which will
induce apoptosis to kill off a cell with damaged DNA. When p53 is hit with a loss of function
mutation, the cell does not die, and it attempts to replicate even with damaged DNA, which
may lead to more mutations in the subsequent generation, if it is successful in reproduction.
Without p53, the accumulation of errors in successive generations increases. The mechanism
of buying time for the cell to make repairs is not limited to the ATM-BRCA situation. The left
side of the figure shows another response to DNA damage that leads to cell cycle arrest.

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 265

It should be clear now how recessive loss-of-function mutations in a tumor suppressor
gene can lead to an inherited predisposition to cancer. As diploid organisms, we have
two copies of each gene in our cells, so losing one to mutation does not wipe out the
protective function. Thus, if nothing happens to the other one, then the cell is fine. It
is just a question of probability. Losing the function of one is a very low probability
event, but the probability of losing both copies is extremely small. Thus, even though
it is “only 1 step” on the way to losing the protection of this particular tumor suppressing function, it is a very large difference in probabilities. Of course, keep in mind that
even complete loss of a single tumor suppressor gene is usually not enough to lead
immediately to cancer, and still other mutations must occur to take advantage of the
weakened cell defenses and push it towards a cancerous state.

Human Cancers
Although some oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes have a restricted distribution
that hints at likely tumor locations, many of the genes are widespread and even ubiquitous. It is presently unclear, therefore, why certain types of cancer are linked to
particular mutated genes, but there are a number of strongly correlated cases.
Retinoblastoma is a cancer of the eye that usually strikes at a relatively young age. It
has been linked to the RB gene, which encodes a repressor of E2F, a transcription factor that would normally turn on genes needed for S phase progression. Only 10% of
individuals who inherit the RB loss-of-function mutation escape the development of the
cancer. It also turns out that people with the RB mutation have a higher incidence of
developing other tumors as well, although generally later in life. Perhaps the higher
rate of damage to retinal cells (due to light exposure) leads to greater susceptibility.

Cancers are classified by the tissue type in which the tumors first
arise. Thus, carcinomas, which are the most common type (~85%
of human cancers), come from epithelial cells arising from either
the embryonic ectoderm (skin and nerve cells) or endoderm (gut
lining). Leukemias (~4%) arise from white blood cells. Lymphomas
(~5%) reflect aberrant growth of lymphocytes in spleen or lymph
nodes. Sarcomas (~2%) arise from connective tissue of mesodermal origin, such as bone cancers.

Breast cancer is another disease that has strong links to mutations in certain genes.
Loss of function mutations to the BRCA1 gene encoding a DNA repair protein lead to a
five-fold higher risk of developing breast cancer in a woman’s lifetime. Although mutations to other tumor suppressors (including p53, PTEN, CHEK2, ATM) most hereditary
breast cancers have a link to BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation. On the oncogene side, breast
cancer tumors consistently show expression of CYCD1 (a cyclin) mutations, and depending on the type of tumor, HER2/Neu may be linked as well.
Lung cancers are among the most common - the second highest in men (prostate is
higher) and women (breast is higher) alike, and make up approximately 1 in 3 cancer
deaths annually. Several oncogenes of the myc family: N-myc, L-myc, and c-myc, as well
as H-ras have been linked to various lung cancers. Loss of p53 and RB are also associ-

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 266

ated with the development of lung cancers, and perhaps not coincidentally, tobacco
smoking is associated with p53 mutations. Interestingly, despite being so common, so
far, there have been no particular oncogenes associated with prostate cancer, nor any
hint of prostate-specific tumor suppressor susceptibilities.

Metastasis
The onset of metastasis signals a drastic change in the prognosis of a cancer
patient. While pre-metastatic tumors
can certainly be dangerous or painful,
treatment can be fairly localized, e.g.
1
surgical excision and directed radiation
therapy. Once the tumor metastasizes
it must be treated systemically due to
3
2
the potential for secondary tumors
literally anywhere in the body. This
presents a problem because the tumor
cells are derived from the body’s cells
and are mostly indistinguishable by the
body’s immune system. The primary
4
mechanism for anti-cancer drugs is to
target fast proliferation, since most
5
cancer cells proliferate much faster
than most normal cells, but this still
Figure 16. Metastasis.
kills off some of the body’s naturally
fast-proliferating cells, such as the epithelial cells lining the gut. More recently, other
approaches to anti-cancer drug treatments have been developed; most notably, antiangiogenesis drugs to starve tumors by preventing them from developing or recruiting
new blood vessels. As tumors grow, the ability to absorb nutrients from the environment decreases for the innermost cells of a solid tumor.
Metastasis (fig. 16) starts with downregulation of cell-cell adhesions (1). This may include inside-out signaling to integrin receptors, or downregulation of cadherin expression, and other methods for allowing the cell to separate from the rest of the tumor.
Non-metastatic tumors are surrounded by a capsule of extracellular matrix that contains the tumor in its location. To escape this capsule, the metastasizing cell must
secrete proteases (usually metalloproteases) that can break down the ECM proteins (2).
Once out into the looser connective mesenchymal tissue, the metastatic cell increases

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 267

its locomotive activity and heads for a blood vessel. Intravasation (3) into a small, low-flow blood
vessel allows the cell to be carried to nearly any
destination in the body by the circulatory system
(4). At some point, the metastatic cell will attach
to the interior wall of a blood vessel, and exit the
circulation (5). The molecules and situations that
determine the point of exit are not clear yet, although there are clearly preferred sites of metastasis for some types of tumors. Presumably, there is
specific recognition and adhesion occurring based
on cell adhesion molecule expression on tumor cell
and target tissue surfaces.

Figure 17. Common sites (open yellow circles) for the metastasis of colon cancers
(filled yellow circle).

The Immune System
Immunology is a full semester course at most universities, so this section will only
touch on a few basic concepts that should be easily accessible to the student who has
nearly completed the cell biology course. At its core, immunology is about adaptation.
That is, since an animal has no preconception of the various potential infections it may
be subject to, it must have a system in place that is flexible enough to deal with almost
anything that comes along. Obviously, the systems are not perfect, but considering the
wide range of pathogens, immune systems are remarkably efficient. In humans, there
are two types of immune response to infection: the innate response, which is relatively
nonspecific, and the adaptive, or acquired, response, which has more specificity.
The innate immune responses are common to all animals, and act on large classes of
pathogens. For example, Toll-like receptors on phagocytes recognize a variety of bacterial surface molecules such as the flagellin specific to bacterial flagella, or the peptidoglycan components of bacterial cell walls. When these receptors are activated, the
phagocyte goes into action, enveloping the offending bacteria or virus, and breaking

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 268

it down. This depends on recognizing the external surface, so bacteria or viruses that
do not have a recognizable molecule on their surface are able to escape this particular
line of defense.
Defensins, which are found on a variety of surfaces (skin, cornea, gut) as well as in circulation, are small (18-45 amino acids) cysteine-rich cationic proteins that bind to a variety of pathogenic viruses, bacteria, and fungi. It is unclear how they may work against
viruses, other than perhaps attacking infected host cells, but against bacteria and fungi
the mode of operation is generally to bind to the cell membrane and form a pore that
allows ions and other small molecules to flow out killing the pathogen. Complement,
a group of proteins (~20) circulating in the blood, can act similarly against pathogenic
cells.
Finally, natural killer (NK) cells, lymphocytes that target any cell that does not carry
cell surface proteins that are normally found on cells from the animal, can kill not only
attacking cells, but virally infected cells that have stopped producing their normal proteins (including the recognition protein) because they are busy producing viral proteins.
NK cells can even be effective against some cancer cells if they have downregulated cell
surface protein expression as part of their de-differentiation and deadhesion.
The adaptive immune system, which is only found in vertebrates, is what most people
think of when the human immune system is mentioned. We and other vertebrates also
have an innate immune system, but all the molecules and cells that normally come to
mind — antibodies, T-cells, B-cells — are part of the adaptive immune response. There
are two components to the adaptive response, a humoral response, in which proteins
(antibodies) floating in the blood bind to the infectious agent and prevent if from binding to cells or targeting it for the cellular response, which is mediated by T cells that
can specifically recognize and kill the targeted pathogen.

Antibodies
Front and center in the adaptive immune response are antibodies. These proteins
may be either secreted by or attached to the surface of B cells, the lymphocytes that
differentiate either in bone marrow (adult) or liver (fetus), as opposed to those called
T cells, which differentiate in the thymus gland. Incidentally, if you see sweetbreads
on a menu, that would be thymus. Yum. You can take that seriously or sarcastically
depending on how you think my tastes run.

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 269

Back to the antibodies. The different types of antibodies, IgA, IgD, IgE, IgG, and IgM, are
all based on the IgG structure (fig. 18), which is roughly Y-shaped, and composed of two
heavy chains and two light chains. These chains have disulfide bond-stabilized loops
(recall the Ig-like loops in the cell adhesion molecules a few chapters back?), and the
combination of the distal light chain loop and distal heavy chain loop make the antigen
binding site. The antigen is defined as the molecule, or more specifically the part of a
molecule that is recognized by the particular antibody. Since the antibody is meant
to mediate highly specific recognition of a wide variety of invading pathogens, there
must be a way to create at least as many different antibodies. This is made possible by
the process of DNA rearrangement. This mechanism is also used to generate diversity
in T-cell receptors, which are quite different structurally, but also need to be available
with an extremely wide variety of specific binding sites.

A

B
Antigen-binding
domain

SS

SS

secretory
component

VL
CL

IgA

SS

CH3

SS

CH2

CH2

SS

Light chain

SS

Hinge
region

SS

SS

SS

CL

J chain

SS

SS

SS

CH1 CH1

SS

VL

IgG

(IgD, IgE very similar)

VH

SS

SS

VH

CH3
J chain

Heavy chain

IgM

Figure 18. Antibodies. (A) an antibody is composed of two heavy chains
(red) and two light chains (blue). Each has a variable region, and constant
region(s). (B) IgA and IgM are built upon multiple IgG-like structures.

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 270

DNA Rearrangement
One of the central assumptions throughout our study of the cell has been that although
the RNA and proteins in any cell may differ, any cell of a given organism other than
the gametes should have the same DNA. This is not the case with B cells or T cells. In
these cells, part of the maturation process is to create a unique arrangement of different domains to form a specific antibody (or T-cell receptor). The germline DNA, or the
DNA that is found in all other somatic cells of the organism, contains many different
such segments, but only a few are put together to make the antibody/TCR. This is a
stochastic process, and with this kind of rearrangement happening on both heavy chain
genes and two different light chain genes (designated k and l), there are well over 10
trillion (1013) different combinations for generating immunoglobulins in humans, and
even more combinations for T-cell receptors! How is this accomplished?

A

Germline DNA
V4

V5

DNA rearrangement

Vn

...

J1 J2 J3 J4 J5

C

...

3’

Vn

...

A

V5

5’

C

V1

V2

V4

V3

J2

J3 J4 J5

...

C

5’

...

V2

mRNA

...

C

B
3’

Vα

3’

5’

Cα

3’

α chain
Germline DNA
Vβ1
Vβn

...

Dβ1

...

NH2

Vβ

Cβ

...

Jβ1-3

Cβ1 Dβ2

...

Jβ4-6

Cβ2

β chain

S S

Extracellular
3’

Random recombination

Primary transcript
5’

V3 J3 J4 J5

...

C

Rearranged DNA
3’
5’

E

Antigen-binding domain
H2N

Cα

Vα1 Jα1 Cα

5’

Transcription

D

3’

Transcription and Splicing

J2
V3 J3 J4 J5

...

Jα1-5

5’

Degradation

V4

Cα

Jα1-5

Random recombination

J1
V1

Vα1

3’

Vn

V5

5’

C

Germline DNA
Vα2
Vαn

Rearranged DNA
Vα1

...

B-cell DNA

J1

S S

V3

S S

V2

S S

B

V1

S S

5’

Vβ1 Dβ1 Jβ3

Cβ1

3’

Transcription and Splicing

mRNA
5’

V3 J3

C

mRNA
3’

Figure 19. DNA rearrangement of a k light chain gene. (A) The germline DNA has approximately 40 V region genes, 5 J segments, and one C region gene. (B) By action of the V(D)J
recombinase, a random V region is brought close to a random J region, and the intervening
sequence is cut out (C). (D) The gene may still contain multiple J segments, but RNA splicing
removes all but one, leaving the final mRNA (E) with one V, one J, and one C region.

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Intracellular

HOOC

COOH

Vβ1 Dβ1 Jβ3 Cβ1
5’

3’

Figure 20. T-cell receptor genes also under DNA rearrangement to generate diversity like antibodies. In fact, there is actually greater diversity in TCR than in
immunoglobulins. (A) rearrangement of a chain and (B) b chain. (C) protein
structure of TCR.

Page 271

Figure 19 shows the DNA rearrangements that take place in generating k chain diversity. The l chain locus has a slightly different arrangement, and has only 30 V genes,
with 4 J segments and 4 C genes. The heavy chain has an extra domain: there are 40 V
genes, which are linked to one of 25 D segments, then 6 potential J segments, and one C
gene. These rearrangements, although they look something like the RNA splicing that
we saw earlier in this course, are happening at the DNA level. Once it has happened,
that cell and its progeny can no longer make the other combinations because those
parts of the genome have been cut out and destroyed. This is distinctly different from
alternative splicing of RNA, in which the genetic information is still there, and under
different conditions could still generate other variations of the gene product.
The enzyme that produces this diversity is a complex called the V(D)J recombinase.
The recombination occurs in two parts: first double-stranded breaks are made at recombination signal sequence (RSS) sites, then the breaks are repaired by the general
double-stranded break repair mechanism. Depending on which J segment is chosen,
there may be more than one left in the gene after the rearrangement. However, only
the one closest to the V segment is used, and the others are spliced out of the primary
transcript (by normal RNA splicing) in the process of connecting the C segment to the
V and J for the final mRNA. Although this process generates great diversity, there is
another mechanism that can generate further diversity under certain circumstances.
Somatic hypermutation causes rearranged V segments to mutate at 105 times the rate
of other DNA! This mechanism is carried out by Activation-Induced Cytidine Deaminase (AID), which converts cytidines to uracils, generating a G:U mismatch that is “corrected” by repair polymerases without strong error-correction. This hypermutation is
initiated by the activation of a B cell by recognizing and binding to a ligand. As we will
see in the next paragraphs, when that happens, the B cell initiates rapid proliferation
and this is when the somatic hypermutation takes effect, so that many of the B cells
will carry highly similar but subtly different antibodies than the initial B cell that recognized and was activated by the antigen. The idea is some of these subtle mutation may
lead to antibodies with higher affinity for the antigen and therefore faster response the
next time this particular pathogen tries to infect the organism.

RAG1 and RAG2, lymphocyte-specific recombination activating
genes, recognize the RSS sites and make the double-stranded
cuts. Once the cuts are made, the excised portion joins its ends
together to form a circular signal joint (SJ) which is then degraded. The coding portions have asymmetric cut ends that fold
into hairpin formations and prevent their fusion. These hairpins
are broken by Artemis, a nuclease recruited by DNA-dependent
protein kinase (DNA-PK), which also brings together XRCC4, XLF,
DNA ligase IV, and a DNA polymerase. The XRCC and XLF alight
the DNA ends, recruits a terminal transferase that randomly adds
nucleotides to the ends, then DNA polymerase l or m fills in the
overhangs, and the ligase completes the join. Interestingly, this
process adds even more variability to the immunoglobulin, since
Artemis cuts the hairpin at random, and the terminal transferase
also adds nucleotides at random.

The reason that this kind of DNA rearrangement is necessary is that antibody “design”
is not a reactive system, but a proactive system. A common misconception is that the
immune system encounters a pathogen and creates antibodies that fit it. Unfortunately, there is no known mechanism by which a cell can “feel” the shape of something
and create a protein that matches it. Instead, the immune system pre-emptively makes
as many different antibodies (and TCRs) as possible, so that initially, most of the B and
T cells in the body are actually genetically different. If an infection occurs, most of
Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 272

the B and T cells will bump into the pathogen and bounce right off, not recognizing
it, but some of them will have the right antibody combination to bind to a part of the
pathogenic invader. Although B cells can recognize surface antigens on their own, in
most cases, a helper T cell is needed to activate the B cell (fig. 21). This process is initi1

2

Bacterium

Antigens
TCR

MHC II
Macrophage

Macrophage

4

3

Clonal B cells

Helper T cell

5
Secreted antibodies
to antigen

Antigens

Cytokines

Proliferation
Activated
helper T cell

B cell

Plasma cell

Specific antigen receptor
(surface antibody)

Figure 21. Activation of B cells by helper T-cells.

ated by a macrophage non-specifically ingesting a pathogen (1), breaking it apart, and
presenting bits of it on its cell surface in partnership with MHC (major histocompatibility complex). A helper T-cell with a TCR that can recognize the antigen presented by
the macrophage binds to it (2) and that leads to activation of the T cell. The activated
helper T-cell binds to and activates a B cell (3) that has also bound to the antigen of
interest, leading to massive B-cell proliferation (4), thus providing the body with many
more copies of cells that have the right antibody to locate and fight the infection.
This does two things: it provides lymphocyte reinforcements to specifically deal with
a particular pathogen (but not other B cells, fig. 22), and once the pathogen has been
eliminated, there is a larger circulating pool of these cells to respond more quickly to
any subsequent infection by this particular type of pathogen. Finally, some of the B
cells will differentiate into plasma cells (fig. 21-5), that secrete antibodies into the bloodstream to provide a humoral response. Others become memory cells, which are like B
cells in that the antibody is on its cell surface and not secreted, but they can be thought
of as “pre-activated” and can respond more quickly than naive B cells to re-infection.

B4 cell

B4 cell
B3 cell

B2 cell
B2 cell
B3 cell

B1 cell

Activated
helper
T cell

B1 cell

B1 cell

Proliferation

B1 cell

Antigens

B1 cell

B1 cell

B6 cell

B1 cell

B1 cell

B1 cell

B1 cell

B1 cell

B5 cell
B7 cell

B5 cell

B7 cell
B6 cell

Figure 22. Amplification of only those B cells possessing antibodies that can
recognize the infectious particle(s).

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 273

The big question that should have been lurking in the back of your mind through all
this is, how do the antibodies and T-cell receptors tell what’s foreign and what’s part
of one’s own body? We’ll get to that shortly. First, recall the activation of the helper
T-cell. It occurs when the T-cell receptor recognizes an antigen from an ingested pathoFigure 23. Antigen presentation by MHC class II
(top) and class I (bottom)
to T cells.

Antigen
proteins

Antigen-presenting cell

Helper T cell
Endocytosis
Endocytic
vesicle

Peptides
(antigen)

Lysosome

. .
.
.
. . . . ..
. ..
.
..
.
.
. ..
.
. .
.
.
. .
.

. . .
.
.
. ..
.
. .
.
.
. .

Ii fragments

Fusion of lysosome
and transport vesicle

Transport
vesicle

Ii
molecule

ER

MHC class II
molecule

Golgi

+

Virus

Antigen-presenting cell

Cytotoxic T cell
Endocytosis

Golgi

Viral RNA

Capsid and
other viral proteins

ER

MHC class I
molecule

β2-microglobulin

TAP
Heavy
chain
Calnexin

Proteasome
Peptides
(antigen)

Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

Page 274

gen being presented by the MHC class II molecule on an antigen presenting cell (e.g. a
macrophage). Figure 23 shows the pathway from ingestion of the pathogen to the presentation of its molecular parts on an MHC molecule. A similar pathway also applies
to presentation of antigens on MHC class I molecules in conjunction with cytotoxic
(killer) T cells. The cytotoxic T cells work against compromised cells, whether they are
infected by a virus or another pathogen (fig. 24). There are two major pathways to
A

B
Activated
cytotoxic
T cell

Granzymes

Fas ligand
Fas

Infected target cell

Activated
cytotoxic
T cell

Perforins

Caspase Cascade

Figure 24. Cytotoxic T cells first recognize an infected cell by the T cell receptor,
thich then leads to (A) binding of T-cell
Fas ligand to Fas on the target cell, or
alternatively, (B) secretion of granzymes
and perforins. Both lead to activation of
a caspase cascade and subsequent apoptosis of the infected cell.

Infected target cell

Apoptotic target cell

killing the infected cell. One is the activation of a “death receptor”, Fas, which induces
a signal transduction cascade to activate caspases and apoptosis. The other pathway
is the release of granzymes and perforins. The perforins drill into the membrane of
the target cell and become pores that allow, among other things, granzymes to enter
the cell, where they activate caspases by proteolysis, and again induce apoptosis. An
important part of this is that the T cell receptor recognizes the antigen in combination
with the MHC molecule that is presenting it. Furthermore, there are many variations
of MHC molecules due there being 6 loci each with many known alleles.
So, what does any of this have to do with self vs non-self recognition? Early in the
development of the immune system, the MHC does not present bits of digested pathogens, it presents bits of the organism’s own cells that have gone through a proteasome
or lysosome. At this early time, T cells behave somewhat differently, and if the T cell
receptor binds strongly, the T cell commits apoptosis. This gets rid of TCR genes that
strongly react to the organism’s own cells. If the T cells do not react at all, apoptosis is
also invoked, because the TCR genes that cannot recognize the MHC will not be useful
in an immune response. Only those T cells that very weakly bind to the self-presenting
MHC survive (fig. 25).
Chapter 16, Advanced Topics, version 1.0

A

B
Antigen-presenting cell

Antigen-presenting cell

MHC

MHC

TCR

TCR

T cell

T cell

Strong receptor affinity

Weak receptor affinity

T cell undergoes apoptosis

T cell survives

Figure 25. Self-recognition by T-cell receptor binding of MHC proteins
presenting antigens derived from the organism’s own cells. If there is
strong recognition (A), the T cell dies to prevent cytotoxic attacks on
its own cells. If it is weak and the TCR recognizes the MHC but not the
antigen, the T cell survives (B).

Page 275

Cells: Molecules and Mechanisms is published by Axolotl Academic Publishing Company under
a Creative Commons license that permits redistribution of this work in whole or in part, provided
that no fee is charged and the work is attributed as speciﬁed in the license details.

Axolotl

Academic Publishing Co.

