Fungal Biology

Fungal Biology
4th edition
Jim Deacon
Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Edinburgh, UK

© 2006 by J.W. Deacon
© 1980, 1984, 1997 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
BLACKWELL PUBLISHING
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK
550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
The right of J.W. Deacon to be identified as the Author of this Work has been asserted in accordance with the UK
Copyright, Designs, and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted
by the UK Copyright, Designs, and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
First edition published 1980
Second edition published 1984
Third edition published 1997
Fourth edition published 2006 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
1

2005

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Deacon, J.W.
Fungal biology / J.W. Deacon.—4th ed.
p. ; cm.
Rev. ed. of: Modern mycology. 3rd ed. 1997.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-1-4051-3066-0 (pbk. : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 1-4051-3066-0 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Mycology. 2. Fungi.
[DNLM: 1. Fungi. 2. Mycology. QK 603 D278i 2006] I. Deacon, J.W.
Modern mycology. II. Title.
QK603.D4 2006
579.5—dc22
2005004137
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library.
Set in 8/10.5pt Stone Serif
by Graphicraft Limited, Hong Kong
Printed and bound in England
by TJ International, Padstow, Cornwall
The publisher’s policy is to use permanent paper from mills that operate a sustainable forestry policy, and which has
been manufactured from pulp processed using acid-free and elementary chlorine-free practices. Furthermore, the
publisher ensures that the text paper and cover board used have met acceptable environmental accreditation standards.
For further information on
Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:
www.blackwellpublishing.com

Contents

Preface

vii

1

Introduction: the fungi and fungal activities

1

2

The diversity of fungi and fungus-like organisms

16

3

Fungal structure and ultrastructure

48

4

Fungal growth

67

5

Differentiation and development

85

6

Fungal nutrition

110

7

Fungal metabolism and fungal products

122

8

Environmental conditions for growth, and tolerance of extremes

142

9

Fungal genetics, molecular genetics, and genomics

158

10

Fungal spores, spore dormancy, and spore dispersal

184

11

Fungal ecology: saprotrophs

213

12

Fungal interactions: mechanisms and practical exploitation

237

13

Fungal symbiosis

256

14

Fungi as plant pathogens

279

15

Fungal parasites of insects and nematodes

309

16

“The moulds of man”

322

17

Principles and practice of controlling fungal growth

338

Sources

356

Systematic index

361

General index

366

Preface

Fungal Biology (4th edition) is the successor to three previous editions of “Modern Mycology.” The text has been
fully updated and expanded to cover many new developments in fungal biology. Each of the 17 chapters is
largely independent, with a clear theme and crossreferencing, so that the text can be used to focus on
selected topics.
The early chapters deal with the unique structure
and organization of fungi and fungus-like organisms,
including modern experimental approaches in fungal
biology, and the many ways in which fungi respond
to environmental cues. These chapters also cover the
diversity of fungi, and fungal products including immunosuppressants, antibiotics, and mycotoxins that
contaminate food.
Recent developments in fungal genetics, molecular
genetics, and genomics are discussed within the
framework of a “biochemical and molecular toolbox,”
using in-depth examples such as the roles of viruslike double-stranded RNA for the control of chestnut
blight, and the population dynamics of Dutch elm
disease. Major sections of the text deal with the development of fungi as commercial biological control
agents of plant pathogens and insect pests. In addition,
one of the three new chapters deals with the symbiotic associations of fungi with plants and animals,
and the biology of lichens. Plant pathogens and plant

defense also are covered in depth, using selected
examples of all the major pathosystems.
Two final chapters are devoted to the “moulds of
man,” covering the biology, pathogenicity, and virulence
factors of the major fungal diseases of humans, and the
antifungal drugs used to treat these conditions.
This text is designed to appeal to both undergraduates and postgraduates. The emphasis throughout is on
the functional biology of fungi, with several examples
from recent research, and many tables and illustrations.
The text is supported by a comprehensive website
(available via www.blackwellpublishing.com/deacon),
with over 600 images, many in color, including “Special Focus Topics” and “Profiles of Significant or Interesting Fungi.” My own images are identified, and can
be used freely, without restriction. The website also has
a large interactive (randomized) test bank of multiplechoice questions, designed to aid self-assessment and
reinforcement of key learning outcomes.
I wish to thank many colleagues who have contributed to this book by providing images and
resources. They include many of my doctorate students,
and Nick Read’s research group at the University of
Edinburgh, who have been supportive throughout.
Jim Deacon
Edinburgh

Chapter 1

Introduction: the fungi and
fungal activities

This chapter is divided into the following major sections:
• the place of fungi in the “Tree of Life” – setting the
scene
• the characteristic features of fungi: defining the fungal kingdom
• the major activities of fungi as parasites, symbionts
and saprotrophs
• fungi in biotechnology
Fungi are a unique group of organisms, different from
all others in their behavior and cellular organization.
Fungi also have an enormous range of activities – as
pathogens of crop plants or humans, as decomposer
organisms, as experimental “model organisms” for
investigating genetics and cell biology, and as producers
of many important metabolites. The uniqueness of fungi
is a prominent feature of this book, which adopts a
functional approach, focusing on topics of inherent
interest and broad significance in fungal biology.
The uniqueness of fungi is reflected in the fact that
they have the status of a kingdom, equivalent to the
plant and animal kingdoms. So, fungi represent one of
the three major evolutionary branches of multicellular
organisms.
In terms of biodiversity, there are estimated to
be at least 1.5 million different species of fungi, but
only about 75,000 species (5% of the total) have been
described to date. For comparison, there are estimated
to be 4.9 million arthropod species and about 420,000
seed plants (Hawksworth 2001, 2002).
If the estimate of the number of fungal species is
even remotely accurate then we still have much to learn,
because even the fungi that we know about play

many important roles. To set the scene, we can mention just a few examples:
• Fungi are the most important causes of crop diseases, responsible for billions of dollars worth of
damage each year, and for periodic devastating
disease epidemics.
• Fungi are the main decomposers and recyclers of
organic matter, including the degradation of cellulose and wood by the specialized enzyme systems
unique to fungi.
• Fungi produce some of the most toxic known
metabolites, including the carcinogenic aflatoxins
and other mycotoxins in human foods and animal
feedstuffs.
• With the advance of the acquired immune
deficiency syndrome (AIDS) and the increasing role
of transplant surgery, fungi are becoming one of
the most significant causes of death of immunocompromised and immunosuppressed patients.
Fungal diseases that were once extremely rare are
now commonplace in this sector of the population.
• Fungi have an enormous range of biochemical
activities that are exploited commercially – notably
the production of antibiotics (e.g. penicillins),
steroids (for contraceptives), ciclosporins (used as
immunosuppressants in transplant surgery), and
enzymes for food processing and for the soft drinks
industry.
• Fungi are major sources of food. They are used
for bread-making, for mushroom production, in several traditional fermented foods, for the production
of Quorn™ mycoprotein – now widely available in
supermarkets and the only survivor of the many

2

CHAPTER 1

“single-cell protein” ventures of the late 1900s – and,
of course, for the production of alcoholic drinks.
• Fungi can be used as “cellular factories” for producing
heterologous (foreign) gene products. The first
genetically engineered vaccine approved for human use
was produced by engineering the gene for hepatitis
B surface antigen into the yeast (Saccharomyces
cerevisiae) genome. In this way the antigen can be
produced and exported from the cells, then purified
from the growth medium.
• The genome sequences of several fungi have now
been determined, and in several cases the genes of
fungi are found to be homologous (equivalent) to
the genes of humans. So, fungi can be used to investigate many fundamental cell-biological processes,
including the control of cell division and differentiation relevant to biomedical research.
• Fungi are increasingly being used as commercial
biological control agents, providing alternatives
to chemical pesticides for combating insect pests,
nematodes, and plant-pathogenic fungi.
The first part of this book (Chapters 1–9) deals
with the growth, physiology, behavior, genetics, and
molecular genetics of fungi, including the roles of
fungi in biotechnology. This part also includes an
overview of the main fungal groups (Chapter 2). The
second part (Chapters 10–16) covers the many ecological activities of fungi – as decomposers of organic
matter, as spoilage agents, as plant pathogens, plant symbionts, and as pathogens of humans. A final chapter
is devoted to the ways of preventing and controlling
fungal growth, because this presents a major challenge
in modern Fungal Biology.”

The place of fungi in the “tree of life” –
setting the scene
The Tree of Life Web Project is a major collaborative
internet-based endeavor (see Online resources at the end
of this chapter). Its aim is ultimately to link all the main
types of organism on Earth according to their natural
phylogenetic relationships. The hope is that this will
lead us closer to the very root of life on earth, which
is currently estimated to be some 3.6–3.8 billion years
ago (1 billion = 1000 million years; 109 years). However,
fungi arrived much later on the scene. The oldest
known fossil fungi date to the Ordovician era, between
460 and 455 million years ago – a time when the largest
land plants are likely to have been bryophytes (liverworts and mosses). This accords remarkably well with
recent phylogenetic analyses based on comparisons of
gene sequences, discussed below.

Carl Woese of the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, USA, has championed the use of
molecular phylogenetics. The basis of this is to identify genes that are present in all living organisms and
that have an essential role, so they are likely to be highly
conserved, accumulating only small changes (mutations
and back mutations) over large spans of evolutionary
time. Comparisons of these sequences can then
indicate the relationships between different organisms. There are limitations and uncertainties in this
approach, because of the potential for lateral gene
transfer between species and because there are known
to be variable rates of gene evolution between different groups of organisms. However several highly conserved genes and gene families can be used to provide
comparative data.
Most phylogenetic analyses are based primarily on
the genes that code for the production of ribosomal
RNA. Ribosomes are essential components of all living
organisms because they are the sites of protein synthesis.
They occur in large numbers in all cells, and they are
composed of a mixture of RNA molecules (which have
a structural role in the ribosome) and proteins. In
prokaryotes (non-nucleate cells) the ribosomes contain
three different size bands of ribosomal RNA (rRNA),
defined by their sedimentation rates (S values, also
known as Svedberg units) during centrifugation in a
sucrose solution. These three rRNAs are termed 23S,
16S, and 5S. In eukaryotes (nucleate cells) there are also
three rRNAs (28S, 18S, and 5.8S). The genes encoding
all of these rRNAs are found in multiple copies in
the genome, and the different rRNA genes can be used
to resolve differences between organisms at different
levels.
For most phylogenetic analyses the genes that code
for 16S rRNA (of prokaryotes) and the equivalent 18S
rRNA (of eukaryotes) are used. These small subunit
rDNAs contain enough information to distinguish
between organisms across the phylogenetic spectrum.
Using this approach, several different phylogenetic trees
have been generated, but many of them are essentially
similar, and one example is shown in Fig. 1.1.
Several points arise from Fig. 1.1, both in general
terms and specifically relating to fungi.
• Ribosomal DNA sequence analysis clearly demonstrates that there are three evolutionarily distinct
groups of organisms, above the level of kingdom.
These three groups – the Bacteria, Archaea, and
Eucarya (eukaryotes) – are termed domains and the
differences between them are matched by many differences in cellular structure and physiology.
• Beneath the level of domains, there is still uncertainty
about the taxonomic ranks that should be assigned
to organisms. Plants, animals, and fungi are
almost universally regarded as separate kingdoms

INTRODUCTION

Bacteria

Archaea

Cyanobacteria
Flavobacteria

er
M mo
et ph
ha il
no es
ge
ns

Hy

Gram positives
Proteobacteria

Eucarya

Entamoebae

pe
rth

Green non-sulfur
bacteria

3

Extreme
halophiles

Animals
Slime
moulds
Fungi
Plants
Ciliates
Flagellates
Trichomonads

Thermotoga
Microsporidia
Diplomonads

Fig. 1.1 A representation of the Universal Phylogenetic Tree, based on comparisons of the genes encoding smallsubunit (16S or 18S) ribosomal RNA. The lengths of the lines linking organisms to their nearest branch point represent
inferred evolutionary distances (rRNA gene sequence divergence). (Based on a diagram in Woese (2000) but showing
only a few of the major groups of organisms.)

(Whittaker 1969). But, arguably, this status could also
apply to the many “kingdoms” of bacteria, especially
the enormous Proteobacteria kingdom which
includes most Gram-negative bacteria. And, it could
be argued that the many separate groups of unicellular eukaryotes (amoebae, slime moulds, flagellates,
etc.) should also be regarded as kingdoms, based on
their apparently long-term separation as judged by
rDNA sequence divergence. However, many of these
lower eukaryotes are still poorly studied, so they are
often referred to collectively as “protists,” pending
further resolution of their relationships.
• The major multicellular organisms – the animals,
plants, and fungi – form a cluster at the very top of
the Eucarya Domain, so they are often termed the
“crown eukaryotes”. The interesting feature of these
groups is that they seem to have diverged from one
another at roughly the same time, and then underwent a major, rapid expansion and diversification.
The time when this happened, roughly half a billion
years ago, coincides with the period when the land
surfaces were colonized by primitive plants such as
bryophytes (mosses and liverworts) and when there
were only three major continental land masses: (i) a
land mass including present-day North America and
Europe, located near the equator; (ii) part of modern
Siberia, towards the north; (iii) a land mass consisting of present-day South America, Africa, Antarctica,
India, and Australia in the southern hemisphere.
• Currently, the earliest fossil evidence of fungi
dates to the Ordovician period, between 460 and

455 million years ago, but it is almost certain that
aquatic fungi would have been present before that
time, perhaps dating back to about 1 billion years
ago. The Chytridiomycota are widely believed to be
among the most ancient of the presently known fungi
– not least because they have motile flagellate cells,
indicating their dependence on free water. By contrast, in the Devonian period (417–354 million years
ago) there is abundant evidence of fossil fungi
associated with primitive land plants. For example,
representatives of several major groups of fungi
have been found in the Rhynie Chert deposits of
Aberdeenshire, Scotland, representing the Devonian
era. The early fossil fungi of the Rhynie deposits
are very well preserved and, intriguingly, occur in
close association with the underground organs of early
land plants. These early terrestrial fungi, belonging
to a newly defined group, the Glomeromycota (see
Fig. 2.4), are remarkably similar to the arbuscular
mycorrhizal fungi that colonize the roots of nearly
80% of present-day land plants (Fig. 1.2). So it
seems that these fungi co-evolved with early land
plants, and that their hyphae could have facilitated
the uptake of mineral nutrients and water from soil,
just as they do today (Lewis 1987; Chapter 13).
• Having made the case for a long-term association
between fungi and land plants, we need to correct a
widely held misconception: there is now strong
evidence that fungi are more closely related to
animals than to plants (Baldauf & Palmer 1993). The
fungi evolved as an early branch from the animal

4

CHAPTER 1

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 1.2 (a) A present-day “club-moss,”
Lycopodium, which represents a primitive
member of the ferns (pteridophytes), and
(b,c) two fossil pteridophytes (Asteroxylon
mackiei, and Rhynia major) from the Rhynie
chert deposits. (d) Swollen vesicles of a presentday mycorrhizal fungus are remarkably similar
to vesicles found in fossils from the Rhynie
deposits (417–354 million years ago).

The characteristic features of fungi: defining
the fungal kingdom

Flagellum
Collar

Stalk

Fig. 1.3 Codosiga gracilis, a member of the choanoflagellates (organisms with a single flagellum and a collar),
considered to be the common ancestors of both
fungi and animals. (Based on a drawing from: http://
microscope.mbl.edu/scripts/microscope.php?func=imgDetai
l&imageID=4575)

lineage, and both groups probably have a common
origin in one of the simple unicellular eukaryotes.
Currently it is believed that the most likely common
ancestor of both the fungal and the animal kingdoms
is a protozoan of the group termed choanoflagellates,
also known as the collar-flagellates (Fig. 1.3). These
resemble both the earliest branch of animals (the
sponges) and the earliest branch of fungi (the
chytrids). It is a humbling thought that humans
should have evolved from something like this!

To begin this section we must make an important
distinction between the true fungi and a range of
fungus-like organisms that have traditionally been
studied by mycologists, but are fundamentally different from fungi. Here we will focus on the true fungi,
often termed the Mycota or Eumycota. We will discuss the fungus-like organisms in Chapter 2.
All true fungi have a range of features that clearly
separate them from other organisms and that serve to
define the fungal kingdom (Mycota). These features are
outlined below:
• All fungi are eukaryotic. In other words, they
have membrane-bound nuclei containing several
chromosomes, and they have a range of membranebound cytoplasmic organelles (mitochondria, vacuoles,
etc.). Other characterisitics, shared by all eukaryotes,
include: cytoplasmic streaming, DNA that contains
noncoding regions termed introns, membranes that
typically contain sterols, and ribosomes of the 80S
type in contrast to the 70S ribosomes of bacteria (“S”
refers to Svedberg units, as mentioned earlier).
• Fungi typically grow as filaments, termed hyphae (singular: hypha), which extend only at their extreme
tips. So, fungi exhibit apical growth in contrast to
many other filamentous organisms (e.g. filamentous
green algae) which grow by repeated cell divisions
within a chain of cells (intercalary growth). Fungal
hyphae branch repeatedly behind their tips, giving

INTRODUCTION

(a)

5

(b)

Fig. 1.4 Candida albicans, a common dimorphic fungus that grows on the mucosal membranes of humans. Normally
it is found as a budding yeast (a), but the yeast cells can produce hyphae (b) for invasion of the tissues.

rise to a network termed a mycelium. However,
some fungi grow as single-celled yeasts (e.g.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae) which reproduce by budding,
and some can switch between a yeast phase and a
hyphal phase in response to environmental conditions. These dimorphic fungi (with two shapes)
include several species that are serious pathogens of
humans (Chapter 16). They often grow as yeast-like
cells for proliferation in the body fluids but convert
to hyphae for invasion of the tissues (Fig. 1.4).
• Fungi are heterotrophs (chemo-organotrophs). In
other words, they need preformed organic compounds as energy sources and also as carbon skeletons for cellular synthesis. The cell wall prevents
fungi from engulfing food by phagocytosis, so fungi
absorb simple, soluble nutrients through the wall and
cell membrane. In many cases this is achieved by
secreting enzymes at the hyphal tips to degrade
complex polymers and then absorbing the simple,
soluble nutrients released by the depolymerase
(polymer-degrading) enzymes.
• Fungi have a distinctive range of wall components,
which typically including chitin and glucans (polymers of glucose with predominantly β-1,3 and β-1,6
linkages). Short lengths of cellulose (a β-1,4-linked
polymer of glucose) have been detected in some
fungal walls, especially in some of the primitive
fungi. However fungi differ from plants because
they do not have cellulose-rich cell walls.

• Fungi have a characteristic range of soluble
carbohydrates and storage compounds, including
mannitol and other sugar alcohols, trehalose (a
disaccharide of glucose), and glycogen. These compounds are similar to those of some animals – notably
the arthropods – but are different from those of
plants.
• Fungi typically have haploid nuclei – an important
difference from almost all other eukaryotes. However,
fungal hyphae often have several nuclei within each
hyphal compartment, and many budding yeasts
are diploid. These differences in nuclear status and
nuclear arrangements have important implications for
fungal genetics (Chapter 9).
• Fungi reproduce by both sexual and asexual means,
and typically produce spores. Fungal spores vary
enormously in shape, size and other properties,
related to their various roles in dispersal or dormant
survival (Chapter 10).
In summary, we can define fungi by the following
characteristic features (Table 1.1):
• eukaryotic
• typically grow as hyphae, with apical growth, but
sometimes as yeasts
• heterotrophic – they depend on pre-formed organic
nutrients

6

CHAPTER 1

Table 1.1 Comparison of some features of fungi with those of animals and plants.
Character

Fungi (and chapter reference)

Animals

Plants

Growth habit

Hyphal tip growth or budding
yeasts (3, 4)
Heterotrophic, absorb soluble
nutrients (6, 11)
Typically contains chitin (3)

Not hyphal

Multicellular tissues

Heterotrophic, ingest food

Photosynthetic

Absent, but chitin is found
in insect exoskeletons
Typically diploid; the
membrane breaks down
during nuclear division
Histone 2B
Sensitive to colchicine

Mainly cellulose

Not synthesized, must be
supplied
Stacked, plate-like
Plate- or disk-like cisternae
Trehalose in insects

Synthesized by DAP
pathway
Stacked, plate-like
Tubular cisternae
Glucose, fructose,
sucrose
Starch

Nutrition
Cell wall
Nuclei

Lysine synthesis

Usually haploid; nuclear
membrane persists during
division (9)
Histone 2B
Sensitive to benzimidazoles and
griseofulvin (17)
Synthesized by AAA pathway (7)

Golgi cisternae
Mitochondria
Translocated
carbohydrates
Storage compounds

Unstacked, tubular (3)
Plate- or disk-like cisternae (3)
Polyols (mannitol, arabitol, etc.),
trehalose (7)
Glycogen, lipids, trehalose (7)

Mitochondrial
codon usage
Membrane sterols

UGA codes for tryptophan

Glycogen, lipids, trehalose
in some
UGA codes for tryptophan

Ergosterol (7, 17)

Cholesterol

Histones
Microtubules

Diploid; the membrane
breaks down during
nuclear division
Plant histones
Sensitive to colchicine

UGA codes for chain
termination
Sitosterol and other
plant sterols

AAA, alpha-amino adipic acid pathway; DAP, diamino-pimelic acid pathway.

• typically have a haploid genome
• have walls composed primarily of chitin and glucans
• absorb soluble nutrients through the cell wall and
plasma membrane
• produce spores.

The major activities of fungi: pathogens,
symbionts, and saprotrophs
As we have already seen, all fungi require organic
nutrients for their energy source and as carbon nutrients for cellular synthesis. But a broad distinction
can be made according to how these nutrients are
obtained: (i) by growing as a parasite (or a pathogen
– a disease-causing agent) of another living organism;
(ii) by growing as a symbiont in association with
another organism; or (iii) by growing as a saprotroph
(saprophyte) on nonliving materials. These topics are
covered in detail in Chapters 11–14.

Fungal parasites of plants
A large number of fungi are adapted to grow as parasites of plants, obtaining some or all of their nutrients
from the living tissues of their host. Many of these associations are quite specific because the fungus infects only
one type of host, and sometimes it is so specific that
the fungus cannot grow at all in laboratory culture –
it is an obligate parasite that can grow only in the host
tissues. Many examples of this are found among the
rust fungi and powdery mildew fungi (Chapter 14),
while other examples are found in the fungus-like
downy mildews (Chapter 2), and the plasmodiophorids (Chapter 2). These host-specific fungi are
termed biotrophic parasites (bios = life; trophy = feeding) because they feed from living host cells without
killing them, often by producing special nutrientabsorbing structures to tap the host’s reserves. At the
other end of the spectrum are many common fungi that

INTRODUCTION

aggressively attack plant tissues. They are termed
necrotrophic parasites (necros = death) because they
kill the host tissues as part of the feeding process – for
example by producing toxins or degradative enzymes.
A common example is the fungus Botryotinia fuckeliana
(more commonly known by its former name, Botrytis
cinerea) which rapidly destroys soft fruits such as
strawberries, raspberries, and grapes, covering the fruit
surface with its gray sporing structures.
The fungal (or fungus-like) parasites of plants are
enormously significant, accounting for more than 70%
of all the major crop diseases, and for many devastating
epidemics. To cite just a few examples:
• Potato blight caused by the fungus-like organism
Phytophthora infestans destroyed the potato crops of
Ireland in the 1840s, leading to the starvation of up
to one million people, and large-scale emigration
to the rest of Europe and the USA. Even today
the control of P. infestans and its close relatives, the
downy mildew fungi, accounts for about 15% of world
fungicide sales. The Advance of the Fungi by E. C. Large
(1940) provides a fascinating and highly readable
account of potato blight and its legacy.
• Dutch elm disease, caused by Ophiostoma novo-ulmi
and O. ulmi (Chapter 10), has destroyed most of the
common elm (Ulmus procera) trees in Britain and
Western Europe in the last 30 years, as it did in North
America earlier in the 1900s. Similarly, chestnut
blight caused by the fungus Cryphonectria parasitica
(Chapter 9) has devastated the native American
chestnut (Castanea dentata) population in the USA –
an epidemic that can be traced to the first recorded
diseased chestnut tree in the New York Zoological
Garden in 1904 (Chapter 9). And, at the time of writing, a new species of Phytophthora (P. ramorum) is causing sudden oak death in southwestern USA and has
already spread to several parts of Europe (Chapter 14).

Fungal symbionts of plants
Many fungi form symbiotic associations with plants,
in which both of the partners are likely to benefit.
The two most important examples are lichens and
mycorrhizas. Lichens are intimate associations between
two organisms – a photosynthetic partner (a green
alga or a cyanobacterium) and a fungus – which
together produce a thallus that can withstand some
of the most inhospitable environments on Earth
(Fig. 1.5). Typically, the fungus encases and protects
the photosynthetic cells, and also absorbs mineral
nutrients from trace levels in the environment, while
the photosynthetic partner provides the fungus with
carbon nutrients. There are about 13,500 lichen
species across the globe, and they play essential roles

7

as pioneer colonizers of habitats where no other
organisms can grow, including rock surfaces and
unstable, arid mineral soils (Chapter 13).
Mycorrhizas are intimate associations between
fungi and the roots or other underground organs of
plants. There are many types of mycorrhizal fungi,
which have evolved independently of one another
and which serve different roles. In almost all cases
these fungi depend on the plant for a supply of
carbon nutrients, while the plants depend on the
fungi for a supply of mineral nutrients (phosphorus,
nitrogen) from the soil. As we will see in Chapter 13,
phosphorus is often the critical limiting factor for
plant growth, because soil phosphates rapidly form
insoluble complexes with organic matter or with divalent cations (Ca2+, Mg2+ ) and cannot easily diffuse to
the plant roots. Mycorrhizal fungi help to alleviate this
problem by providing an extensive hyphal network for
capturing mineral nutrients and transporting them
back to the roots. However, some other mycorrhizal
fungi serve a quite different role. Orchids and some
nonphotosynthetic plants are absolutely dependent
on fungi for all or part of the plant’s life, because the
plant feeds on sugars supplied by a soil fungus.
Lichens and mycorrhizas are not the only examples
of symbiosis. In recent years many plants have been
found to harbor symptomless endophytic fungi within
the plant walls or intercellular spaces. These fungi
apparently do no harm to the plants. Instead they can
be beneficial because they help to activate plant defense
genes and produce insect anti-feedant compounds
such as the ergot alkaloids. But this is a double-edged
sword, because the toxins can cause serious damage
to grazing animals such as horses, cattle, and sheep
(Chapter 11).

Fungal pathogens of humans
In contrast to the many fungal parasites of plants, there
are only some 200 fungi that infect humans or other
warm-blooded animals. In fact, humans have a high
degree of innate immunity to fungi, with the exception of the dermatophytic fungi which commonly
cause infections of the skin, nails, and hair. However,
the situation changes drastically when the immune
system is compromised, and this is becoming common
in patients with AIDS, transplant patients whose
immune system is purposefully suppressed, patients suffering from cancer or advanced diabetes, and patients
undergoing prolonged corticosteroid therapy. In any of
these circumstances there is a significant chance of infection from fungi that pose no serious threat to healthy
people. For example, the widespread and extremely common airborne fungus Aspergillus fumigatus normally
grows on composts and in soil, but it has become one

8

CHAPTER 1

Fig. 1.5 A sign in Arches National Park, Utah, USA. Get your boots off our microbes!

of the most significant invasive fungi in deep surgical
procedures, and the survival rate can be as low as
30%. Many other fungi that can grow at 37°C have
spores that are small enough to enter the lungs and
reach the alveoli. These fungi were virtually unknown
until recently but are now extremely common causes
of infection in immunodeficient patients. For example,
the fungus-like organism Pneumocystis jiroveci (previously
named P. carinii) commonly causes pneumonia in
patients infected with the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV). The onset of this disease in patients
with HIV is regarded as one of the “AIDS-defining”
symptoms.
Only a handful of antifungal drugs are available to
treat the major human mycoses, and most need to be
administered at low doses over a prolonged time to
avoid excessive toxicity. Many of these drugs are
expensive so they offer little hope to the poorest people
in the developing world. Chapter 16 is devoted to
the mycoses of humans, and Chapter 17 deals with the
drugs available to treat these conditions.

Fungal parasites as biological control
agents
Fungi parasitize many types of host, including
other fungi (mycoparasites, Chapter 12), insects
(entomopathogens, Chapter 15), and nematodes
(nematophagous fungi, Chapter 15). In the past,
such fungi might have been regarded as curiosities, but
now they are recognized as being significant population regulators of their hosts and as potential biological control (biocontrol) agents of major pests or
plant pathogens. We discuss biocontrol at many
points in this book, notably in Chapters 12 and 17.

Fungal saprotrophs
Saprotrophs (saprophytes) are organisms that feed on
dead organic matter (sapros = death; trophy = feeding).
Fungi play a major role in this respect because they

INTRODUCTION

produce a wide range of enzymes that degrade complex polymers such as starch, cellulose, proteins,
chitin, aviation kerosene, keratin, and even the most
complex lignified materials such as wood. In fact,
there are few naturally occurring organic compounds
that cannot be degraded by one fungus or another. One
of the few exceptions is sporopollenin, the highly
resistant polymer found in the walls of pollen grains.
Fungi are particularly important in the decomposition of cellulose, which represents about 40% of plant
cell wall material and is the most abundant natural
polymer on Earth. Grazing animals (ruminants) also
consume significant amounts of cellulose, but this
is broken down in the rumen (in effect, a large anaerobic fermentation vessel) and the rumen fungi are
thought to play a significant role in the decomposition
process. The breakdown of polymers by fungi is
intimately linked to hyphal growth which provides
both penetrating power and the coordinated release of
extracellular enzymes and subsequent reabsorption of
the enzymic breakdown products (Chapter 6). But different fungi are adept at degrading different types of
polymer, so fungal saprotrophs often grow in complex,
mixed communities reflecting their different enzymic
capabilities (Chapter 11).
Although the decomposer fungi play vital roles in the
recycling of major nutrients, they can also be significant
spoilage agents. A well-known example is the dry-rot
fungus, Serpula lacrymans, which is a major cause of
timber decay in buildings (Chapter 5). Similarly the
“sooty moulds” that commonly grow on kitchen and
bathroom walls are extremely difficult to eradicate
(Fig. 1.6). They utilize the soluble cellulose gels that
are used as stabilizers in emulsion paints or as wall-

9

paper pastes. These common fungi include species of
Alternaria, Cladosporium and Sydowia polyspora (previously called Aureobasidium pullulans) which discolor the
walls because of their darkly pigmented hyphae and
spores. However, their natural habitat is the surface of
leaves or the decaying stalk tissues of plants, and they
occur in buildings only because they find similar
conditions (and substrates) to those in their natural
environment (Chapter 8). Public health authorities
are now paying increasing attention to safety in the
workplace, and particularly to the potential roles of
fungi in “sick building syndrome,” which has been
linked (tenuously) to infant cot death. The conditions
in underventilated buildings can certainly promote
the growth of moulds, including Stachybotrys chartarum, another common sooty mould. But there is no
definitive evidence to link these fungi to sick building
syndrome.
Some saprotrophic fungi pose a serious threat to
human and animal welfare by growing on stored food
products and producing mycotoxins. These are a
diverse range of fungal secondary metabolites, often
found in improperly stored materials. For example,
aflatoxins are commonly produced in groundnuts
and cottonseed meal. They are among the most
potent known carcinogens and are strongly implicated in hepatomas. Similarly, the toxins produced by
several Fusarium species on grain crops are implicated
in esophageal cancer in Africa, and in kidney carcinomas. The pathways leading to the production of these
compounds are discussed in Chapter 7; the maintenance
of safe storage conditions is covered in Chapter 8.

Fungi in biotechnology
Fungi have many traditional roles in biotechnology, but
also some novel roles, and there is major scope for their
future commercial development (Wainwright 1992).
Some of these roles are outlined below.

Foods and food flavorings

Fig. 1.6 Part of a bathroom ceiling where the paint has
flaked away, revealing extensive growth and sporulation
of sooty moulds.

In 1994 the total world production of edible mushrooms
was estimated to be over 5 million tonnes, with a value
of US $14 billion. Much of the mushroom-growing
industry is based on strains of the common cultivated
mushroom Agaricus bisporus (or A. brunnescens) discussed in Chapters 5 and 11. But Lentinula edodes (the
Shiitake mushroom, which is grown on logs; Fig. 1.7),
Volvariella volvacea (the padi straw mushroom, which
is grown on rice straw), and Pleurotus ostreatus (the
oyster mushroom, Fig. 1.8) are traditionally grown in
Japan and southeast Asia, and are now widely available
in western supermarkets.

10

CHAPTER 1

Fungi are used to produce several traditional foods
and beverages, including alcoholic drinks (ethanol
from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and bread,
where the yeast produces CO2 for raising the dough.
Penicillium roqueforti is used in the later stages of production of the blue-veined cheeses such as Stilton and
Roquefort, to which it imparts a characteristic flavor.
P. camemberti is used to produce the soft cheeses such
as Camembert and bries; it grows on the cheese surface, forming a “crust,” and produces proteases which
progressively degrade the cheese to give the soft consistency. Less well known but equally significant is the
role of fungi in the fermentation of traditional foods
around the world. For example, Rhizopus oligosporus is
used to convert cooked soybean “grits” to a nutritious
staple food, called tempeh (Fig. 1.8). This involves only
a short (24–36 hour) incubation time, during which the
fungus degrades some of the fat and also degrades a
trypsin inhibitor in soybeans, so that the naturally high
protein content of this crop is more readily available
in the diet, and a “flatulence factor” is broken down
during this process. The food termed gari is part of the
staple diet in southern Nigeria; it is produced from
the high-yielding root crop, cassava, perhaps better
known in its processed form, tapioca. Raw cassava
contains a toxic cyanogenic glycoside termed linamarin, which is removed during a prolonged and
largely uncontrolled fermentation in village communities. Much of this process involves bacteria, but the
fungus Galactomyces geotrichum (asexual stage: Geotrichum
candidum) gives the product its desired flavor. Details
of the production of several traditional Asian fermented
foods can be found in Nout & Aidoo (2002).
A major development in recent years has been the
introduction of an entirely new type of food, termed
Quorn™ mycoprotein (Fig. 1.9). This is produced
commercially by growing a fungus (Fusarium venanatum) in large fermentation vessels, then harvesting
the fungal hyphae and processing them into meat-like
chunks and various oven-ready meals. Quorn (as it is
now called) is widely available in British and European
supermarkets. It has an almost ideal nutritional profile, with a high protein content, low fat content, and
absence of cholesterol (Table 1.2). The production of
Quorn is discussed in detail in Chapter 4.

(a)

Fungal metabolites
Metabolites can be grouped into two broad categories
(Chapter 7):
(b)
Fig. 1.7 (a,b) Commercial culture of the shiitake mushroom, Lentinula edodes, on inoculated logs. (Courtesy of
Robert L. Anderson (photographer) and USDA Forest Service; www.forestryimages.org)

• Primary metabolites: the intermediates or end
products of the common metabolic pathways of all
organisms (sugars, amino acids, organic acids, glycerol, etc.) and which are essential for the normal
cellular functions of fungi.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1.8 (a) A tray of exotic mushrooms from a supermarket in the UK, including shiitake (centre) and the oyster mushroom, Pleuotus ostreatus, reputed to be an aphrodisiac. (b) An attempt to produce a homemade cake of tempeh, which
tasted only marginally better than it looks.
Table 1.2 Nutritional composition of Quorn™ mycoprotein, compared with traditional protein sources. (Data from Trinci
1992.)
Units
Protein
Dietary fibre
Total fats
Fat ratio
Cholesterol
Energy

(a)

g 100g−1
g 100 g−1
g 100 g−1
Polyunsaturated:
saturated
mg 100g−1
kJ 100g−1

Quorn
12.2
5.1
2.9
2.5
0
334

Cheddar cheese
26.0
0
33.5
0.2
70
1697

Raw chicken
20.5
0
4.3
0.5
69
506

Raw lean beef
20.3
0
4.6
0.1
59
514

Fresh cod
17.4
0
0.7
2.2
50
318

(b)

Fig. 1.9 Quorn: (a) the package and (b) one of several products: “Fillets in a Mediterranean marinade with tomato,
red wine, and herbs.”

12

CHAPTER 1

• Secondary metabolites: a diverse range of compounds formed by specific pathways of particular
organisms; they are not essential for growth,
although they can confer an advantage to the
organisms that produce them (e.g. antibiotics, fungal toxins, etc.).
Several metabolites of both groups are produced commercially from fungal cultures (Turner 1971; Turner &
Aldridge 1983). One of the best examples of a fungal
primary metabolite is citric acid, with an estimated
global production of 900,000 tons in the year 2000
(Ruijter et al. 2002). Citric acid produced on this
vast scale is the mainstay of the soft drinks industry
(lemonade, etc.) because it has a tart taste and also
enhances flavor, reduces sweetness, and has antioxidant
and preservative qualities. Specially selected, overproducing strains of Aspergillus niger are used for the commercial production of citric acid, but several other
conditions are necessary – the cultures must contain
high levels of readily metabolizable sugars (up to 20%
or more) and the concentration of either phosphate or
nitrogen must be kept low, to limit the amount of fungal growth. In these conditions 80% or more of the sugar
supplied to the cultures is converted into citric acid,
which is then exported from the cells and accumulates
in the culture medium. The effect of this is to lower
the pH of the culture medium to 3.0 or less, which the
fungus tolerates well. This secretion of the acid is a crucial feature, because fungal cells tightly regulate their
internal pH. Recent evidence indicates that cells of A.
niger maintain their intracellular pH at 7.7 when the
cells are exposed to external pH levels ranging from 1.5
to 6.
Other organic acids are produced commercially
by fungal fermentations. Gluconic acid (estimated
annual global production of 50,000–100,000 tons) is
used mainly as a food additive, and is produced by

specific strains of A. niger, grown at normal pH. This
acid is produced by the direct oxidation of glucose, catalyzed by the enzyme glucose oxidase. Itaconic acid
(global production 70,000–80,000 tons) is produced
by Aspergillus terreus and is used as a co-polymer in the
manufacture of paints, adhesives, etc.
In some respects the production of citric acid and
itaconic acid is similar to the production of ethanol
by Saccharomyces spp. – the basis of the alcoholic drinks
industry. Both types of product accumulate in the
culture medium when growth is restricted by some
factor but when the biochemical machinery continues
to operate, like the engine of a car taken out of gear.
For example, ethanol accumulates as a metabolic endproduct when yeast is grown in a sugar-rich medium
favoring metabolism, but in anaerobic conditions
that limit cell growth.
In contrast to the bulk metabolites mentioned
above, a vast range of secondary metabolites are produced by fungi, and they include several high-value
products with pharmaceutical applications. A small
selection of these is shown in Table 1.3. The best-known
examples are the penicillins – a group of structurally
related β-lactam antibiotics that are synthesized naturally from small peptides. As explained in Chapter 7,
the naturally occurring penicillins such as penicillin G
(produced by Penicillium chrysogenum) have a relatively
narrow spectrum of activity. But a wide range of other
penicillins can be produced by chemical modification
of the natural penicillins. All modern penicillins are
semisynthetic compounds; they are obtained initially
from fermentation cultures but are then structurally
modified for specific desirable properties. Schmidt
(2002) reviewed the manufacture and therapeutic
aspects of β-lactam antibiotics, including the
cephalosporins which are structurally related to the
penicillins. Remarkably, despite their age (the penicillins
were first produced commercially in the late 1940s),

Table 1.3 Some valuable secondary metabolites produced commercially from fungi.
Metabolite

Fungal source

Application

Penicillins
Cephalosporins
Griseofulvin
Fusidin
Ciclosporins
Zearalenone
Gibberellins
Ergot alkaloids and
related compounds

Penicillium chrysogenum
Acremonium chrysogenum
Penicillium griseofulvum
Fusidium coccineum
Tolypocladium spp.
Gibberella zeae
Gibberella fujikuroi
Claviceps purpurea and
related fungi

Antibacterial
Antibacterial
Antifungal
Antibacterial
Immunosuppressants
Cattle growth promoter
Plant hormone
Many effects including: antimigraine,
vasoconstriction, vasodilation,
antihypertension, anti-Parkinson,
psychiatric disorders

INTRODUCTION

the β-lactam antibiotics still share 50% of the world market for systemic antibiotics, with sales in 1998 worth
about US $4 billion for penicillins and about US $7 billion for the more recently developed cephalosporins.
Several non-β-lactam antibiotics are also produced by
fungi. They include griseofulvin (from the fungus P.
griseofulvum) which has been used for several years to
treat dermatophyte infections of the skin, nails and hair
of humans, although recently it has been replaced
by less toxic drugs (Chapter 17). Fusidic acid (from various fungi) has been used to control staphylococci
that have become resistant to penicillin, and there
is renewed interest in a range of other natural fungal
products for treating the systemic fungal infections
of humans (Chapter 17). Ciclosporins from various
fungi (but principally from species of Tolypocladium) are
used as immunosuppressants to prevent organ rejection
in transplant surgery. In fact, 17 different fungal taxa
are reported to produce ciclosporins. Another powerful immunosuppressant is the antibiotic gliotoxin
(from Trichoderma virens), which is better known for
its role in biological control of plant pathogenic
fungi (Chapter 12). The production and use of these
immunosuppressants was reviewed by Kürnsteiner et al.
(2002). As a final example, the ergot alkaloids and
related toxins of the ergot fungus, Claviceps purpurea
(Chapter 14), have many important pharmacological
applications (Keller & Tudzynski 2002). The fourmembered ring structure of the d-lysergic acid derivatives of ergot alkaloids mimic the ring structures of
neurotransmitters (dopamine, epinephrine (adrenaline), and serotonin: Fig. 1.10). However, at present
many of the ergot derivatives are too nonspecific in their
modes of action to meet their true potential in treating human disorders.
Even these few examples raise fascinating questions
about the roles of fungal secondary metabolites. What
functions do they serve in fungi and what competitive
advantage do they confer? In recent years many of the
genes encoding the secondary biosynthetic pathways
have been identified and sequenced. This should lead

13

both to an understanding of their roles and to the
potential construction of transgenic strains that overproduce valuable metabolites.
Some of the polysaccharides of fungi have potential
commercial value. Pullulan is an α-1,4-glucan (polymer of glucose) produced as an extracellular sheath by
Sydowia polyspora (formerly Aureobasidium pullulans), one
of the sooty moulds. This polymer is used in Japan to
make a film-wrap for foods. A potential new market
could develop from the discovery that fungal wall
polymers or their partial breakdown products can be
powerful elicitors of plant defense responses (Chapter
14) so they might be used to “immunize” plants. For
example, the β-glucan fractions from walls of the yeast
S. cerevisiae have this effect. So too does chitosan, the
de-acetylated form of chitin in fungal cell walls (Chapters 3 & 7). At present, chitosan is used on a large scale
in Japan for clarifying sewage, but the source of this
chitosan is crustacean shells. Fungi are an alternative,
easily renewable source of this and other polymers.

Enzymes and enzymic conversions
Saprotrophic fungi and some plant-pathogenic fungi
produce a range of extracellular enzymes with important commercial roles (Table 1.4). The pectic enzymes
of fungi are used to clarify fruit juices, a fungal amylase is used to convert starch to maltose during breadmaking, and a fungal rennet is used to coagulate milk
for cheese-making. A single fungus, Aspergillus niger,
accounts for almost 95% of the commercial production
of these and other bulk enzymes from fungi, although
specific strains of the fungus have been selected for
particular purposes. The methanol-utilizing yeasts
(Candida lipolytica, Hansenula polymorpha, and Pichia
pastoris) have potential commercial value because they
produce large amounts of alcohol oxidase, which
could be used as a bleaching agent in detergents.
The wood-rotting fungus Phanerochaete chrysosporium
is extremely active in degrading lignin; it has the

COR
OH

HO
NH2

NH2

NH2

N
CH3

OH
HO
Dopamine

O
H
HO
Noradrenaline

HN
Serotonin

HN
d-Lysergyl acid derivative

Fig. 1.10 Structural similarities between three neurotransmitters (dopamine, noradrenaline, and serotonin) and the
D-lysergic acid derivatives of ergot alkaloids.

14

CHAPTER 1

Table 1.4 Some fungal enzymes produced commercially. (Based on Wainwright 1992.)
Enzyme

Fungal source

Application

a-Amylase
Amyloglucosidase
Pullulanase
Glucose aerohydrogenase
Proteases (acid, neutral, alkaline)
Invertase
Pectinases
Rennet
Glucose isomerase
Lipases
Hemicellulase
Glucose oxidase

Aspergillus niger, A. oryzae
A. niger
Aureobasidium pullulans
A. niger
Aspergillus spp. etc.
Yeasts
Aspergillus, Rhizopus
Mucor spp.
Mucor, Aspergillus
Mucor, Aspergillus, Penicillium
A. niger
A. niger

Starch conversions
Starch syrups, dextrose foods
Debranching of starch
Production of gluconic acid
Breakdown of proteins (baking, brewing, etc.)
Sucrose conversions
Clarifying fruit juices
Milk coagulation
High fructose syrups
Dairy industry, detergents
Baking, gums
Food processing

potential to be developed for delignification of agricultural wastes and byproducts of the wood-pulping
industry, so that the cellulose in these materials could be
used as a cheap substrate for production of fuel alcohol
by yeasts (Chapter 11).
In addition to these examples of “bulk” enzymes,
fungi have many internal enzymes and enzymic pathways that can be exploited for the bioconversion of compounds such as pharmaceuticals. For example, fungi are
used for the bioconversion of steroids, because fungal
enzymes perform highly specific dehydrogenations,
hydroxylations and other modifications of the complex
aromatic ring systems of steroids. Precursor steroids are
fed to a fungus, held at low nutrient level either in culture or attached to an inert bed, so that the steroid is
absorbed, transformed and then released into the culture medium from which it can be retrieved.

ous gene products that have been produced experimentally from yeast include epidermal growth factor
(involved in wound healing), atrial natriuretic factor
(for management of hypertension), interferons (with
antiviral and antitumor activity), and α-1-antitrypsin
(for potential relief from emphysema). There are, however, disadvantages in using S. cerevisiae. In particular,
this fungus is genetically quite different from other fungi
and other eukaryotes, including its use of different
codons for some amino acids, so it does not always
correctly read the introduced genes. For this reason
attention has switched to some other fungi, such as
the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe and the
filamentous fungus Emericella (Aspergillus) nidulans, for
both of which the genomes have now been sequenced.

Heterologous gene products

Forestry Images. http://www.forestryimages.org. [Many
high-quality images of fungi, diseases, forestry practices,
etc.]
Fungal
Biology.
http://www.helios.bto.ed.ac.uk/bto/
FungalBiology/ [The website for this book.]
Tree of Life Web Project. http://tolweb.org/tree?group=life.
[A major source of information on fungal systematics and
phylogeny.]

Genetic
engineering
of
fungi,
particularly
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, has developed to the stage
where the cells can be used as factories to produce pharmaceutical products, by the introduction of foreign (heterologous) genes, as we already noted for the hepatitis
B vaccine. There are several advantages in using yeast
to synthesize such products. S. cerevisiae is already
grown on a large industrial scale, so companies are familiar with its culture. It is a GRAS organism, i.e. “generally regarded as safe.” Its genome was the first to be
sequenced, and its genetics and molecular genetics are
well-researched (Chapter 9). Furthermore, yeast has a
well-characterized secretory system for exporting gene
products into a culture medium. Examples of heterolog-

Online resources

General texts
Alexopoulos, C.J., Mims, C.W. & Blackwell, M. (1996)
Introductory Mycology, 4th edn. John Wiley, New York.
Carlile, M.J., Watkinson, S.C. & Gooday, G.W. (2001) The
Fungi, 2nd edn. Academic Press, London.
Jennings, D.H. & Lysek, G. (1999) Fungal Biology: understanding the fungal lifestyle, 2nd edn. Bios, Oxford.

INTRODUCTION

Kendrick, B. (2001) The Fifth Kingdom, 3rd edn. Mycologue
Publications, Sidney, Canada.
Turner, W.B. (1971) Fungal Metabolites. Academic Press,
London.
Turner, W.B. & Aldridge, D.C. (1983) Fungal Metabolites.
II. Academic Press, London.
Wainwright, M. (1992) An Introduction to Fungal Biotechnology. Wiley, Chichester.
Webster, J. (1980) Introduction to Fungi, 2nd edn. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Cited references
Baldauf, S.L. & Palmer, J.D. (1993) Animals and fungi are
each other’s closest relatives: congruent evidence from
multiple proteins. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA 90, 11558–11562.
Hawksworth, D.L. (2001) The magnitude of fungal
diversity: the 1.5 million species estimate revisited.
Mycological Research 105, 1422–1432.
Hawksworth, D.L. (2002) Mycological Research News.
Mycological Research 106, 514.
Keller, U. & Tudzynski, P. (2002) Ergot alkaloids. In: The
Mycota X. Industrial Applications (H.D. Osiewicz, ed.),
pp. 157–181. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.

15

Kürnsteiner, H., Zinner, M. & Kück, U. (2002) Immunosuppressants. In: The Mycota X. Industrial Applications (H.D.
Osiewicz, ed.), pp. 129–155. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Large, E.C. (1940) The Advance of the Fungi. Henry Holt,
New York.
Lewis, D.H. (1987) Evolutionary aspects of mutualistic
associations between fungi and photosynthetic organisms.
In: Evolutionary Biology of the Fungi (eds Rayner, A.D.M.,
Brasier, C.M. & Moore, D.), pp. 161–178. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Nout, M.J.R. & Aidoo, K.E. (2002) Asian fungal fermented
food. In: The Mycota X. Industrial Applications (H.D.
Osiewicz, ed.), pp. 23–47. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Ruijter, G.J.G., Kubicek, C.P. & Visser, J. (2002) Production
of organic acids by fungi. In: The Mycota X. Industrial
Applications (H.D. Osiewicz, ed.), pp. 213–230. SpringerVerlag, Berlin.
Schmidt, F.R. (2002) Beta-lactam antibiotics: aspects of
manufacture and therapy. In: The Mycota X. Industrial
Applications (H.D. Osiewicz, ed.), pp. 69–91. SpringerVerlag, Berlin.
Trinci, A.P.J. (1992) Myco-protein: a twenty-year overnight success story. Mycological Research 96, 1–13.
Woese, C.R. (2000) Interpreting the universal phylogenetic tree. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA 97, 8392–8396.

Chapter 2

The diversity of fungi and
fungus-like organisms

This chapter is divided into the following major sections:
• overview of the fungi and fungus-like organisms
• the true fungi (Kingdom Mycota): Chytridiomycota,
Glomeromycota,
Zygomycota,
Ascomycota,
Basidiomycota, mitosporic fungi
• the cellulose-walled fungus-like organisms (Kingdom
Straminipila)
• other fungus-like organisms: slime moulds, cellular
slime moulds (acrasids and dictyostelids), and
plasmodiophorids
In this chapter we focus on the major groups of fungi
and fungus-like organisms, covering the whole span
of fungal diversity in its broadest sense. We will use
selected examples to illustrate key features of the
fungal groups, and their biological significance. There
will be some surprises in store. For example, we will
see that some of the most devastating plant
pathogens are not fungi at all, but belong to an
entirely separate kingdom. We will see that some of
the organisms once considered to be among the
most “primitive” – the microsporidia, trichomonads,
and diplomonads (see Fig. 1.1) – are derived from fungi
by the loss of features such as mitochondria, which they
once possessed. We will also see how the development
of molecular methods for determining the relationships
between organisms has enhanced our understanding
of fungi in many respects, but there is still no consensus
on the best way to construct phylogenetic trees. In the
words of Patterson & Sogin (Tree of Life Web Project,
see Online Resources): “The consequence . . . has been
to demolish the model of the 1990s, but not to replace
it with something better.”

Overview of the fungi and fungus-like
organisms
Box 2.1 shows all the fungi and fungus-like organisms
that are currently considered to be fungi in the broadest sense. The vast majority are true fungi, sometimes

Box 2.1 The several types of organism that constitute the
fungi in a broad sense.
Kingdom: Fungi (Mycota)
Probably derived from a choanoflagellate ancestor
Phylum Chytridiomycota
Phylum Zygomycota
Phylum Glomeromycota
Phylum Ascomycota
Phylum Basidiomycota
Kingdom: Straminipila
Probably derived from the protist group
containing golden-brown algae, diatoms, etc.
Phylum Oomycota
Phylum Hyphochytridiomycota
Phylum Labyrinthulomycota
Fungus-like organisms of uncertain affinity
Phylum Myxomycota (plasmodial slime
moulds)
Phylum Plasmodiophoromycota
(plasmodiophorids)
Phylum Dictyosteliomycota (dictyostelid slime
moulds)
Phylum Acrasiomycota (acrasid slime moulds)

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

termed Eumycota (eu = “true”). Until recently, all
the true fungi were assigned to four phyla –
Chytridiomycota, Zygomycota, Ascomycota, and
Basidiomycota. But in 2001, a fifth phylum was
erected – the Glomeromycota (arbuscular mycorrhizal
fungi and their relatives). These had previously been
included in the Zygomycota. It will be recalled from
Chapter 1 that the Glomeromycota were associated
with the earliest land plants (Schuessler et al. 2001)
and are still associated with the vast majority of plants
today.
Within the Kingdom Fungi, the Ascomycota and
the Basidiomycota have many features in common,
pointing clearly to a common ancestry. The phylum
Chytridiomycota has traditionally been characterized
on the basis of motile cells with a single posterior
flagellum. This phylum was redefined recently, based
on sequence analysis of the nuclear genes encoding
small subunit (SSU) ribosomal RNA (18S rDNA). This
has revealed that some nonmotile fungi, previously
assigned to the Zygomycota, are closely related to the
Chytridiomycota and must be reassigned. An example
is the fungus Basidiobolus ranarum (Chapter 4), now
transferred to the Chytridiomycota. The status of
Zygomycota (as currently defined after excluding the
Glomeromycota) is still unclear. Some of its members
may need to be separated into new groups.
Nevertheless, the current view is that all organisms
within the Kingdom Fungi constitute a monophyletic
group (all derived from a common ancestor), sharing
several features with animals (see Table 1.1). Gene
sequence analyses provide the basis for a natural
phylogeny, especially when data for the SSU rDNA are
supported by sequence analysis of other gene families,
such as the tubulin and actin genes.
The Kingdom Straminipila (straminipiles, or stramenopiles) is now universally recognized as being
distinct from the true fungi. It consists of one large
and extremely important phylum, the Oomycota,
and two small phyla, the Hyphochytridiomycota
(with about 25 species) and Labyrinthulomycota (with
about 40 species). The Phylum Oomycota is remarkable
in many ways. It includes some of the most devastating plant pathogens, including Phytophthora infestans
(potato blight), Phytophthora ramorum (sudden oak
death in California), Phytophthora cinnamomi (the
scourge of large tracts of Eucalyptus forest in Australia),
and many other important plant pathogens, including Pythium and Aphanomyces spp. But perhaps most
remarkable of all is the fact that Oomycota have
evolved a lifestyle that resembles that of the true fungi
in almost every respect. We discuss this group in
detail later in this chapter and at several points in this
book.
The fungus-like organisms of uncertain affinity
include four types of organism: the acrasid cellular

17

slime moulds, the dictyostelid cellular slime moulds,
the plasmodial slime moulds (Myxomycota), and the
plasmodiophorids. For most of their life these organisms lack cell walls, and they grow as either a naked
protoplasmic mass or as amoeboid cells, converting
to a walled form at the onset of sporulation. There is
no evidence that they are related to fungi, but they
have traditionally been studied by mycologists, and they
have several interesting features, which are discussed
towards the end of this chapter.
Against this background, we now consider the individual phyla in more detail.

The true fungi (Kingdom Mycota)
Chitridiomycota
The Chytridiomycota, commonly termed chytrids,
number about 1000 species (Barr 1990) and are considered to be the earliest branch of the true fungi,
dating back to about 1 billion years ago. They have cell
walls composed mainly of chitin and glucans (polymers of glucose) and many other features typical of fungi
(see Table 1.1). But they are unique in one respect,
because they are the only true fungi that produce
motile, flagellate zoospores. Typically, the zoospore
has a single, posterior whiplash flagellum, but some of
the chytrids that grow in the rumen of animals have
several flagella (Chapter 8), and some other chytrids
(e.g. Basidiobolus ranarum, recently transferred to the
Chytridiomycota based on SSU rDNA analysis), have no
flagella. This provides a good example of the value of
DNA sequencing in determining the true phylogenetic
relationships of organisms.
Ecology and significance
Most chytrids are small, inconspicuous organisms that
grow as single cells or primitively branched chains
of cells on organic materials in moist soils or aquatic
environments. They are considered to play significant
roles as primary colonizers and degraders of organic
matter in these environments. Two common examples
are Rhizophlyctis rosea (a strongly cellulolytic fungus that
is common in natural soils) and Allomyces arbuscula,
both shown in Fig. 2.1.
Often, the Chytridiomycota are anchored to their substrates by narrow, tapering rhizoids, which function
like hyphae in secreting enzymes and absorbing nutrients. Sometimes the rhizoidal system is extensive, or
the thallus (the “body” of the fungus) resembles a string
of beads, with inflated cells arising at intervals along
a rhizoidal network. An example of this is the fungus
Catenaria anguillulae, shown in Fig. 2.2. A few chytrids
grow as obligate intracellular parasites of plants (e.g.

18

CHAPTER 2

Fig. 2.1 Chytridiomycota. (a) Life cycle of Allomyces, which alternates between haploid (n) and diploid (2n) generations. The haploid thallus produces male and female gametangia that release motile gametes. These fuse in pairs and
encyst to produce 2n zygotes, which germinate to produce a 2n thallus. The 2n sporangia release zoospores for
recycling of the 2n phase. Thick-walled resting sporangia (rs) are formed in adverse conditions; after meiosis these
germinate to release haploid zoospores. (b) Rhizophlyctis rosea, a common cellulolytic fungus in soil. It grows as a single
large cell, up to 200 mm diameter, with tapering rhizoids. At maturity, the large, inflated cell converts into a sporangium,
where the cytoplasm is cleaved around the individual haploid nuclei, and large numbers of zoospores are released through
the exit papillae. (c) Olpidium brassicae grows as naked protoplasts in root cells of cabbages. At maturity, the protoplasts convert to sporangia, which release zoospores into the soil. These spores encyst on a host root, germinate, and
release a protoplast into the host. Thick-walled resting spores are produced in adverse conditions and can persist in soil
for many years (see Fig. 2.3).
Olpidium brassicae; Figs. 2.1c, Fig. 2.3), of small animals
(e.g. Coelomomyces; see Fig. 15.5), of algae, or of
fungal spores. But very few chytrids can be considered
to be economically important – the most notable
example is Synchytrium endobioticum, which causes
potato wart disease, where the potato tubers develop
unsightly galls that render them unmarketable.

Having said this, the significance of chytrids lies
mainly in their fascinating biology. Anybody who has
watched a chytrid zoospore crawling like an amoeba
along the body of a nematode, searching for the
best site to encyst, and then winding in its flagellum,
encysting and penetrating the host will never forget
the experience (Fig. 2.2). All these events can be

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Fig. 2.2 Catenaria anguillulae, a facultative parasite of nematodes and some
fungal spores. (a–c) Three zoospores
showing amoeboid crawling in a
water film on a glass slide (note
the single posterior flagellum and the
pseudopodium-like extensions at the
front of the cells). Two zoospores are
seen crawling (d) on the surface of
a living nematode and encysting
(e) over the nematode’s heart region.
(f) Encysted zoospores germinate and
penetrate the nematode, then produce swollen vesicles within the dead
host. (g) A catenulate (beaded) chain
of cells growing from a killed nematode.
(From Deacon & Saxena 1997.)

(g)

20

CHAPTER 2

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2.3 Olpidium brassicae, a biotrophic (obligate) parasite commonly found in cabbage roots. The root cell contents
were destroyed by treatment with hot KOH, then rinsed, acidified, and stained with trypan blue to reveal fungal structures within the roots. (a) Two sporangia (sp) about 30 mm long, with exit tubes (et) and many germinating zoospore
cysts (cy). (b) Two thick-walled resting spores of O. brassicae, about 25 mm diameter, within a root cell.

followed in simple glass chambers on microscope
slides (Deacon & Saxena 1997).
The Chytridiomycota are difficult to isolate by standard methods such as dilution plating of soil onto agar
plates. But they can be found easily by suspending small
“bait” particles on the surface of natural waters or
in dishes of flooded soil. In these conditions, chytrid
zoospores accumulate on baits such as cellulose,
chitin, keratin, insect exoskeleton, or pollen grains. Then
they encyst and produce rhizoids for anchorage to the
substrate. There is strong experimental evidence that
chytrid zoospores accumulate selectively on different
types of bait (Mitchell & Deacon 1986). For example,
when pieces of cellulose or purified crab-shell chitin
were added to zoospore suspensions, the zoospores
were seen to encounter the baits at random, but then
changed their swimming pattern, making frequent
random turns, and often encysted within 3–5 minutes.
Zoospores of Allomyces arbuscula and A. javanicus accumulated and encysted on both cellulose and chitin,
whereas zoospores of Chytridium confervae encysted
preferentially on chitin, and zoospores of Rhizophlyctis
rosea accumulated and encysted only on cellulose.
The most likely explanation is that the zoospores
have surface-located receptors that recognize different structural polymers – a phenomenon well known
in zoospores of the fungus-like Oomycota (Chapter 10).

Taxonomy and relationships
Currently, the Phylum Chytridiomycota is subdivided
into five orders (Blastocladiales, Chytridiales,
Monoblepharidales,
Neocallimastigales,
and
Spizellomycetales) based largely on ultrastructural
features of the zoospores, which seem to indicate conserved patterns of evolution in the different lineages.
For example, the zoospores of all members of the
Order Blastocladiales (including Catenaria anguillulae)
have a conspicuous nuclear cap that surrounds the
nucleus and is filled with ribosomes (see Fig. 10.12),
but different arrangements of the organelles are found
in the other chytrid orders. Many of these differences
relate to the arrangement of microtubular elements
associated with anchorage of the flagellum, and the
arrangements of mitochondria and lipid storage
reserves that are essential for zoospore motility. We
return to these points in Chapter 10, where we discuss
zoospore ultrastructure. We should also note that the
Order Neocallimastigales is unique in being obligately
anaerobic. These organisms have recently been shown
to have a hydrogenosome, equivalent to a mitochondrion, for generating energy (Chapter 8). But there is
still doubt about whether the Neocallimastigales is a
natural phylogenetic grouping. SSU rDNA analysis of
a wider range of chytrids should help to clarify their
relationships.

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

Reproduction and other features of Chytridiomycota
Most true fungi have a haploid genome but some
species of Allomyces (Fig. 2.1) can alternate between
haploid and diploid generations. This is also true for
some species of Blastocladiella. There are different
patterns of the life cycle within Allomyces spp. but one
of these patterns, exemplified by A. arbusculus and
A. macrogynus (Fig. 2.1), involves a predominantly
diploid phase. Sporangia are produced on the diploid
colonies, and cytoplasmic cleavage within the sporangium leads to the release of diploid zoospores.
These encyst and then germinate to produce further
diploid colonies. This process can continue as long as
the environmental conditions are suitable, but at the
onset of unfavorable conditions the fungus produces
thick-walled resting sporangia. Meiosis then occurs
within the resting sporangia, leading to the release of
haploid zoospores, which encyst and then germinate
to produce haploid colonies. These colonies produce
male and female gametangia, which release male and
female haploid gametes. The gametes of opposite mating type fuse to form a diploid zygote, which encysts
and then germinates to repeat the diploid phase of the
life cycle. In other Allomyces spp. there is no separate
gametophyte generation; instead this is probably represented by a cyst, which germinates to produce a
further asexual diploid colony.
One of the most intriguing features of chytrid
zoospores is their ability to undergo prolonged
amoeboid crawling, by pseudopodium-like extensions
of the cell. This occurs both on glass surfaces and
on the surfaces of potential hosts such as nematodes
– a searching behavior for locating suitable sites for
encystment (Fig. 2.2). Then the zoospores round-up and
wind-in their flagellum by rotating most or all of the
cell contents (Deacon & Saxena 1997).
Many details of the Chytridiomycota can be found
in Fuller & Jaworski (1987).

Glomeromycota
As noted in Chapter 1 (see Fig. 1.2), fungal fossils
resembling the common and economically important
arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi were associated
with plants in the Rhynie chert deposits of the
Devonian era about 400 million years ago (mya). They
probably played a vital role in the establishment of
the land flora. Recent detailed analysis of these fungi,
based on SSU rDNA sequences, has shown convincingly
that they are distinct from all other major fungal
groups, so they have been assigned to a new phylum,
the Glomeromycota (Schuessler et al. 2001). The
relationships between this group and other fungi are
still unclear, but Fig. 2.4 shows that there is very

21

strong bootstrap support for linking all of these AM
fungi.
The arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi are considered in
detail in Chapter 13, so we will discuss them only briefly
here. They share several characteristic and quite remarkable features:
• They are found growing within the roots of the vast
majority of plants, and yet they cannot be grown
independently, in the absence of a plant.
• When they penetrate the roots they grow predominantly between the root cortical cells and often (but
not always) produce large, swollen vesicles which are
believed to function as food storage reserves.
• The AM fungal hyphae penetrate individual root
cortical cells to form intricately branched arbuscules (tree-like branching systems). But they do not
kill the root cells, and instead they establish an intimate feeding relationship, which seems to benefit
both partners. Fig. 2.5 shows the extent of this type
of relationship, in roots cleared of plant protoplasm,
then stained with trypan blue.
Recently discovered fossil hyphae and spores from
Wisconsin, USA, date back to the Ordovician, 460–
455 mya (Redecker et al. 2000) and therefore pre-date
the vascular plants (i.e. plants with water-conducting
tissues). Examples of these early fossil fungi are shown
in Fig. 2.6. They are remarkably similar to the AM
fungal spores, although it is emphasized that they
were not associated with plants. Nevertheless, they can
provide calibration points in phylogenetic analyses, as
shown in Fig. 2.7.
One final point – and perhaps the most remarkable
– was the discovery of a novel type of symbiosis,
first reported in 1996 and still known from only a few
natural sites in Germany. In this symbiosis, AM fungi
are attached to plant roots and grow up to the soil
surface, where the AM fungus produces transparent
bladders. These bladders engulf and internalize the
cells of a cyanobacterium, Nostoc punctiforme, so that
the fungus obtains sugars from the cyanobacterial
partner. The resulting organism is called Geosiphon
pyriforme, a member of the Geosiphonaceae (Glomeromycota) shown in Fig. 2.4. We return to this in
Chapter 13.

Zygomycota
Five major features serve to characterize the phylum
Zygomycota:
1 cell walls composed of a mixture of chitin, chitosan
(a poorly- or non-acetylated form of chitin) and
polyglucuronic acid;

Archaeosporales
Archaeosporaceae
Geosiphonaceae
Acaulosporaceae
Paraglomeraceae
Diversisporales
Paraglomerales
89

84
Diversisporaceae fam. ined.

Gigasporaceae

Basidiomycetes
and ascomycetes

Glomeraceae
(Glomus-group B)

Glomeraceae
(Glomus-group A)
Glomerales

Fig. 2.4 Proposed generalized taxonomic structure of the AM fungi and related fungi (Glomeromycota). Thick lines
delineate “bootstrap” values (indicating relatedness between the main branches) above 95%. Lower values (89% and
84%) are shown on two of the branches. (Reproduced by courtesy of Schuessler et al. 2001, and the British Mycological
Society.)

Fig. 2.5 Vesicles (v) and arbuscules
(a) of present-day arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in clover roots.

Fig. 2.6 (A,B) Fossil hyphae and spores from the Ordovician, about 460 mya, compared with a spore (C) of a presentday Glomus species (an arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus). All scale bars = 50 mm. (Images courtesy of Dirk Redecker; see
Redecker et al. 2000.)

c
f
240

400 b
460

a

Basidiomycota

e

Glomeromycota

90
290

Zygomycota
and
outgroups

400 d

Hypomyces
Neurospora
Ophiostoma
Blumeria
Eremascus
Eurotium
Morchella
Saccharomyces
Coprinus
Russula
Tremella
Tilletia
Gigaspora margarita
Scutellospora
Acaulospora (A)
Entrophospora
Glomus mosseae
Glomus intraradices
Glomus versiforme
Glomus etunicatum
Geosiphon pyriforme
A. gerdemannii
A. trappei
Glomus occultum
Mortierella
Endogone
Diphanoeca
Ichthyophanus
Dermocystis

23

Ascomycota

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

0.01 substitutions/site
Fig. 2.7 A phylogenetic tree based on small subunit ribosomal RNA gene sequences. Triangle a indicates fossil spores
of the Ordovician (460 mya). Triangle b indicates fossil spores of presumed arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi from the
Rhynie chert (400 mya). Triangle c indicates a fossil clamp connection (Chapter 4) – the earliest evidence of
Basidiomycota (290 mya). Triangle d indicates Ascomycota from the Rhynie chert (400 mya). Triangle e indicates a gilled
mushroom in amber (90 mya). Triangle f indicates AM fungi of the Gigaspora type in the Triassic (about 240 mya). As
reference points, the “outgroups” are Diphanoeca (a choanoflagellate from which fungi are thought to have arisen),
and two early divergent forms of animals, Ichthyophanus and Dermocystis. (Courtesy of Redecker et al. 2000.)

2 hyphae that typically lack cross walls, so all the
nuclei are contained within a common cytoplasm (a
coenocytic mycelium);
3 the production of a thick-walled resting spore – the
zygospore – which if formed by a sexual process
involving the fusion of two gametangia;
4 the production of asexual spores by cytoplasmic
cleavage within a sporangium;
5 a haploid genome.
Ecology and significance
The Zygomycota contains a diverse range of species,
with different types of behaviour, but for convenience
we start with the most familiar examples in the
Order Mucorales. This includes several common
species of the genera Mucor, Rhizopus, Phycomyces and

Thermomucor (a thermophilic fungus that can grow up
to about 60°C). All these fungi grow mainly as saprotrophs in soil, on animal dung, on composts in the case
of thermophilic species, or on various other substrates
such as over-ripe fruits. They grow rapidly, often covering an agar plate in 24–36 hours, and they are among
the commonest fungi found on soil dilution plates. They
have been termed “sugar fungi”, to denote the fact that
they often depend on simple, soluble carbon nutrients.
However, some fruit-rotting species such as Rhizopus
stolonifer produce pectic enzymes that can rapidly
liquefy apples and soft fruits (see Fig. 14.6). In addition, several species of Mortierella degrade chitin by
producing chitinases (as also do several chytrids).
Chitin is a common and important polymer, because
it is a major component of fungal walls and of the
exoskeletons of insects and other invertebrates.

24

CHAPTER 2

Fig. 2.8 General life cycle of Mucorales. Asexual reproduction occurs by the production of sporangia which release
haploid spores. Sexual reproduction occurs by the fusion of gametangia at the tips of zygophores, leading to a diploid
zygospore that undergoes meiosis to release haploid spores.

A generalized life cycle of these fungi is shown in
Fig. 2.8. After a phase of rapid somatic (vegetative)
growth, they produce erect aerial branches (sporangiophores) behind the colony margin, then a thinwalled sporangium is formed at the tip and the
sporangial contents are cleaved around the individual
nuclei to produce many uninucleate spores (sporangiospores). These spores are darkly pigmented, with
melanin in their walls. They are released and usually
wind-dispersed by breakdown of the thin sporangial
wall, but in some species they are water-dispersed.
The tip of the sporangiophore projects into the
sporangium as a columella, which remains after the
spores have been shed (Fig. 2.8). Sporangiospores can
germinate rapidly in suitable conditions, repeating the
asexual cycle.
Within the Zygomycota there are several variations
in the ways that sporangia and sporangiospores are
produced. Several species produce sporangia at the
tips of long, unbranched sporangiophores (Fig. 2.9a)
but the thermophilic species often produce branched
sporangiophores (Fig. 2.10b). Thamnidium elegans is a
psychrophilic (cold-loving) species which can grow on
meat in cold-storage, and at one stage was patented for
tenderizing steak. It produces a large sporangium at the

tip of a long sporangiophore, but the sporangiophore
also produces complex branching structures that terminate in many few-spored sporangioles (Fig. 2.9b).
Other variations are found in different Orders and
Families of the Zygomycota (Fig. 2.11). In this respect
it is important to recognize that the spore-bearing
structures of fungi have functional significance – their
role is to maximize the chances of dispersing spores to
sites where the fungus can establish new colonies. We
cover this topic in detail in Chapter 10.
Many members of the Mucorales also have a sexual
stage. In appropriate culture conditions aerial branches,
termed zygophores, grow towards one another and
swell at their tips to produce progametangia (Fig. 2.8).
Then the progametangia develop a complete septum,
which cuts off each gametangium from the subtending hypha. The gametangia then fuse to form a single
cell that develops into a zygospore – a thick-walled,
ornamented resting spore. Coupled with this, the terminal parts of the zygophores can swell, to produce
bulbous suspensors (Figs. 2.8; 2.12). Zygospores exhibit
a period of constitutive dormancy, but eventually
germinate to produce a sporangium, releasing haploid
spores. Many species in the Mucorales are heterothallic
(outcrossing) and develop zygospores only when

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

(a)

25

(b)

Fig 2.10 (a) A 2-day-old colony of Thermomucor pusillus
(previously called Mucor pusillus), a thermophilic species
common in composts. (b) The characteristic branched
sporangiophores of this fungus; the spores have been
shed but the sporangiophores and columellae remain, like
drumsticks.

(a)

strains of opposite mating type (designated plus and
minus) are opposed on agar plates. Nuclear fusion
and meiosis usually occur within the zygospore. This
whole process is orchestrated by volatile hormones
termed trisporic acids, discussed in Chapter 5.
In addition to the Order Mucorales, the Zygomycota
contains a wide range of fungi that parasitize other
small organisms, including nematodes, other small
invertebrates, and other fungi. For example, the
genus Piptocephalis (Fig. 2.11c), in the Order
Zoopagales, contains several species that parasitize
other Zygomycota and occasionally other fungi.
Piptocephalis is one of several genera that produce
few-spored sporangia, termed merosporangia, with
linearly arranged spores. In nature the Piptocephalis
spp. probably grow as obligate parasites on other
fungi, especially other Zygomycota, although they
can be grown in pure culture if supplied with the
necessary vitamins. They penetrate the host hyphae
without killing them, by producing specialized, nutrientabsorbing haustoria, and in this way they tap the
host’s nutrients to support their own development. This
type of interaction seems to be governed by specific
recognition factors (lectins), discussed in Chapter 12 (see
Fig. 12.10).
(b)
Fig. 2.9 (a) The characteristically unbranched sporangiophores of most Mucor species. The sporangia are still
intact and contain many darkly pigmented spores with
melanized walls. (b) Thamnidium elegans, showing one of
several variations in the production of sporangiospores by

Zygomycota. This fungus produces typical sporangia on
long sporangiophores, but complex branching structures
arise from the sporangiophore and terminate in small,
few-spored sporangioles.

26

CHAPTER 2

Fig. 2.11 (a) Sporangia of insect-pathogenic members of the Entomophthorales (e.g. Entomophthora, Pandora spp.) are
released and function like spores. (b) Pilobolus, a common fungus on herbivore dung, has a sporangium containing many
spores. It is mounted on a vesicle, which ruptures at maturity to shoot the sporangium onto surrounding vegetation
(Chapter 10). (c) Piptocephalis is a parasite of other Zygomycota. It produces branched sporangiophores with merosporangia (each containing a few linearly arranged spores) at the branch tips.

Fig. 2.12 A mature, thick-walled, warty zygospore (sexual
spore) of Rhizopus sexualis, produced by the fusion of
two gametangia. The bulbous swellings on either side are
termed suspensors.

The Order Entomophthorales is notable because
it includes many fungi that parasitize insects, and that
can cause spectacular population crashes of their
insect hosts (discussed in Chapter 15). Many are host-

specialized, typically infecting only a narrow range of
insects, but others have relatively broad host ranges.
Techniques have been developed to mass produce
some of these fungi in solid or liquid culture systems,
raising the prospect of using them as practical biocontrol
agents of insect pests. The Entomophthorales are
notable for the way in which they are dispersed. As
shown in Fig. 2.11a, the hyphae emerging from a dead
insect produce sporangiophores, each bearing a large
sporangium at its tip. The tip of the sporangiophore
has a columella, which bulges into the spore and
is double-walled (one wall being the tip of the columella,
and the other being the wall of the sporangium).
The progressive build-up of turgor pressure causes the
sporangium to be shot suddenly from the columella,
projecting the sporangium to a distance of about 4 cm
(Webster 1980). (Technically, the sporangium in this
case is a single spore, which is not enclosed in a sporangium wall, so it is termed a conidium, like the many
types of conidia produced by the Ascomycota – see
later.) The sporangium (conidium) is sticky and must
adhere to an insect in order to infect. If it does not land
on an insect it will germinate to produce a secondary
conidium, which is similarly dispersed, and this process will be repeated until the conidium lands on a suitable host or until the nutrient reserves are exhausted.
Chapter 15 provides a much fuller account of these and
other insect-pathogenic fungi.

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

Some other fungi of the Entomophthorales display
a dispersal strategy similar to that described above.
One example is Conidiobolus coronatus, a common
saprotrophic fungus in soil. Another example is
Basidiobolus ranarum, which is found in the gut, the
faeces or the intestines of insect-eating reptiles or
amphibians (e.g. frogs, from which the species name
ranarum is derived). This fungus has recently been
transferred to the Chytridiomycota, based on SSU
rDNA sequencing. A third fungus, Pilobolus (Fig.
2.11b) in the Order Mucorales, shows a parallel mode
of dispersal. This fungus is common in animal dung
and produces a large sporangium which is shot free from
the dung, but the sporangium subsequently breaks
down to release many individual spores. We return to
this topic when we discuss spore dispersal, in Chapter
10.

Zygomycota as pathogens of humans
Several common members of the Mucorales, especially
Rhizopus arrhizus, Absidia corymbifera and Rhizomucor
pusillus (a thermophilic species) can cause serious,
life-threatening infections of humans. Similar infections can occasionally be caused by Conidiobolus
(Entomophthorales) and Basidiobolus ranarum. Collectively, these diseases are termed zygomycosis
(infections caused by members of the Zygomycota). In
the vast majority of cases the infection is associated
with predisposing factors. For example, diabetics
with ketoacidosis are among the most vulnerable to
infection, which often develops in the rhino-cerebral
area (the nasal passages, progressing into the brain).
But many other predisposing factors can be involved,
including severe malnourishment in children, severe
burns, cancer, lymphoma, and immunodeficiency or
immunosuppression.
These fungal infections can develop rapidly by
spread through the arteries and invasion of the surrounding tissues. They often require surgical excision
of the affected areas. Even so, the prognosis is poor –
the overall mortality rate is about 50% and can rise to
85% in patients with the rhino-cerebral form of the
disease. The zygomycoses fall clearly into the category
of opportunistic infections, because they are associated
with impaired host defenses. They are among the
most difficult infections to control because of their rapid,
invasive growth.

Ascomycota
The phylum Ascomycota contains about 75% of all
the fungi that have been described to date. It is not
only the most important phylum, but also the most

27

diverse, and many of the relationships within this
group have yet to be resolved by modern molecular
methods. The one feature that characterizes all members of this phylum is the ascus – a cell in which two
compatible haploid nuclei of different mating types
come together and fuse to form a diploid nucleus,
followed by meiosis to produce haploid sexual spores,
termed ascospores. In many species the meiotic division is followed by a single round of mitosis, leading
to the production of eight ascospores within each
ascus (Fig. 2.13). In the more advanced members of
the group, many asci are produced within a fruiting
body, termed an ascocarp. This can take various
forms – a flask-shaped perithecium with a pore at its
tip, a cup-shaped apothecium, a closed structure that
breaks down at maturity, termed a cleistothecium, or
a pseudothecium which is usually embedded in a pad
of tissue, termed a stroma. In other cases, the asci are
produced singly and are not enclosed in a fruiting
body – for example, this is true for the budding
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (which produces only
4 ascospores in a naked ascus) and the fission yeast
Schizosaccharomyces octosporus (eight-spored asci).
Several of these points are illustrated in Figs. 2.13–
2.15.
The vast majority of Ascomycota also produce asexual spores by mitosis. These mitospores (as opposed
to meiospores, derived by meiosis) are extremely common and function in dispersal. In fact, a substantial
number of Ascomycota are known only in the form of
their mitosporic (asexual) stages. Their sexual stages
remain to be discovered and in some cases might have
been abandoned, but SSU rDNA sequence analysis
can be used to link them to the Ascomycota. To give
just one example, the extremely common fungus,
Aspergillus fumigatus, has never been shown to produce
a sexual stage. This fungus is becoming increasingly
common as a major cause of death in hospital
patients undergoing deep surgical procedures, and it
also causes the serious respiratory disease termed
aspergillosis (Chapters 8 and 16). In cases such as
this it is important to know the sources of genetic
variation – is there a sexual stage that we have yet to
discover?
Like many members of the Ascomycota, N. crassa, has
a sexual stage, leading to the production of asci containing ascospores. N. crassa is heterothallic, requiring
strains of different mating types (termed A and a) for
sexual development. The female sex organ, termed an
ascogonium, is often a coiled, multinucleate hypha with
a receptive trichogyne. It is fertilized either by contact
with a spermatium (a small uninucleate cell that cannot germinate) or by a conidium. Then the ascogonium
produces an ascogenous hypha that will eventually give
rise to the asci. The process by which this happens is
shown in Fig. 2.16.

(a)

Fig. 2.13 (a) A developing perithecium of Sordaria
macrospora which, at maturity, will have a pore at its tip
to release the ascospores. (b) Several asci in different stages
of development within the perithecium; each ascus contains eight ascospores, about 20 mm diameter. (Courtesy
of N. Read; from Read, N.D. & Lord, K.M. 1991 Experimental Mycology 15, 132–139.)

Fig. 2.14 Diagrammatic representation of some fruiting structures of Ascomycota. (a) A single ascus containing eight
ascospores which, at maturity, will be shot forcibly through the narrow apical pore. (b) A cup-shaped apothecium containing many asci interspersed with sterile “packing” hyphae (paraphyses). The paraphyses help to laterally constrain
the developing asci so that they project beyond the surface of the cup to release their spores. (c) A cleistothecium
(closed ascocarp) such as that of Eurotium, the sexual stage of some Aspergillus spp. The asci, each with eight ascospores, are released when the cleistothecium wall breaks down at maturity to release the ascospores.

(b)

Fig. 2.15 Stages in the life cycle of Neurospora crassa and many similar fungi in the Ascomycota.

Fig. 2.16 Early stages in the production of
asci from an ascogenous hypha. (a) The
ascogenous hypha grows for some distance
then curls back at its tip to form a crosier.
(b) Synchronous nuclear division occurs as
the crosier bends back upon itself. (c) Septa
are laid down so that the penultimate cell
(located at the top) has one nucleus of each
mating type. This cell will extend and will give
rise to the first ascus, when the nuclei fuse
and then undergo meiosis and one round of
mitosis, to produce eight ascospores. Meanwhile, the tip cell of the crosier fuses with the
ascogenous hypha, and the nucleus is transferred. (d) A new branch develops from the
fused cell, and this branch forms a further
crosier, to repeat the whole process. Thus,
eventually, a large number of ascus initials are
produced, which will give rise to a large
number of asci. The final stage in this process is the development of a fruitbody tissue
surrounding the asci. The haploid ascospores
are either A or a mating type, and eventually germinate to produce haploid colonies,
to complete the life cycle.

(a)

Crosier
formed

Nuclear
division

Septation
hyphal fusion

(b)

(c)

(d)

Ascogonium

New crosier
ascus initial

30

CHAPTER 2

Taxonomy and relationships
The Ascomycota is considered to be a monophyletic
group (all members sharing a common ancestry) that
dates back to the coal age, at least 300 million years
ago. This group is closely related to the Basidiomycota
(the phylum containing mushrooms, etc.) as a sister
group that shares similar features.
Currently, the Ascomycota is divided into three
subgroups, although the status of some of the earlydiverging members is still unclear:
1 Archaeascomycetes, including the fission yeast,
Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and some primitive
plant pathogens such as Taphrina spp. (Fig. 2.17).
2 Hemiascomycetes – the true yeasts such as
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, used to produce alcohol
and for bread-making. These fungi do not produce
ascocarps.
3 Euascomycetes, comprising the majority of species
that produce hyphae and ascocarps.
In addition to the main distinguishing feature, the ascus,
the Ascomycota are characterized by cell walls composed
primarily of chitin and glucans, by hyphae that have
cross walls (septa; singular septum) at regular intervals
but with a central pore that allows the passage of

nuclei and other cellular organelles, and by the production of non-motile asexual spores (mitospores,
termed conidia) that are produced in various ways, but
never by cytoplasmic cleavage in a sporangium.
The life cycle of Ascomycota
We will use Neurospora crassa as an example to illustrate
significant features of the life cycle of Ascomycota
(Fig. 2.15). Neurospora grows as a branched network of
hyphae with perforated septa, and produces aerial
hyphae that terminate in branched chains of conidia
(asexual spores). These are formed by a bud-like process involving swelling and repeated septation. When
mature, the conidia develop a pink coloration and are
easily removed from the hyphae by air currents. This
cycle of sporulation, dispersal and spore germination
occurs repeatedly when substrates are readily available.
There are several variations in sexual reproductive systems of the Ascomycota, which we need mention only
briefly. For example, N. crassa and N. sitophila are heterothallic (out-crossing) but some species (Neurospora
tetrasperma, Podospora anserina) produce only 4 binucleate ascospores in each ascus, and are homothallic.
A single ascospore can give rise a colony that will
produce the sexual stage.
Ecology and significance

Fig. 2.17 Taphrina populina, a plant-parasitic member
of the Archaeascomycota which causes yellow blister
of poplar leaves (Populus spp.). The fungus grows as a
mycelium in the plant leaves, causing leaf distortion, and
it produces naked asci which project from the surface of
the leaves. Within the asci the ascospores often bud, so
that the asci become filled with a mixture of ascospores
and budding yeast cells (particularly evident in the top
ascus). (See further images on the website for this book
(see Online resources).)

Because the Ascomycota is a very large and important
phylum, many aspects of its biology are covered
in the later chapters of this book. The group as a
whole includes many economically important plant
pathogens, such as the powdery mildew fungi of
many crop plants (Chapter 14), the vascular wilt fungi
(Chapter 14), Ophiostoma ulmi and O. novo-ulmi,
which cause the devastating Dutch elm disease that
swept repeatedly across Europe and the USA in the last
century (Chapter 10), the equally devastating chestnut
blight disease in the USA, caused by Cryphonectria parasitica (Chapter 9) and several toxigenic fungi, such as
Claviceps purpurea (ergot of cereals; Chapter 7).
The Ascomycota also includes several pathogens of
humans, domesticated animals and livestock. For
example, the ubiquitous dermatophytic (ringworm)
fungi are estimated to infect about half of the total
human population, especially in the tropics and
subtropics, but also in developed countries, where
infections such as “athlete’s foot” and “nail fungus”
are common. The ascomycetous yeast, Candida albicans,
is a common commensal organism in the gut and
on other mucosal membranes of humans, causing
irritation to people who wear dentures and to
women during menstruation or pregnancy. And,
some ascomycetous fungi (Blastomyces dermatitidis,
Histoplasma capsulatum) can cause life-threatening

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

diseases of humans whose immune system is deficient
or impaired. The “Moulds of Man” are covered in
Chapter 16.
In a different context, some of the Ascomycota form
mycorrhizal associations with forest trees (e.g. Tuber
spp – the truffles) and an estimated 96% of the
13,500 known species of lichens have Ascomycota as
the fungal partner. Very few of these lichenized fungi
grow in a free-living state. In terms of numbers, the
ascomycetous lichen fungi probably represent the
largest single component of biodiversity in the entire
fungal kingdom (Chapter 13). Many ascomycetous
yeasts (Saccharomyces, Candida oleophila, etc.) commonly grow as saprotrophs on leaf and fruit surfaces,
and some are now being marketed as biological control agents to prevent fruit rots (Chapters 11, 12).
Many other ascomycetous fungi degrade cellulose
and other structural polymers; e.g. Chaetomium in soil
and composts, Xylaria and Hypoxylon as agents of
wood decay, Sordaria and Ascobolus in herbivore dung,
and Lulworthia on wood in estuarine environments
(Chapter 11).

Basidiomycota
According to Kirk et al. (2001), the Basidiomycota contains about 30,000 described species, which is 37% of
the described species of true fungi. Although the most
familiar examples of this group are the mushrooms and
toadstools, there is an enormous diversity of species,
including basidiomycetous yeasts, many important
plant pathogens, and some serious human pathogens.
The one single feature that characterizes the group is
the basidium in which meiosis occurs, leading to the
production of sexual spores (basidiospores) that usually are produced externally on short stalks termed
sterigmata (Fig. 2.19).
Several other features are found in the
Basidiomycota. The hyphae often have a complex
dolipore septum (Chapter 3) that prevents nuclei
from moving between different hyphal compartments. The cell wall typically is composed of chitin and
glucans (but chitin and mannans in the yeast forms).
The nuclei typically are haploid, but throughout most
of the life of a colony each hyphal compartment
contains two nuclei, representing two different mating
compatibility groups. A mycelium of this type is termed
a dikaryon. The significance of this will be explained
shortly.
Taxonomy and relationships
The Basidiomycota is a monophyletic group (all of its
members having a common ancestry) and is a sister
group to the Ascomycota. In other words, both of

31

these groups have a common ancestor. Three major
sub-groups are recognized within the Phylum
Basidiomycota:
1 Urediniomycetes, including the rust fungi
(Uredinales) which are economically significant
plant pathogens of many crops and wild plants.
2 Ustilaginomycetes, including the smut fungi
(Ustilaginales) some of which again are significant
plant pathogens, and gain their name from their
black, sooty spores.
3 Hymenomycetes, including mushrooms, puffballs,
and jelly fungi.
However, the phylogenetic relationships between and
within these three groups are still unclear.
Significant features in the life-cycle of Basidiomycota
We will begin by considering the generalized life-cycle
of a typical mushroom (Fig. 2.18). Basidiospores, each
containing a single haploid nucleus, germinate and
grow into hyphal colonies that have a single nucleus
in each hyphal compartment. This phase is termed a
monokaryon (meaning that it has one nuclear type in
each hyphal compartment). The monokaryon can produce small oidia that either act as fertilizing elements
or they can germinate to produce further monokaryotic
colonies. The next stage of development occurs when
the hyphae of two monokaryons of different mating
compatibility groups fuse with one another, or when
an oidium of one mating compatibility group attracts
a hypha of a different mating compatibility group. This
causes a strong “homing response” but the chemical
attractants causing it have not been identified. Once
the two compatible strains have fused by the process
termed plasmogamy, all subsequent growth occurs by
dikaryotic hyphae (with two nuclei – one of each compatibility group – in each hyphal compartment).
The fungus can grow for many weeks, months or even
years in this form, producing an extensive network of
dikaryotic hyphae, but in response to environmental
signals (Chapter 5) it will produce a mushroom or other
type of fruitbody. All the tissues of the mushroom are
composed of dikaryotic hyphae, but at a relatively
late stage in development of the mushroom the gills
become lined with (dikaryotic) basidia. Within each
basidium the two nuclei fuse to form a diploid
nucleus (karyogamy) which subsequently undergoes
meiosis. Sterigmata then develop from the top of each
basidium, and the four haploid nuclei migrate into the
developing basidiospores (Fig. 2.19). Sometimes only two
spores are produced, instead of four – a common
example being the cultivated mushroom, Agaricus bisporus. This is because, after meiosis in the basidium,
2 nuclei enter each spore, and the germinating

32

CHAPTER 2

Germination

Basidiospores

Monokaryotic
hyphae

Basidium

Oidia

Fruitbody
(Karyogamy)

Dikaryotic
hyphae

Homing

Plasmogamy

Fig. 2.19 Scanning electron micrograph of the basidia of
a mushroom, Coprinus cinereus. Note the inflated basidia,
each with four sterigmata, and the basidiospores, some
of which have already been released, or collapsed during
preparation of the specimen. (Courtesy of Dr Chris
Jeffree.)

basidiospores produce a dikaryotic mycelium that is
homothallic (self-fertile). However, the vast majority of
mushroom-producing fungi are heterothallic – about
90%. We will discuss the compatibility systems of
these fungi in Chapter 5.
The way in which the basidiospores are released
is not fully understood, but just before their release a

Fig. 2.18 A generalized life cycle of a mushroom; see text for details. (Courtesy of Maria
Chamberlain.)
small droplet, termed the hylar droplet, is seen at
the base of the spore, then the spore is “popped” from
the sterigma into the space between the gills, where it
falls vertically, free from the fruitbody. After a period
of dormancy the haploid basidiospores germinate
to produce monokaryotic hyphae, which repeat the
whole cycle.
One of the most intriguing aspects of this life cycle
is the manner in which the dikaryon develops. This
is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 2.20. The dikaryotic
tip cell extends and synthesizes protoplasm until it
attains a critical cytoplasmic volume. Then a small
backwardly-projecting branch arises, and the two nuclei
divide synchronously – one of the nuclei dividing
along the axis of the hypha, and the other dividing so
that one of the daughter nuclei enters the branch. The
branch is then cut off by the development of a septum (cross-wall) and a septum also develops in the main
axis of the hypha. The effect of this is to create a tip
cell with two nuclei of different compatibility types, a
penultimate cell with a single nucleus, and a branch
with a single nucleus, isolated by septa. The branch then
fuses with the penultimate cell, by dissolution of the
wall, and the nucleus migrates into the penultimate cell,
restoring the dikaryotic condition. This process occurs
every time the nuclei divide. The resulting “bumps” on
the hyphae are easily seen by light microscopy, and are
termed clamp connections (Fig. 2.20). However, not
all members of the Basidiomycota produce clamp connections, and yet they still grow as dikaryons, suggesting
that other regulatory mechanisms are involved.
If we refer back to the development of asci in Fig.
2.16, we see a remarkable similarity in the behavior

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

33

Hyphal tip with two nuclei
Clamp
Clamp branch forms

Clamp

Branch attaches to hypha;
nuclei divide

Clamp branch sealed
off by septum

Wall dissolves, nucleus migrates
Fig. 2.20 The role of clamp connections in maintaining a regular dikaryon.

of clamp connections (Fig. 2.20) and the development
of asci in the Ascomycota. In both cases the nuclear
distribution is maintained by a hypha growing back
upon itself and fusing with the cell behind it. And in
both cases there is a dikaryotic phase, although it
occurs only temporarily in the ascus initials. These lines
of evidence reinforce the view that the Ascomycota and
Basidiomycota are closely related.
Ecology and significance
The Phylum Basidiomycota exhibits the most extreme
variation of any group of fungi. Some of the yeasts
on plant surfaces are basidiomycetous, although they
are far outnumbered by the ascomycetous yeasts.
A common example is the salmon-colored yeast,
Sporobolomyces roseus, which grows on senescent leaf surfaces. It divides by budding but also has a sexual stage,
in which single yeast cells produce a sterigma and release
a basidiospore, apparently by the same mechanism as
in mushrooms. S. roseus is a common inhabitant of
leaf surfaces, and the spore population in the air can
be high enough to cause respiratory allergies. But a few
basidiomycetous yeasts are much more significant
and can be life-threatening pathogens of humans,
especially of people with impaired immune defenses.
The most notable examples are Blastomyces dermatitidis,
Cryptococcus neoformans and Histoplasma capsulatum,
all of which can produce sexual stages when strains
of different mating types are crossed in laboratory
conditions, but the sexual stages are seldom found in
nature. The sources of inoculum that initiate infection
in the lungs are common environmental samples,
such as birds’ droppings and even the bark of eucalypt

trees (Chapter 16). The important lesson from this is
that even the apparently insignificant saprotrophic
fungi of plant surfaces and other materials can have a
significant impact on human health.
Some of the most economically important plant
pathogens are members of the Basidiomycota. They
include the many species and genera of rust fungi
(Uredinales) that are specialized to infect particular
types of plant. One of the best-known examples is
Puccinia graminis, which causes black stem rust of
wheat. These fungi can have complex life cycles, with
up to four different types of spore being produced at
different stages of the life cycle (Chapter 14). Another
important group of pathogens, the smut fungi
(Ustilaginales), are unusual because they grow only as
yeasts in culture but as mycelia in their hosts. Again,
these are discussed in Chapter 14.
The most familiar fungi in the Basidiomycota
belong to the class Hymenomycetes, and include
almost all the larger fungi, such as the mushrooms (commonly known as toadstools), woody brackets, puffballs,
earth-stars, splash cups, and jelly-like structures. Most
of these “higher” Basidiomycota degrade polymers
such as cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin. They are
found in composts (e.g. Coprinus), leaf litter (e.g.
Mycena), the thatch of dead leaf sheaths in old grasslands (e.g. Marasmius oreades, which produces “fairy
rings”; Chapter 11) and in woody substrates, where
they play a major role in wood decay (Chapter 11).
Some of these fungi cause major tree diseases; e.g.
Armillaria spp. in hardwood stands (Chapter 5) and
Heterobasidion annosum in conifers (Chapter 12).
Many other mushroom-producing fungi form
mycorrhizal associations with forest trees, although

34

CHAPTER 2

this applies mainly to the cooler regions of the world,
because most tropical and subtropical trees have
arbuscular-mycorrhizal fungi. Common examples of
mycorrhizal fungi found in the cooler regions
include species of Amanita, Russula, Cortinarius, Boletus,
Hebeloma, Lactarius, etc. They play major roles in facilitating the uptake of mineral nutrients from soil. But,
whereas the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi of most land
plants seem to be involved primarily in the uptake of
phosphates from soil (Chapter 1), the ectomycorrhizal
fungi of forest trees (excluding the tropics and subtropics) seem to be most significant in degrading
soil proteins and providing the trees with nitrogen
(Chapter 13).
Several members of the Basidiomycota are grown
commercially as mushroom crops (e.g. Agaricus bisporus,
Volvariella volvacea, Lentinula edodes), while others are
“cultivated” by insects to provide a food source for
the insect colonies. Two classic examples of this are
seen in the “fungus gardens” of the leaf-cutting attine
ants (Atta species) and in a sub-family of termites that
lack cellulolytic bacteria in their guts. In both cases,
the insects obtain their main food source by bringing
pieces of leaf or other material into the nests and
inoculating this with spores of basidiomycetous fungi.
The insect colony then feeds on the fungal hyphae, and
weeds-out any contaminant fungi. Cladistic analysis has
traced the origin of these mutualistic associations to
about 50–60 million years ago (Chapter 13).
Other members of the Basidiomycota, such as
Amanita phalloides – “the destroying angel” – produce
deadly toxins that bind to the cytoskeletal proteins
in cells. These toxins have become important
tools in cell biology for investigating cell dynamics
(Chapter 3).

(a)

(b)

The diversity of fruiting bodies (basidiocarps)
produced by Basidiomycota
As a means of illustrating the considerable diversity of
form and function of basidiocarps, a range of examples
are shown, with annotations, in Figs 2.21–2.32. All these
examples can be downloaded in color, on the accompanying website for the book (see Online Resources).

Fig. 2.21 Basidiocarps of one of the bird’s nest fungi (genus
Cyathus), about 1 cm diameter. These fungi are commonly
seen in soil enriched with wood chippings. The small
gray-brown cups open at maturity by rupture of the
thin upper membrane (see arrows), revealing a cluster
of egg-like peridioles. The basidiocarp acts as a splash
cup. When raindrops hit the peridioles these are flung
out of the cup, but each periodiole is attached to a thin
funicular cord, with a sticky hapteron at its base, and
this attaches to any object that it strikes, such as a leaf
blade.

Fig 2.22 (a,b) Earth stars (Geastrum
spp.), about 6 cm diameter, growing in
leaf litter beneath birch trees. These
basidiocarps are like puffballs, but are
initially enclosed in thick outer wall
layers. These layers split and curl back,
helping to raise the basidiocarp above
the leaf litter. Basidiospores develop
and mature within the closed fruitbody, which then develops a pore at
its tip. The spores are “puffed” through
this pore when raindrops hit the papery
casing of the “spore chamber.”

(a)

(b)
Fig. 2.23 Puffballs (Lycoperdon spp.) in an immature white stage (a) and mature brown stage (b), about 3 cm diameter. These are similar to the earthstars shown in Fig. 2.22, but frequently are attached to woody substrates. Puffballs
produce basidiospores from basidia that develop within the fruitbody. The spores are not shot from the sterigmata but
drop off and accumulate within chambers inside the developing fruitbody. Mature puffballs have a thin, papery outer
casing with a pore at the top. Spores are puffed from the pore by raindrops.

(a)

(b)
Fig. 2.24 Two characteristic wood-rotting fungi of Scottish birch woods. (a) Fomes fomentarius (the hoof fungus), about
20 cm diameter. This hard, woody, perennial, bracket fungus is very common. The hyphae growing within the wood
cause a brown rot. The underside of the basidiocarp consists of minute pores through which the basidiospores fall and
are then wind-dispersed. (b) A bracket-shaped polypore of the fungus Piptoporus betulinus, the “razor strop” fungus.

(a)

(b)
Fig. 2.25 (a) An evanescent bracket of Polyporus squamosus (Dryad’s saddle), about 25 cm diameter, growing on a senescent poplar tree. The spores are released through pores on the underside, but the bracket senesces and decays within
a few months and is usually replaced annually. (b) A large conical-shaped fruitbody of Phaeolus schweinitzii, parasitic
on the roots of conifers. The cap is about 15 cm diameter, cream-colored at the margin but dark brown in the center.
In this fresh specimen the toadstool is covered with a downy felt on the upper surface.

(a)
(a)

(b)
Fig. 2.26 (a) A basidiocarp of Boletus scaber (10 cm
diameter, mauve-brown in color), growing as a mycorrhizal associate of birch trees. The underside (b) shows that
basidiospores are produced in pores, not on gills, giving
rise to the common name for these fungi – the polypores.

(b)
Fig. 2.27 Two examples of jelly fungi, with a moist,
jelly-like appearance. (a) Ear-shaped basidiocarps of
Auricularia auricula, commonly seen as a saprotroph on
the dead branches of elder trees (Sambucus spp.). The dark
brown fruitbody (about 6 cm) can dry completely and
shrivel, but swells and resumes its shape after rains. (b)
Tremella mesenterica (about 5 cm diameter) growing as
a saprotroph on a dead tree branch. Jelly fungi have
several distinctive structural and ultrastructural features,
including basidia that are deeply divided like tuning forks
or with four long sterigmata, or with septate basidia. Some
have a haploid yeast-like budding phase, and some can
bud conidia from the basidiospores.

(a)

(a)

(b)
Fig. 2.29 (a,b) Thin, leathery brackets of the polypore
fungus Coriolus versicolor (about 5–7 cm diameter),
which often occurs abundantly on logs or fallen hardwood
trees. The brackets grow at their margins and often show
concentric zones of different colors – hence the species
name, versicolor.
(b)
Fig. 2.28 (a) A further example of a jelly fungus: a forked
basidiocarp of Calocera viscosa (about 5 cm high, color
orange-yellow), which grows from underground decaying
stump tissues of trees. (b) A basidiocarp of the fungus
Lactarius torminosus (color salmon-pink), frequently seen
as a mycorrhizal associate of birch trees. This poisonous
fungus is commonly known as the woolly milk cap
because of its woolly appearance. The specimen is about
10 cm diameter.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2.30 Two examples of edible gilled fungi. (a) A typical cluster of basidiocarps of Pleurotus ostreatus, the “oyster
fungus” (each about 10 cm diameter) growing on a log. The gills are pure white, and the upper surface is mauvebrown. (b) The orange-yellow colored chanterelle, Cantharellus cibarius, which typically grows on mossy banks beneath
birch trees.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2.31 The “ink caps” (Coprinus spp.) and related fungi, commonly found on animal dung or in composts. Typically,
the basidiocarps develop rapidly but last for only a short time. The cap containing the gills then senesces (deliquesces)
from the base upwards, dripping an inky fluid containing the black basidiospores. Mycological enthusiasts have been
known to write with this material, but that was before computers! (a) Coprinus comatus (known as shaggy cap, or lawyer’s
wig), about 15 cm tall at maturity. (b) Similar basidiocarps 2–3 days after maturity and showing deliquescence.
(c) A related genus, Psathyrella, growing on an agar plate. Coprinus and related species are among the few mushroomproducing fungi that can be grown easily in agar culture. They have been used extensively in genetical and developmental studies. (Images courtesy of Maria Chamberlain.)

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

39

alternative means of genetic recombination, such as
a “parasexual cycle” that has been described in
(mitosporic) genera such as Penicillium and Aspergillus
(Chapter 9).
The methods of conidial production

Fig. 2.32 Amanita muscaria, the “fly agaric” (about 12 cm
diameter). The cap is bright red, with white scales. The
stalk (stipe) bears a ring (annulus) just below the cap, and
at the base of the stalk is a cup-shaped volva (not clearly
visible, but see Fig. 13.6). This species is a common mycorrhizal associate, especially of birch (Betula spp.) and pines
(Pinus spp.). It is extremely poisonous.

Mitosporic fungi
Finally, among the true fungi, we consider the
large number of ascomycetous fungi that produce
conidia, but whose sexual stages are absent, rare or
unknown. In the past, these fungi have variously
been termed “Deuteromycota” (Deuteromycotina) or
“Fungi Imperfecti” but the more appropriate term is
mitosporic fungi, indicating that the spores are produced only by mitotic nuclear division. The majority
of these fungi are likely to be assigned to genera of
the Ascomycota by gene sequence comparisons. But at
present, the genera and species with no known sexual
stage are given provisional generic names, termed
“form genera.” When a sexual stage is discovered the
fungus must be renamed, and described according
to the features of its sexual reproductive stage – the
so-called “perfect state.” (Other terms used include
anamorph for the asexual stage, and teleomorph for
the sexual stage)
Some very common and important fungi are known
only by their asexual stages. Examples include fungi of
the form-genera Alternaria (although one species has
a sexual stage, termed Lewia infectoria), Aspergillus
(although two species have a sexual stage: Fenellia
flavipes for Aspergillus flavipes, and Emericella nidulans
for Aspergillus nidulans), Cladosporium, Humicola,
Penicillium, Phialophora, etc.
The interesting question is: why have so many
fungi largely or completely abandoned sexual reproduction? The answer might be that they have developed

The mitosporic fungi, like the asexual stages of known
Ascomycota, produce conidia in various ways, but
never by cytoplasmic cleavage in a sporangium. Some
of the many methods of conidium production are
shown in Fig. 2.33. It has been proposed that the
main types of conidium development can be either
thallic (essentially by a fragmentation process involving septation, as in the fungus Geotrichum candidum;
Fig. 2.33g) or blastic, involving swelling of the conidium initials before they are separated by septa (e.g.
Cladosporium (Fig. 2.33a) and Alternaria (Fig. 2.33b) ).
Most types of conidium development would fall
into the “blastic” type. For example, the conidia of
Aureobasidium pullulans, now named by its sexual
(teleomorph) stage, Sydowia polyspora, produce conidia
by budding at or near the septa (Fig. 2.33h). The
conidia of Humicola spp. are produced by a ballooning
of the tip of a conidiophore branch (Fig. 2.33d).
The conidia of many fungi are produced by extruding spores from flask-shaped cells termed phialides
(Aspergillus, Penicillium, Phialophora; Figs. 2.33c,e,f).
Other variations are seen in the ways that conidiophores
are arranged. For example, Penicillium spp. typically have
brush-like conidiophores, terminating in phialides,
and the successive conidia accumulate in chains
(Fig. 2.33e). Aspergillus spp. typically have a conidiophore with phialides arranged on a swollen vesicle,
and again they produce chains of conidia (Fig. 2.33c).
The conidiophores can be aggregated into a stalk
termed a synnema or coremium (e.g. Pesotum, Fig.
2.33i) or the conidia can arise from a pad of tissue
(an acervulus as in Gloeosporium, Fig. 2.33k) or they
can be produced in a flask-shaped pycnidium (e.g.
Phomopsis, Fig. 2.33j).
Ecology and significance
As will be clear from the comments above, mitosporic
fungi are extremely common and produce abundant
conidia which are dispersed by wind, rain or animals.
Many of these fungi are common saprotrophs, with
important roles in nutrient recycling. Several have
conidia that are large enough 20–40 µm to impact
in the nostrils, causing hay-fever symptoms (e.g. Alternaria). Others have conidia that are small enough
(about 4 µm diameter) to escape impaction in the
upper respiratory tract, and reach the alveoli where they
can cause acute allergic responses (Chapter 10) or in
some cases (e.g. Aspergillus fumigatus) establish long-term

40

CHAPTER 2

Fig. 2.33 Some representative methods of conidium production in mitosporic fungi.

foci of infection in the lungs. Mitosporic fungi such
as Penicillium, Aspergillus and Fusarium spp. can also
be major spoilage agents of stored food products
(Chapter 8), and produce several dangerous mycotoxins (e.g. the aflatoxins of Aspergillus flavus, discussed
in Chapter 7). Several mitosporic fungi are major
plant pathogens, including the vascular wilt fungi
Verticillium dahliae and Fusarium oxysporum (Chapter 14).
Others parasitize insects – for example, the many
strains of Metarhizium and Beauveria that have potential for biological control of insects (Chapter 15).

Mitosporic fungi have many other beneficial roles
and are exploited commercially for their vast range of
useful metabolites (antibiotics, enzymes, immunosuppressants, organic acids, etc.).

The fungus-like organisms
In addition to the true fungi, several fungus-like
organisms have traditionally been studied by mycologists. This legacy dates back a long time and it is

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

defensible, so long as we recognize that the fungus-like
organisms are not true fungi. The main fungus-like
organisms that can be considered as fungi in a broader
sense (Box 2.1) are:
• The Oomycota, which belong to the Kingdom
Straminipila (stramenipiles; Dick 2001) and are
closely related to the golden-brown algae and diatoms.
• The acrasid and dictyostelid slime moulds
(Acrasiomycota and Dictyosteliomycota).
• The plasmodial slime moulds (Myxomycota).
• The plasmodiophorids (Plasmodiophoromycota).

The Oomycota
The Oomycota are the most economically important
fungus-like organisms and play extremely significant
roles in many environmental processes. They are
particularly important as plant pathogens, and cause
some of the most devastating plant diseases, such as
potato blight (caused by Phytophthora infestans),
sudden oak death (caused by Phytophthora ramorum),
many seedling and “decline” diseases caused by
Pythium spp., and several downy mildew diseases.
These diseases are treated in detail in Chapter 14.
Many other aspects of the Oomycota are covered in
Chapters 3 and 10.
One of the most remarkable features of Oomycota
is that they behave exactly like the true fungi. Their
hyphae exhibit apical growth and penetrate plant cells
by producing cell-wall-degrading enzymes. They also
use similar infection strategies to those of fungi. So,
by a remarkable degree of convergent evolution the
Oomycota have developed a lifestyle equivalent to
that of fungi (Latijnhouwers et al. 2003). Nevertheless,
they are wholly unrelated to the true fungi. Apart
from their lack of photosynthetic pigments, they have
many plant-like features, including:
• cell walls composed primarily of glucans, including
cellulose-like polymers;
• diploid nuclei, in contrast to the haploid nuclei of
most fungi;
• cell membranes composed of plant sterols, in contrast to ergosterol, the characteristic fungal sterol;
• energy storage compounds similar to those of
plants, in contrast to the polyols (sugar alcohols) and
trehalose found in most fungi;
• a range of ultrastructural features more closely
related to those of plants than of fungi, including
stacked, plate-like golgi cisternae (the fungi have
tubular golgi cisternae), and tubular mitochondrial
cisternae (the fungi have plate-like or disc-like mitochondrial cisternae;
• different sensitivities to a range of antifungal agents.

41

The characteristic life-cycle features of Oomycota
Figure 2.34 illustrates the major life-cycle features
of Oomycota, represented by the plant-pathogen,
Phytophthora infestans, and water moulds such as
Saprolegnia spp.
Typically, the somatic (vegetative) stages are broad,
fast-growing hyphae with diploid nuclei. The
hyphae lack cross-walls (septa) except when they
produce complete, unperforated septa to isolate the
reproductive structures.
Asexual reproduction involves the production of a
multinucleate sporangium, which is separated by a
septum. The sporangial contents are then cleaved
around the individual nuclei, resulting in the production of diploid zoospores, each with an anteriorly
directed tinsel-type flagellum and a trailing whiplash
flagellum. The zoospores are released when the tip of
the sporangium breaks down, but in some species (e.g.
Phytophthora infestans) the whole sporangium can be
released and functions as a dispersal spore. Depending
on environmental conditions (especially temperature)
this can germinate by producing a hypha or it can
undergo cytoplasmic cleavage and release zoospores.
The important downy mildew pathogens of several
crop plants release sporangia that are wind-dispersed
and germinate by a hypha to infect their hosts.
Sexual reproduction typically involves the production of a male sex organ (antheridium) and a female
sex organ (oogonium) that may contain one or several eggs. Meiosis occurs within these sex organs, and
fertilization is achieved by the transfer of a single
haploid nucleus through a fertilisation tube to each
haploid egg (Fig. 2.34b). In some Phytophthora species
(e.g. P. cactorum) the antheridia are attached laterally
to the oogonium. But in others (e.g. P. infestans) the
oogonial hypha grows through the antheridium and
then swells to form the oogonium. In any case,
fertilization leads to the development of one or more
thick-walled, diploid oospores. These usually have a
constitutive dormant period before they germinate to
produce either diploid hyphae or a sporangium that
releases diploid zoospores.
There are many variations on these basic themes.
For example, some of the Oomycota are homothallic
(self-fertile) and some heterothallic. Some species (e.g.
Pythium oligandrum) characteristically develop oospores
parthenogenetically, without a sexual process. In some
of the water moulds (Saprolegniales) the zoospores
released from the sporangia encyst immediately and
then germinate to produce a secondary zoospore,
which can swim for many hours. In Pythium spp. the
sporangia do not release their zoospores “directly” by
dissolution of the tip of the sporangium. Instead, the
sporangium produces a short exit tube and the tip of
this breaks down to form a membrane-bound vesicle

Fig. 2.34 Characteristic features of Oomycota. (a) Stages in the infection cycle of Phytophthora infestans (potato blight).
Strains of opposite mating types in the host tissues produce antheridia and oogonia. Fertilization leads to the production of thick-walled resting spores (oospores). After a dormant period, the oospores germinate by a hyphal outgrowth,
which produces lemon-shaped, wind-dispersed sporangia. These initiate infection either by germinating as a hyphal
outgrowth (in warm conditions) or by cytoplasmic cleavage to release motile biflagellate zoospores in cool, moist conditions. Infected leaves produce sporangiophores through the stomatal openings, leading to spread of infection to other
plants. (b) Sexual reproduction by Saprolegnia: several oospores are formed in each oogonium. (c) Asexual reproduction
in Saprolegnia: the sporangium develops at the tip of a hypha, then the protoplasm cleaves to release several primary
zoospores (each with two anterior flagella). These encyst rapidly and the cysts release secondary zoospores (laterally
biflagellate) for dispersal to new sites. (d) Asexual reproduction in Pythium. At maturity the sporangium discharges its
contents into a thin, membraneous vesicle. The laterally biflagellate zoospores are cleaved within this vesicle which then
breaks down to release the zoospores.

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

(Fig. 2.34d). The contents of the sporangium are
extruded into this vesicle, where the zoospores differentiate and then are released by rupture of the vesicle.
Classification, ecology, and significance
There are estimated to be 500–800 species in the
Oomycota, classified in 5 or 6 Orders. However, some
of these Orders contain only a few organisms, which
will be mentioned where appropriate in later chapters.
Here we will focus on the two major Orders, Saprolegniales and Peronosporales.
The Saprolegniales, commonly known as water
moulds, are extremely common in freshwater habitats
and in some brackish, estuarine environments. They can
often be baited by immersing hemp seeds in natural
waters, but it is difficult to free the cultures from
bacteria. Several species of Achlya and Saprolegnia are
common saprotrophs in freshwater habitats, and
contribute to the recycling of organic matter, but S.
diclina is an important pathogen of salmonid fish.
The related Aphanomyces spp. are perhaps best-known
as aggressive root pathogens (e.g. A. euteiches on pea
and beans). But A. astaci is a pathogen of crayfish and
has virtually eliminated the native European crayfish
(the disease being known as crayfish plague). The
introduced American crayfish, however, is resistant
to the disease and has now replaced the European
crayfish in almost all sites.
The Order Peronosporales is by far the largest and
most economically important group. It includes many
serious plant pathogens. For example, many Pythium
spp. cause seedling diseases and attack the feeder
roots of almost all crop plants (Chapter 14), but a few
Pythium spp. parasitize other fungi and have potential
for biocontrol of plant diseases (Chapter 12). The
Peronosporales also includes all the Phytophthora spp.,
causing diseases such as potato blight (P. infestans).
One of the most aggressive plant pathogens is
Phytophthora cinnamomi, with an extensive host range.
It causes root rot of pines, eucalypts, fruit trees, and
many other plants in warmer regions of the globe, and
can invade natural vegetation with devastating consequences. A similarly aggressive species, Phytophthora
ramorum, causes sudden oak death in California
(Chapter 14) and is currently spreading across Europe,
posing a threat to many native European trees. Also
in this group are the important downy mildew
pathogens (e.g. Bremia lactucae on lettuce, Plasmopara
viticola on grape vines) which are obligate biotrophic
parasites (Chapter 14).
The remaining Orders include Leptomitales (a
small group of aquatic fungi, such as Leptomitis lacteus
which is common in sewage-polluted waters). This
group has several interesting and peculiar features, such
as fermentative rather than respiratory metabolism

43

(Chapter 8), a requirement for sulfur-containing
amino acids because they cannot use inorganic sulfur
sources, and hyphae that are constricted at intervals,
like chains of sausages. The walls of some species contain significant amounts of chitin (which is unusual
for Oomycota) and the hyphal constrictions are often
plugged by cellulin granules, composed mostly of chitin.
The Order Lagenidales is a small group of common
symptomless parasites of plant roots (e.g. Lagena
radicicola; Macfarlane 1970) or parasites of algae,
fungi, or invertebrates (e.g. Lagenidium giganteum on
nematodes, mosquito larvae, etc.). Often these cannot
be grown in culture in the absence of a host.

The cellular slime moulds
The cellular slime moulds comprise two groups of
organisms – the dictyostelid cellular slime moulds
and the acrasid cellular slime moulds. These two
groups are biologically similar to one another, but
the dictyostelids seem to be a monophyletic group,
whereas the acrasids seem to be more disparate. Both
types of organism grow and divide as haploid, unicellular amoebae, which engulf bacteria and other food
particles by phagocytosis. They are commonly found
in moist organic-rich soil, leaf litter, animal dung,
and similar types of substrate. When nutrients
become depleted, the amoebae undergo a complex
developmental sequence in which many thousands of
amoebae aggregate and eventually produce a stalked
fruiting body (Fig. 2.35). This process has been
studied intensively in the dictyostelid slime mould,
Dictyostelium discoideum, which has become a model
system of cell communication and differentiation.
At the onset of starvation, a few amoebae act as
an aggregation center and produce periodic pulses of
cyclic AMP (cAMP). This causes other amoebae to join
the aggregate by chemotaxis, and the amoebae then
undergo streaming along defined tracks so that they
aggregate as a mound. Then the cells in the mound
differentiate into two sorts – the pre-stalk cells and
the pre-spore cells, each in its defined position where
it will later become a stalk cell or a spore. At this stage
the mound topples over, and the resulting slug (grex)
migrates to the surface of the substrate where it differentiates into a fruiting body (sorocarp) with a stalk
and a sporing head. The walled spores are subsequently released and wind-dispersed.
A sexual cycle has also been described, leading to
the production of thick-walled, diploid macrocysts,
which undergo meiosis followed by repeated mitotic
divisions. Then the cytoplasm is cleaved and many haploid amoebae are released to repeat the cycle. Detailed
coverage of the dictyostelids can be found in Raper
(1984).

44

CHAPTER 2

Fig. 2.35 The life cycle of Dictyostelium discoideum. (Courtesy of Florian
Siegert ©. From: http://www.zi.biologie.
unimuenchen.de/zoologie/dicty/
dicty.html)

(a)

(d)

(b)

(c)

(e)

Myxomycota – the plasmodial slime
moulds
The plasmodial slime moulds are wall-less organisms
that consist of a multinucleate network of protoplasm
(the plasmodium; Fig. 2.36) exhibiting rapid, rhythmic surges of protoplasmic streaming. These organisms

Fig. 2.36 Myxomycota. (a) A plasmodium of Physarum polycephalum
growing on an agar plate. Note how
the plasmodium, which was inoculated in the center of the plate, has
migrated towards the margin, where the
protoplasm has amassed. (b) A decaying bracket fungal fruitbody (about
15 cm diameter) completely covered
by cream-colored sporing structures
of the myxomycete Fuligo septica. (c)
Mature sporangia of the slime mould
Physarum cinereum on a grass blade
about 4 mm diameter; many of the
sporangia have opened to release the
dark gray spores. (d) Immature, pink
sporangia of Lycogala on the surface of
rotting wood; each sporangium is
about 1 cm diameter. (e) Similar sporangia 5 days later, when the sporangia had matured, turned gray, and
consisted of a thin papery sac that
ruptured to release the spores.

are commonly seen in the autumn on moist rotting
wood, on senescing fungal fruitbodies and on similar
organic substrata where bacteria are abundant. They
engulf bacteria and other food particles by phagocytosis. The plasmodium typically develops within a
substrate but then migrates to the surface in response
to nutrient depletion and the whole plasmodium converts into fruiting structures (sporangia) containing

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

(a)

Fig. 2.37 Plasmodiophorids. (a) Clubroot symptoms caused by Plasmodiophora brassicae on a cruciferous
seedling: note the grossly deformed
root system. (b) Large numbers of thickwalled resting spores of P. brassicae in
clubroot tissue. (c,d) Clusters of thickwalled resting spores of Polymyxa
graminis at different magnifications in
the roots of grasses. ((a,b) Courtesy
of J.P. Braselton, Ohio University; see
http://oak.cats.ohiou.edu/~braselto/
plasmos/)

(c)

many haploid spores that are wind-dispersed. These
spores germinate to produce either amoeboid cells
termed myxamoebae or flagellate swarmers, which
fuse in pairs, and the resulting diploid cell grows into
a plasmodium. Physarum polycephalum is perhaps the
best-known example. It has been studied intensively
by morphogeneticists because it can be maintained
on defined (bacterium-free) media. Full details of the
Myxomycota can be found in Martin & Alexopoulos
(1969).

Plasmodiophorids
Plasmodiophorids (Fig. 2.37) are obligate intracellular
parasites of plants, algae, or fungi. They grow only in
a host organism, and cannot be grown in laboratory
culture. As a group, the plasmodiophorids show no
obvious relationship to fungi or to other fungus-like
organisms, so their phylogenetic status remains
unclear (Down et al. 2002). The most important
organism of this group is Plamodiophora brassicae,
which causes the damaging clubroot disease of cruciferous crops (the cabbage family). In this disease the roots
are severely deformed, with proliferation of cell divi-

45

(b)

(d)

sion caused by the production of phytohormones,
and this can lead to serious yield losses. A related
organism, Spongospora subterranea, causes powdery
scab of potato tubers. In addition to these, several
common plasmodiophorids, such as Polymyxa spp.,
grow as symptomless parasites in the roots of many
plants, causing little or no damage, but they can act
as vectors of some economically important plant
viruses (Chapter 10).
Significant stages in the life cycle of P. brassicae are
shown in Fig. 2.38, although there is still doubt about
the details of some stages. The thick-walled resting
spores can persist in soil for many years, and only a
low proportion of them will germinate in any one year.
So, once this fungus is established in a site it is almost
impossible to eradicate. The resting spores eventually
germinate to release a motile, biflagellate zoospore,
which locates a host root by chemotaxis and then
encysts in a defined orientation. The cyst protoplast is
then injected into a root epidermal cell or a root hair
by means of a bullet-like structure. The protoplast
then grows into a small primary plasmodium within
the infected cell, and converts into a sporangium,
which releases zoospores when the root cell dies or when
an exit tube is formed. At this stage, the zoospores are

46

(a)

CHAPTER 2

(b)

(c)

Fig. 2.38 Stages in the life cycle of Plasmodiophora brassicae, which causes clubroot
disease of cruciferous crops. (a) Uninucleate
primary zoospores are released from germinating resting spores in soil. (b) The zoospores
encyst on a root hair or root epidermal cell and
inject a protoplast into the host cell. (c) The
protoplasts grow into small primary plasmodia and then convert to sporangia, which
release zoospores into the soil when the root
cell dies, or when an exit tube is formed. (d) The
zoospores fuse in pairs. (e) The fused zoospores
infect root cortical cells and develop into
secondary plasmodia. (f) At maturity the secondary plasmodia covert into resting spores
which often completely fill the cortical cells.
These spores are finally released into soil when
the roots decay. Eventually, the resting spores
germinate to release haploid zoospores which
repeat the infection cycle.

(d)

(f)
(e)

CH2

N

OSO3–

S

C6H11O5

Glucosinolase

C

N
Glucobrassicin

CH2

CN

N
H
Indoleacetonitrile (active hormone?)

CH2

COOH

N
H
Indoleacetic acid (1 AA) (active hormone)
Fig. 2.39 Proposed conversion of glucobrassicin to the plant hormone indoleacetic acid by Plasmodiophora brassicae.

believed to fuse in pairs, and the resulting secondary
zoospores infect root cortical cells, where they develop
into large, secondary plasmodia that will eventually
produce thick-walled resting spores. There is evidence
that meiosis occurs just before the development of resting spores, suggesting that the primary zoospores are
haploid, and therefore that the secondary zoospores and
zoosporangia are diploid.
The main damage caused by Plasmodiophora lies in
the fact that the root responds to infection of the cortex by undergoing rapid cell expansion (hypertrophy)
and cell division (hyperplasia), leading to the development of large galls. The plant nutrients diverted to
these galls severely reduce the shoot growth and yield
of crops such as cauliflower, while the galls themselves

make root crops unmarketable. The proposed explanation for gall development is that glucobrassicin, a
characteristic compound in cruciferous plants, is converted to the plant hormone indolylacetic acid (IAA)
by the action of an enzyme, glucosinolase (Fig. 2.39).
As a group, the plasmodiophorids are difficult to study
because they cannot be grown in laboratory culture,
and so many basic aspects of their biology remain
unclear. They show no obvious relationship to other
fungus-like organisms, so they seem to represent a
basal lineage of the early eukaryotic organisms. They
are very common, because when the roots of almost
any grass plant are cleared of protoplasm and stained
with trypan blue the roots are frequently seen to contain resting spores of Polymyxa graminis (Fig. 2.37) or

DIVERSITY OF FUNGI

similar organisms such as Ligniera spp. They do not cause
deformation of the roots, and even Plasmodiophora
brassicae seems able to grow in the roots of many
cruciferous plants, including the common weed
Capsella bursa-pastoris (shepherd’s purse), without
causing galls, perhaps because these plants do not
contain high levels of glucobrassicin or do not
respond to infection by producing active hormones.
Comprehensive accounts of the plasmodiophorids can
be found in Karling (1968) and Buczacki (1983).

Online resources
Fungal
Biology.
http://www.helios.bto.ed.ac.uk/bto/
FungalBiology/ [The website for this book.]
Plasmodiophorid Home Page. http://oak.cats.ohiou.edu/
~braselto/plasmos/
Slime moulds. Superb images from George Barron (also
including many fungi). http://www.uoguelph.ca/~gbarron/
myxoinde.htm
Tree of Life Web Project. Major source of information on
fungal systematics and phylogeny. http://tolweb.org/
tree?group=life
Zoosporic Fungi online. http://www.botany.uga.edu/
zoosporicfungi/

Reference texts
Buczacki, S.T. (1983) Zoosporic Plant Pathogens: a modern
perspective. Academic Press, London.
Dick, M.W. (2001) Straminipolous Fungi. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, New York.
Fuller, M.F. & Jaworski, A., eds (1987) Zoosporic Fungi in
Teaching and Research. Southeastern Publishing Corporation, Athens, GA.
Hawksworth, D.L., Kirk, P.M., Sutton, B.C. & Pegler, D.N.
(1996) Ainsworth and Bisby’s Dictionary of the Fungi, 8th
edn. CAB International, Wallingford, Oxon.
Karling, J.S. (1968) The Plasmodiophorales. Hafner Publishing Co., New York.
Kirk, P.M., Cannon, P.F., David, J.C. & Stalpers, J. (2001)
Ainsworth and Bisby’s Dictionary of the Fungi, 9th edn. CAB
International, Wallingford, Oxon.
Martin, G.W. & Alexopoulos, C.J. (1969) The Myxomycota.
Iowa University Press, Iowa City, IA.
Raper, K.B. (1984) The Dictyostelids. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ.

47

Cited references
Barr, D.J.S. (1990) Phylum Chytridiomycota. In: Handbook
of Protoctista (Margulis, L., Corliss, J.O., Melkman, M. &
Chapman, D.J., eds), pp. 454–466. Jones & Bartlett,
Boston.
Buczacki, S.T. (1983) Zoosporic Plant Pathogens: a modern
perspective. Academic Press, London.
Deacon, J.W. & Saxena, G. (1997) Orientated attachment
and cyst germination in Catenaria anguillulae, a facultative endoparasite of nematodes. Mycological Research
101, 513–522.
Dick, M.W. (2001) Straminipolous Fungi. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, New York.
Down, G.J., Grenville, L.J. & Clarkson, J.M. (2002)
Phylogenetic analysis of Spongospora and implications
for the taxonomic status of the plasmodiophorids.
Mycological Research 106, 1060–1065.
Fuller, M.F. & Jaworski, A., eds (1987) Zoosporic Fungi in
Teaching and Research. Southeastern Publishing Corporation, Athens, GA.
Karling, J.S. (1968) The Plasmodiophorales. Hafner Publishing Co., New York.
Kirk, P.M., Cannon, P.F., David, J.C. & Stalpers, J. (2001)
Ainsworth and Bisby’s Dictionary of the Fungi, 9th edn. CAB
International, Wallingford, Oxon.
Latijnhouwers, M., de Wit, P.J.G.M. & Govers, F. (2003)
Oomycetes and fungi: similar weaponry to attack
plants. Trends in Microbiology 11, 462–469.
Macfarlane, I. (1970) Lagena radicicola and Rhizophydium
graminis, two common and neglected fungi. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 55, 113–116.
Martin, G.W. & Alexopoulos, C.J. (1969) The Myxomycota.
Iowa University Press, Iowa City, IA.
Mitchell, R.T., & Deacon, J.W. (1986) Selective accumulation of zoospores of Chytridiomycetes and Oomycetes
on cellulose and chitin. Transactions of the British
Mycological Society 86, 219–223.
Raper, K.B. (1984) The Dictyostelids. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ.
Read, N.D. & Lord, K.M. (1991) Experimental Mycology 15,
132–139.
Redecker, D., Kodner, R. & Graham, L.E. (2000) Glomalean
fungi from the Ordovician. Science 289, 1920–1921.
Schuessler, A., Schwarzott, D. & Walker, C. (2001) A new
fungal phylum, the Glomeromycota: phylogeny and
evolution. Mycological Research 105, 1413–1421.
Webster, J. (1980) Introduction to Fungi, 2nd edn. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Chapter 3

Fungal structure and
ultrastructure

This chapter is divided into the following major sections:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

the structure of a fungal hypha
fungal ultrastructure
the hypha as part of a colony
the structure of yeasts
fungal walls and wall components
septa
the fungal nucleus
cytoplasmic organelles
the fungal cytoskeleton and molecular motors

Fungi have many unique features in terms of their structure, cellular components, and cellular organization.
These features are intimately linked to the mechanisms
of fungal growth and therefore to the many activities
of fungi as decomposer organisms, plant pathogens,
and pathogens of humans. In this chapter we consider
the main structural and ultrastructural features of
fungi, and some of the powerful techniques that
enable us to view the dynamics of subcellular components in living fungal hyphae, giving an insight into
the way that fungi grow.

Overview: the structure of a fungal hypha
The hypha is essentially a tube with a rigid wall, containing a moving slug of protoplasm (Fig. 3.1). It is of
indeterminate length but often has a fairly constant
diameter, ranging from 2 µm to 30 µm or more (usually 5–10 µm), depending on the species and growth

conditions. Hyphae grow only at their tips, where
there is a tapered region termed the extension zone;
this can be up to 30 µm long in the fastest-growing
hyphae such as Neurospora crassa which can extend at
up to 40 µm per minute. Behind the growing tip, the
hypha ages progressively and in the oldest regions it
may break down by autolysis or be broken down by
the enzymes of other organisms (heterolysis). While the
tip is growing, the protoplasm moves continuously from
the older regions of the hypha towards the tip. So, a
fungal hypha continuously extends at one end and continuously ages at the other end, drawing the protoplasm
forward as it grows.
The hyphae of most fungi have cross walls (septa;
singular septum) at fairly regular intervals, but septa
are absent from hyphae of most Oomycota and Zygomycota, except where they occur as complete walls
to isolate old or reproductive regions. Nevertheless, the
functional distinction between septate and aseptate
fungi is not as great as might be thought, because septa
have pores through which the cytoplasm and even the
nuclei can migrate. Strictly speaking, therefore, septate
hyphae do not consist of cells but of interconnected
compartments, like the compartments of a train. As
we will see later, this enables cellular components to
move either forwards or backwards along dedicated
pathways, so that a hypha can function as an integrated
unit.
All fungal hyphae are surrounded by a wall of
complex organization, described later. It is thin at the
apex (about 50 nm in Neurospora crassa) but thickens
to about 125 nm at 250 µm behind the tip. The
plasma membrane lies close to the wall and seems to
be firmly attached to it because hyphae are difficult to
plasmolyse.

FUNGAL STRUCTURE AND ULTRASTRUCTURE

49

Fig. 3.1 Diagrammatic representation of a fungal hypha, showing progressive aging and vacuolation behind the hyphal
tip. In the oldest regions, the walls may break down by autolysis or the mycelial nutrients may accumulate in chlamydospores (thick-walled resting spores that serve in dormant survival). Aut = autolysis; AVC = apical vesicle cluster; Chlam
= chlamydospore; ER = endoplasmic reticulum; G = Golgi/Golgi equivalent; Gl = glycogen; L = lipid; M = mitochondria; MT = microtubules; MW = melanized wall; N = nucleus; P = plasmalemma; R = ribosomes; S = septum; SP =
septal plug; V = vacuole; W = wall; Wo = Woronin body.

Fungal ultrastructure
Transmission electron microscopy of thin sections of
fungal hyphae has been one of the most important tools
for understanding the behavior of fungal hyphae, and
for elucidating the mechanisms of apical growth. The
initial studies on fungal ultrastructure relied on chemical fixation methods: the hyphae were “fixed” by
immersion in aldehydes such as glutaraldehyde, then
post-treated with electrondense substances (osmium
tetroxide and uranyl acetate) to give maximum contrast.
The superb images of Oomycota shown in Figs 3.2
and 3.3 are widely acknowledged to be among the
best that have ever been produced by this technique.
But a newer technique termed freeze substitution was
developed in the late 1970s, and this provides even
greater resolution (Howard & Aist 1979) so it has now
become the standard (Fig. 3.4). In this technique,
the living hyphae are plunged into liquid propane
(−190°C) causing almost instantaneous preservation of
the hyphae, then transferred to cold (− 80°C) acetone
with osmium tetroxide and uranyl acetate, and slowly
brought back to room temperature.
Comparison of the electron micrographs obtained by
these two methods should be made with caution, for
at least two reasons:
1 The chemically fixed hyphae belong to a species of
Pythium (Oomycota), which is not a true fungus, and

the specimen was stained to give maximum resolution of the internal organelles, so the wall is poorly
stained.
2 The hyphae prepared by freeze substitution represent
a true fungus, Athelia (Sclerotium) rolfsii, and some of
the organelles of fungi are different from those of
the Oomycota, as discussed later in this chapter.
However, it is notable that the degree of preservation
of the hyphae is much better in the freeze-substituted
material. In particular, the plasma membrane has a
smooth profile compared with the many indentations
seen with the chemical fixation method, and the subcellular organelles are more clearly defined.

The zonation of organelles in the apical
compartment
All actively growing fungal hyphae – including
hyphae of the fungus-like Oomycota – show a clearly
defined polarity in the arrangement of organelles
from the hyphal tip back towards the base of the apical compartment. The extreme hyphal tip (Figs 3.2, 3.4)
contains a large accumulation of membrane-bound
vesicles, but no other major organelles. These vesicles
show differences in electron density, suggesting that
they have different contents. Most of the vesicles are
thought to be derived from golgi bodies (or the func-

50

CHAPTER 3

Fig. 3.2 Electron micrograph of the hyphal
tip of Pythium aphanidermatum (Oomycota)
prepared by chemical fixation. The apex
contains a cluster of Golgi-derived vesicles
(V) of at least two types: large with electronlucent contents and small with electrondense contents. Mitochondria (M) are
abundant in the subapical zone but are
absent from the extreme tip. Other components include: the hyphal wall (W), plasma
membrane (P) which has an indented
appearance due to chemical fixation, microtubules (MT) which are poorly resolved,
and clusters of ribosomes (R). (Courtesy of
C. Bracker; from Grove & Bracker 1970.)

tional equivalent of golgi bodies in fungi) further back
in the apical compartment, and to be transported to
the apex where they contribute to apical growth. In support of this view, cytochemical staining of some of the
vesicles has shown that they contain chitin synthase,
the enzyme responsible for producing the chitin component of fungal walls.
The collection of vesicles at the hyphal tip is termed
the apical vesicle cluster (AVC). At high magnification in the true fungi the center of the AVC seems
to be a vesicle-free core consisting of a network of actin
microfilaments, with microtubules running through
this and sometimes extending up to the extreme tip
of the hypha. Early light microscopists had recognized
the existence of the AVC as a phase-dark body in the
hyphal tips of septate fungi, when viewed by phasecontrast microscopy. It was termed the Spitzenkörper
(“apical body”), and it was noted to disappear when
growth was stopped by applying a mild shock to the
hyphal tip, and to reappear when growth restarted.
Moreover, the Spitzenkörper was seen to shift towards

the side of a hyphal tip when hyphae changed their
growth direction, and more recently the Spitzenkörper
has been shown to split prior to the formation of a
hyphal branch, so that two tips are produced from the
original one. All this evidence points to a central role
of the Spitzenkörper in fungal tip growth – a body
that functions as the equivalent of a “tip-growth
organelle.”
Behind the extreme tip is a short zone with few or
no major organelles. Then typically there is a zone rich
in mitochondria (Figs 3.2, 3.4). Through the actions
of ATPase, this zone almost certainly generates the
proton-motive force (H+ gradient across the cell membrane) that drives nutrient uptake at the hyphal tip,
as explained in Chapter 6 (Fig. 6.3). The mitochondria
of fungi have plate-like cisternae similar to those of
animals and plants (see Fig. 3.12), whereas the
mitochondria of Oomycota have tubular cisternae
(Figs 3.2 and 3.3). Further back along the apical compartment there is increasing development of a system
of branched tubular vacuoles (Fig. 3.4). These extend

FUNGAL STRUCTURE AND ULTRASTRUCTURE

51

Fig. 3.3 Part of a subapical region of
a hypha of Pythium aphanidermatum
showing: endoplasmic reticulum (ER);
Golgi bodies (G) consisting of a stack
of pancake-like cisternae, typical of animals and Oomycota, but distinct from
those of fungi (see Fig. 3.4); mitochondrion (M); microtubules (MT); nucleus
(N); nuclear envelope (NE); nucleolus
(Nu); ribosomes (R); large and small
vesicles (V and v). (Courtesy of C.
Bracker; from Grove & Bracker 1970.)

through the septa into the hyphal compartments
further back, providing a transport system for the
movement of metabolites, including phosphates
which often can be in short supply.
The distribution of nuclei varies between and within
fungal groups. The aseptate fungi (e.g. Zygomycota) and
fungus-like organisms (e.g. Oomycota) contain many
nuclei within a common cytoplasm, so these fungi
are coenocytic. Many septate fungi (e.g. Ascomycota
and mitosporic fungi) also have several nuclei in the
apical compartment, but sometimes only one or two
nuclei in compartments behind the apex. However,
nuclei can squeeze through the septal pores, so the
concept of a single nucleus determining the functions
of a fixed volume of cytoplasm does not really apply
to most fungi. Instead, we should regard many fungi
as having several nuclei sharing a common pool of cytoplasm. This has important implications for the genetic
fluidity of fungi, discussed in Chapter 9.
Many members of the Basidiomycota (mushrooms,
toadstools, etc.) have a regular arrangement of one
nucleus in each compartment of the monokaryon, but
two nuclei (of different mating compatibility groups)
in each compartment of the dikaryon (see Fig. 2.20).
This arrangement is ensured by a special type of septum, termed the dolipore septum (see later), which
has only a narrow pore, too small to allow nuclei to
pass through.

The hypha as part of a colony
Fungal colonies typically develop from a single germinating spore, which produces a germ tube (a young
hypha) that grows and branches behind the tip. As the
original hypha and the first-order branches grow, they
produce further branches behind their tips.These
branches diverge from one another until, eventually,
the colony develops a characteristic circular outline
(Fig. 3.5). Then, in the older parts of a colony where
nutrients have been depleted, many fungi produce
narrow hyphal branches that grow towards one another
instead of diverging, and fuse by tip-to-tip contact,
involving localized breakdown of their walls (Fig. 3.6).
This process of hyphal anastomosis creates a network
for the pooling and remobilization of protoplasm to
produce chlamydospores or other, larger differentiated
structures (Chapter 5).
The phenomena seen in Figs 3.5 and 3.6 are remarkable for several reasons:
• In nutrient-rich conditions, the hyphae and
branches at the colony margin always diverge from
one another, positioning themselves so that they grow
in the spaces between existing hyphae. These positioning mechanisms are very precise, but we have no
firm evidence of their causes – possibly local gradients of carbon dioxide, or other growth metabolites?

52

(a)

CHAPTER 3

(b)

(c)

Fig. 3.4 Electron micrographs of hyphae of Athelia (Sclerotium) rolfsii prepared by freeze substitution. (a) Part of the
apical compartment, about 7 µm diameter, showing the distribution of major organelles: Spitzenkörper (S); mitochondria
(M); tubular vacuoles (Va); nucleus (N). (b) The Spitzenkörper at the extreme tip of the hypha consists of a cluster of
apical vesicles (AV) with contents of varying electron density, surrounding a vesicle-free zone; a microtubule (MT) extends
to the plasma membrane (P). Next to the plasma membrane are bundles of F-actin (filasomes, F). The wall consists of at
least two layers of different electron density (WL 1, WL 2). (c) Subapical region of the hypha, showing mitochondria,
tubular vacuoles, endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and Golgi bodies (G) (Courtesy of R. Roberson; see Roberson & Fuller
1988, 1990.)

• Nutrient-poor conditions near the center of a
colony create exactly the opposite effect, in which
hyphae grow towards one another and fuse at the
points of contact. As seen in Fig. 3.6, this again
involves precise orientation of hyphal tip growth,
because the “homing response” is extremely accurate

and always leads to tip-to-tip fusion. We have no
knowledge of the factors involved.
• Hyphal anastomosis only occurs between members
(colonies) of the same species, and seldom, if ever,
between unrelated species. Even within a species,
strains that are genetically different can fuse, but this

FUNGAL STRUCTURE AND ULTRASTRUCTURE

53

Fig. 3.5 (a–e) Stages in the development of a fungal colony from a germinating spore. The broken lines
in (e) represent narrow anastomosing hyphae near
the center of the colony.

Fig. 3.6 Videotaped sequence of anastomosis of two hyphae of Rhizoctonia solani. The times shown are minutes after
the start of video recording. The upper hypha had stopped growing at t 0 but began to produce a branch (arrowhead)
at t6 in response to the approaching hyphal tip. The hyphal tips met at t14. Dissolution of the tip walls and complete
hyphal fusion was achieved at t32. (From McCabe et al. 1999.)
usually leads to rapid death of the fused hyphal
compartments – a reaction governed by heterokaryon incompatibility (het) loci (see Figs 9.6, 9.7).
• The hyphae of Oomycota seldom if ever exhibit
“vegetative” anastomosis, but they do undergo
hyphal fusions when they produce sexual hyphae of
opposite mating types; the development of these is
controlled by sex hormones (see Fig. 5.22).

The structure of yeasts
Several fungi grow as budding, uninucleate yeasts,
rather than as hyphae. Common examples include
the bread yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Ascomycota,
Fig. 3.7), Cryptococcus spp. (Ascomycota, Fig. 3.7),

and Sporobolomyces roseus (Basidiomycota). Some
other fungi are characteristically dimorphic (with two
shapes): they switch between a hyphal and a yeast form
in response to changes in environmental conditions
(Chapter 5). A good example is the genus Candida
(Ascomycota), including the common species Candida
albicans, which can be a significant pathogen of humans
(Chapter 16). Therefore, yeasts are not fundamentally
different from hyphal fungi; they merely represent a
different growth form, adapted to spread in nutrientrich water films and similar types of environment.
As shown in Fig. 3.8, each yeast cell has a single
nucleus and a typical range of cytoplasmic organelles,
including a large, conspicuous vacuole and usually
several phase-bright lipid bodies. The vacuole and the
lipid bodies are often the only structures clearly visible

54

CHAPTER 3

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3.7 (a) The common budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, viewed by phase-contrast microscopy. (b) Cryptococcus albidus, a yeast that produces a rigid polysaccharide capsule over the cell surface, seen by mounting the cells in
a suspension of India ink particles. Different stages in the budding process are labeled from 1 (nonbudding cell) to 5
(cell separation). Note the presence of bright lipid bodies in the plane of focus of some cells (e.g. 5) and the presence
of a large central vacuole in the plane of focus of some other cells (e.g. 2, 3, 4).

Fig. 3.8 Diagrammatic representation of
a budding yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, about 5 µm diameter. BS = bud
scar; ER = endoplasmic reticulum; G =
Golgi; L = lipid body; M = mitochondrion; N = nucleus; SPB = spindle-pole
body; V = vesicle; Vac = large central
vacuole; W = wall.
by light microscopy. Most yeasts divide by budding from
one or more locations on the cell surface. During this
process a small outgrowth appears at the bud site,
then the bud progressively elongates before expanding
into a rounded form, by synthesis of new wall components over the whole of the cell surface. When the
bud has nearly reached its final size, the nucleus of the
mother cell migrates towards the bud site and divides,
so that one nucleus remains in the mother cell and a
second nucleus enters the daughter cell.
The final separation of the two cells is achieved by
the development of a septum. In Saccharomyces this
occurs when a ring of chitin is produced at the “neck”
site, and this ring of chitin expands inwards until it
becomes a complete chitin plate between the mother
and daughter cell. Then other wall materials are
deposited on each side of this chitin plate, and the cells
separate by enzymic cleavage of the wall between the
chitin plate and the daughter cell. This process leaves
a bud scar on the mother cell and a birth scar on the

daughter cell. These scars are inconspicuous by normal
light microscopy, but the chitin plate on the mother
cell can be seen clearly if yeasts are treated with a fluorescent brightener such as Cellufluor (calcofluor), which
binds to chitin and fluoresces blue when the cell is
observed under a fluorescence microscope.
By using fluorescent dyes that bind to chitin, we
can count the number of bud scars on the cell surface.
This reveals that Saccharomyces cerevisiae is a multipolar
budding yeast – it always buds from a different point
on the cell surface, never from a previous bud site,
whereas some other yeasts exhibit bipolar budding –
the buds always arise at the same positions, often at
the poles of the cell. In theory, the cells of bipolar
species are immortal, with no limit to the number of
times they can bud, whereas the cells of multipolar
species would eventually run out of potential bud sites
– calculated to be up to 100, although only about
40 bud scars have been seen on a single cell. However,
in practise this distinction is unimportant because in

FUNGAL STRUCTURE AND ULTRASTRUCTURE

exponentially growing cultures (where one cell produces
two in a unit of time, two produce four in the next
unit of time, and so on) one half of all the cells will
be first-time mothers, one quarter will be second-time
mothers, and an infinitessimally small number will be
very old mothers. In fact, the typical chitin content of a
yeast population seldom exceeds more than 1–2% of
the total wall material, and almost all of this chitin is
found in the bud scars, not in the rest of the yeast cell
wall. We return to this topic in Chapter 4, because some
important advances have been made in understanding growth polarity, based on the use of cell-cycle
mutants in the laboratory of the Nobel Laureate, Sir Paul
Nurse.
The taxonomy of yeasts is complicated by the lack
of obvious morphological features, so in recent years
it has relied heavily on molecular approaches. There
are probably many hundreds, if not thousands, of
yeast species that have yet to be clearly demarcated and
described. Recent evidence from the ascomycetous
budding yeasts suggests that these are a monophyletic
group – all with a common ancestor – and they are
not simply reduced forms derived from the mycelial
Ascomycota. They are also distinct from the “fission
yeasts” such as Schizosaccharomyces species, which
do not bud but instead form filaments that fragment
by septation into brick-like cells (arthrospores, or
arthroconidia).

Fungal walls and wall components
In recent years it has become clear that fungal walls
serve many important roles, quite apart from the obvious role of providing a structural barrier. For example,
the way in which a fungus grows – whether as cylindrical hyphae or as yeasts – is determined by the wall
components and the ways in which these are assembled and bonded to one another. The wall is also the
interface between a fungus and its environment: it

Table 3.1 The major components of
fungal walls.

55

protects against osmotic lysis, it acts as a molecular sieve
regulating the passage of large molecules through the
wall pore space, and if the wall contains pigments such
as melanin it can protect the cells against ultraviolet
radiation or the lytic enzymes of other organisms.
In addition to these points, the wall can have several
physiological roles. It can contain binding sites for
enzymes, because many disaccharides (e.g. sucrose and
cellobiose) and small peptides need to be degraded
to monomers before they can pass through the cell
membrane, and this is typically achieved by the actions
of wall-bound enzymes (Chapter 6). The wall also
can have surface components that mediate the interactions of fungi with other organisms, including plant
and animal hosts. All these features require a detailed
understanding of wall structure and architecture.

The major wall components
The primary approach to investigating the wall composition of fungi is to disrupt fungal cells and purify
the walls by using detergents and other mild chemical
treatments, then use acids, alkalis and enzymes to
degrade the walls sequentially. Although relatively few
fungi have been analysed in detail, these treatments
show that fungal walls are predominantly composed
of polysaccharides, with lesser amounts of proteins
and other components. The major wall components can
be categorized into two major types: (i) the structural
(fibrillar) polymers that consist predominantly of
straight-chain molecules, providing structural rigidity,
and (ii) the matrix components that cross-link the
fibrils and that coat and embed the structural polymers.
The main wall polysaccharides differ between the
major fungal groups, as shown in Table 3.1. The Chytridiomycota, Ascomycota, and Basidiomycota typically
have chitin and glucans (polymers of glucose) as their
major wall polysaccharides. Chitin consists of long,
straight chains of β-1,4 linked N-acetylglucosamine

Taxonomic group

Structural (fibrillar) components

Matrix components

Chytridiomycota

Chitin
Glucan
Chitin
Chitosan
Chitin
b-(1→3), b-(1→6)-glucan
Chitin
b-(1→3), b-(1→6)-glucan
b-(1→3), b-(1→6)-glucan
Cellulose

Glucan ?

Zygomycota
Ascomycota
Basidiomycota
Oomycota
(not true fungi)

Polyglucuronic acid
Mannoproteins
Mannoproteins
a(1→3)-glucan
Mannoproteins
a(1→3)-glucan
Glucan

56

CHAPTER 3

residues (Chapter 7), whereas the fungal glucans are
branched polymers, consisting mainly of β-1,3-linked
backbones with short β-1,6-linked side chains. The
Zygomycota typically have a mixture of chitin and
chitosan (a poorly acetylated or nonacetylated form
of chitin; Chapter 7), polymers of uronic acids such as
glucuronic acid, and mannoproteins. The Oomycota
(which are not true fungi) have little chitin, and
instead they have a mixture of a cellulose-like β-1,4linked glucan and other glucans.
Having made these points, it is important to recognize that the wall composition of a fungus is not
fixed, but can change substantially at different stages
of the life cycle. This is also true for many dimorphic
fungi, which can grow as either hyphae or budding
yeast-like cells (Chapter 5).

Wall architecture
The major wall components of fungi can be thought
of as the bricks and mortar, but it was only in 1970
that we began really to understand the architecture of
the fungal wall. For this, Hunsley & Burnett developed
an elegently simple technique which they termed
enzymatic dissection. They mechanically disrupted
fungal hyphae so that only the walls remained, and then
treated the walls with combinations and sequences
of different enzymes, coupling this with electron
microscopy to detect any changes that the enzyme
treatments had caused. If, for example, the surface
appearance of the wall changed after treatment with a
particular enzyme “X,” then the substrate of “X” is likely
to be the outermost wall component. So, by using
various sequences and combinations of enzymes it
was possible to strip away the major wall components
and to see their relationships to one another. Three
fungi were used in this work, but we will take Neurospora crassa as an example to illustrate the essential
features (Fig. 3.9).
In mature regions of hyphae the wall of Neurospora
was shown to have at least four concentric zones;
these are shown as separate layers in Fig. 3.9, but in
reality they grade into one another. The outermost zone
consists of amorphous glucans with predominantly
β-1,3 and β-1,6 linkages, which are degraded by the
enzyme laminarinase. Beneath this is a network of glycoprotein embedded in a protein matrix. Then there
is a more or less discrete layer of protein, and then an
innermost region of chitin microfibrils embedded in
protein. The total wall thickness in this case is about
125 nm. But the wall at the growing tip is thinner
(c. 50 nm) and simpler, consisting of an inner zone
of chitin embedded in protein and an outer layer of
mainly protein. So it is clear that the wall becomes
stronger and more complex behind the extending

Fig. 3.9 Diagram to illustrate the wall architecture in
a “mature” (subapical) region of a hypha of Neurospora
crassa as evidenced by sequential enzymatic digestion.
(a) Outermost layer of amorphous β-1,3-glucans and
β-1,6-glucans. (b) Glycoprotein reticulum embedded
in protein. (c) A more or less discrete protein layer.
(d) Chitin microfibrils embedded in protein. (e) Plasma
membrane. (Based on Hunsley & Burnett 1970.)

hyphal tip, as further materials are added or as further
bonding occurs between the components.
Neurospora seems to have an unusually complex
wall architecture, because a glycoprotein network has
not been seen in some other fungi. Nevertheless, the
general pattern of wall architecture of hyphae is fairly
consistent: the main, straight-chain microfibillar components (chitin, or cellulose in the Oomycota) are
found predominantly in the inner region of the wall,
and they are overlaid by nonfibrillar or “matrix” components (e.g. other glucans, proteins, and mannans) in
the outer region. However, there is substantial bonding between the various components, serving to
strengthen the wall behind the apex. In particular, some
of the glucans are covalently bonded to chitin, and the
glucans are bonded together by their side chains. We
return to this topic in Chapter 4, when we consider
the mechanisms of apical growth.

The extrahyphal matrix
In addition to the main structural components of the
wall, some yeasts can have a discrete polysaccharide
capsule, and both hyphae and yeasts can be surrounded
by a more or less diffuse layer of polysaccharide or glycoprotein, easily removed by washing or mild chemical treatment. These extracellular matrix materials can
have important roles in the interactions of fungi with
other organisms. For example, the yeast Cryptococcus
neoformans is a significant pathogen of humans; its
polysaccharide capsule masks the antigenic components of the cell wall so that the fungus is not
engulfed by phagocytes and can proliferate in the
tissues (Casadevall 1995). In a different context, the fungus Piptocephalis virginiana (Zygomycota; see Chapter 12)
parasitizes other Zygomycota such as Mucor spp. on agar
media, but does not parasitize them in liquid culture

FUNGAL STRUCTURE AND ULTRASTRUCTURE

Fig. 3.10 Diagrammatic representation of a simple
septum of Neurospora crassa. The septum develops
as an ingrowing ring from the lateral wall of the
hypha. Associated with this is a modification of
the lateral wall (LW), including a proliferation of the
glycoprotein reticulum (GR). G = glucan layer;
GR/P = glycoprotein reticulum embedded in protein; P = protein; C = chitin. (Based on Trinci A.P.J.
(1978) Science Progress 65, 75–99.)

G
GR/P

C
P

57

Septal pore

GR

LW

where the host fungi produce an extracellular polysaccharide (Chapter 12). In fact, the production of
an extracellular matrix is often influenced by growth
conditions. We noted in Chapter 1 that pullulan is
produced commercially from Aureobasidium pullulans;
in this case its synthesis is favored by an abundant
sugar supply in nitrogen-limiting growth conditions
(Seviour et al. 1984). Some of the other gel-like materials around fungi also have potential commerical roles.

Septa
Septa (cross-walls) are found at fairly regular intervals
along the length of most hyphae in the Ascomycota,
Basidiomycota, and mitosporic fungi, although the
septa are perforated to allow continuity of the protoplasm. If part of the hypha is damaged, then a
Woronin body or a plug of coagulated protoplasm
rapidly seals the septal pore to localize the damage.
Then the hypha can regrow from a newly formed tip
behind the damaged compartment, or in some cases
a new tip can grow into the damaged compartment
(see Fig. 12.12). Clearly, these “damage limitation”
responses help to conserve the integrity of the hypha,
and might often be necessary when hyphae are eaten
by insects, or are attacked by parasitic fungi (mycoparasites), or when hyphae of different vegetative
compatibility groups attempt to anastomose (Chapter 9). However, there are several fungi and fungus-like
organisms that do not produce septa in the normal
vegetative hyphae – for example the Zygomycota
(Mucor, etc.) and the fungus-like Oomycota (Pythium,
Phytophthora, etc.). These aseptate fungi are more
vulnerable to damage.
Septa might help to provide structural support to
hyphae, especially in conditions of water stress. But one
of their main roles seems to be to enable differentiation. By blocking the septal pores, a fungal hypha is
transformed from a continuous series of compartments to a number of independent cells or regions that
can undergo separate development (Chapter 5).
Septa can be seen by normal light microscopy, but
electron microscopy reveals several different types of

septum. The Ascomycota and mitosporic fungi have a
simple septum (Fig. 3.10) with a relatively large central
pore, ranging from 0.05 to 0.5 µm diameter, which
allows the passage of cytoplasmic organelles and even
nuclei. The development of these septa occurs remarkably quickly, usually being completed within a few
minutes. They develop as an ingrowing ring from the
lateral walls of the hypha, and this is associated with
localized modifications of the lateral walls themselves,
including a localized proliferation of a glycoprotein reticulum in the walls of Neurospora crassa.
The Basidiomycota also have simple septa when
they are growing as monokaryons (with one nucleus
in each cell). But they often have a more complex
dolipore septum (Fig. 3.11) when strains of different
mating compatibility groups fuse to form a dikaryon,
with two nuclei in each compartment. The dolipore septum has a narrow central channel (about 100–150 nm
diameter) bounded by two flanges of amorphous glucan. On either side of this septum are bracket-shaped
membraneous structures termed parenthosomes,
which have pores to allow cytoplasmic continuity but
which prevent the passage of major organelles. Thus,
the Basidiomycota often have a more regular arrangement of nuclei compared with other fungi. But we
will see in Chapter 5 that the septa are selectively
degraded when the Basidiomycota begin to form a

Fig. 3.11 The dolipore septum, found in many members
of the Basidiomycota. Large deposits of glucan (G) line
the narrow central pore, and specialized perforated
membranes termed parenthosomes (P) prevent major
organelles from passing through the septal pore.

58

CHAPTER 3

complex fruiting body, such as a mushroom. This
enables the mass redistribution of materials necessary
to fuel the development of the fruiting structure.
From even this brief account, it is clear that septa
play several important roles in fungal biology. They can
isolate compartments or they can allow the free passage of organelles through the septal pores, and they
can be degraded to allow the mass translocation of
nutrients and cytoplasmic components to sites of
future development.

The fungal nucleus
Fungal nuclei are usually small (1–2 µm diameter) but
exceptionally can be up to 20–25 µm diameter (e.g.
Basidiobolus ranarum, Chytridiomycota; Chapter 4).
They are surrounded by a double nuclear membrane
with pores, as in all eukaryotes. However, fungi are
notable for several peculiar features of their nuclei and
nuclear division (Heath 1978). First, the nuclear membrane and the nucleolus remain intact during most
stages of mitosis, whereas in most other organisms the
nuclear membrane breaks down at an early stage during nuclear division. A possible reason for this is that
the retention of a nuclear membrane might help to
prevent dispersion of the nuclear contents in hyphal
compartments that contain several nuclei and rapidly
streaming protoplasm. Second, in fungi there is no clear
metaphase plate; instead the chromosomes seem to be
randomly dispersed, and at anaphase the daughter
chromatids pull apart along two tracks, on spindle
fibres of different lengths. A third point of difference
is that fungi have various types of spindle-pole
bodies (also called microtubule-organizing centers).
They are responsible for microtubule assembly during
nuclear division. In Ascomycota and mitosporic
fungi the spindle-pole bodies are disc-shaped, whereas
in Basidiomycota they are often composed of two
globular ends connected by a bridge. However, the
significance of these differences is unclear. All fungi need
a microtubule-organizing center to ensure that the
chromosomes separate correctly during nuclear division.
The vast majority of fungi are haploid with chromosome numbers ranging from about 6 to 20. For
example there are six chromosomes in Schizophyllum
commune (Basidiomycota), seven in Neurospora
crassa (Acomycota), eight in Emericella (Aspergillus)
nidulans (Ascomycota), 16 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(Ascomycota), and 20 in Ustilago maydis (Basidiomycota). A few fungi are naturally diploid (e.g. the yeast
Candida albicans, and members of the Oomycota).
And some fungi can alternate between haploid and
diploid generations – e.g. S. cerevisiae, and Allomyces
spp. (Chytridiomycota) – or exist as polyploid series
(Allomyces and several Phytophthora spp.).

Many aspects of fungal genetics and fungal
genomes are discussed in Chapter 9, but here we need
to address one of the most remarkable features: fungi
are the only major group of eukaryotic organisms
that are haploid. Almost all other eukaryotes are
diploid, including plants, animals, Oomycota, and
the many single-celled organisms loosely termed “protists.” The likely reason for the haploid nature of
fungi is that it confers a specific advantage. On the one
hand, as we have seen, fungal hyphae usually contain
several nuclei in each hyphal compartment, and there
is continuity of protoplasmic flow between the compartments. If a recessive mutation occurs in one of the
nuclei, then the fungus will still behave as wild-type,
but the recessive mutation will be retained, thereby
storing potential variability – the hallmark of diploid
organisms. On the other hand, a mutated nucleus can
be exposed to selection pressure periodically, when the
fungus produces uninucleate spores or when a branch
arises and a single “founder” nucleus enters it. So, in at
least some respects, haploid fungi with multinucleate
compartments have many of the advantages associated
with both a haploid and a diploid lifestyle. We return
to this subject in Chapter 9.

Cytoplasmic organelles
Many of the cellular components of fungi are functionally similar to those of other eukaryotes, but differ
in some important respects. The major differences are
discussed below.

The plasma membrane
As in all eukaryotes, the fungal plasma membrane
consists of a phospholipid bilayer with associated
transmembrane proteins, many of which are involved
directly or indirectly in nutrient uptake. The membrane
also can anchor some enzymes. In fact, the two main
wall-synthetic enzymes, chitin synthase and glucan
synthase, are integral membrane proteins; they
become anchored in the membrane in such a way that
they produce polysaccharide chains from the outer
membrane face (Chapter 4). The plasma membrane
has a third important role, in relaying signals from the
external environment to the cell interior – the process
termed signal transduction, discussed in Chapter 4.
The fungal plasma membrane is unique in one
important respect – it typically contains ergosterol as
the main membrane sterol, in contrast to animals,
which have cholesterol, and plants which have phytosterols such as β -sitosterol. The Oomycota also have
plant-like sterols. But some plant-pathogenic fungi
such as Pythium and Phytophthora spp. are unable to

FUNGAL STRUCTURE AND ULTRASTRUCTURE

59

synthesize sterols from nonsterol precursors and
instead need to be supplied with sterols from the host.
Ergosterol is the primary target of several fungicides that
are used to control plant-pathogenic fungi. Ergosterol
is also a primary target of several antifungal drugs that
are used to treat human mycoses (Chapter 17).

The fungal secretory system: golgi,
endoplasmic reticulum, and vesicles
Fungi have a secretory system, consisting of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the Golgi apparatus
(or Golgi equivalent), and membrane-bound vesicles.
Proteins destined for export from the cell are synthesized on ribosomes attached to the ER, then enter the
ER lumen and are transported to the Golgi. During their
progressive transport through the Golgi cisternae, proteins undergo various modifications, including partial
cleavage and reassembly, folding into a tertiary structure, and the addition of sugar chains (glycosylation).
Then the proteins, or glycoproteins, are packaged into
vesicles which bud from the maturing face of the
Golgi, and are transported to the plasma membrane
for secretion. This intricate postal system sorts and
delivers proteins to specific destinations, including the
enzymes (pectinases, cellulases, proteases, etc.) that
are destined for export to degrade polymers in the surrounding environment.
The secretory system is involved in at least some
aspects of fungal tip growth, because glycoproteins
are only produced in the Golgi and are transported
in vesicles to the sites of wall growth (Chapter 4).
Additionally, the Golgi is important for the commercial production, and release from the cell, of foreign
(heterologous) gene products (Chapter 9). The ability
of a protein to enter the ER is determined by a signal
sequence at the N-terminus, which is subsequently
removed. Without this sequence the protein will
remain in the cell.
Once again, the fungal secretory system shows
some unique properties. The typical Golgi apparatus of
animals, plants, and Oomycota consists of a stack of
membraneous cisternae (Fig. 3.12a). But fungi have a
Golgi equivalent which is ultrastructually quite different
from a typical Golgi – it consists of sausage-shaped
strings, beads, and loops (Fig. 3.12b).

Chitosomes
Most of the vesicles seen in hyphal tips have not been
chemically characterized, but some of the smaller
ones (microvesicles) resemble particles that have been
purified in vitro and are termed chitosomes. These particles were initially discovered by homogenizing hyphae,

(a)

(b)
Fig. 3.12 (a) Magnification of part of Fig. 2.3, showing
the typical Golgi body found in plants and animals.
(b) Magnification of part of Fig. 2.4, showing mitochondria (M) with plate-like cisternae typical of fungi, and the
“Golgi equivalent” consisting of sausage-shaped rings,
beads, and loops (arrowheads).

removing the wall material and major membranous
organelles by centrifugation, and then subjecting the
supernatant to sucrose density centrifugation so that
its components separated out as bands at different
depths in the tubes. When one of these bands was
examined by electron microscopy it was found to contain chitosomes – small spheroidal bodies, 40–70 nm
diameter, each surrounded by a “shell” about 7 nm thick
(Fig. 3.13). When the band containing these particles
was incubated in the presence of an activator (a
protease enzyme) and UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (the
sugar-nucleotide from which chitin is made), each
particle was seen to produce a coil of chitin inside it,
then the particles ruptured to release ribbon-like
chitin microfibrils, each composed of several chitin
chains. If the supernatant was first treated with digitonin (a saponin which solubilizes sterol-containing
membranes) and then centrifuged in a density gradient, the chitosomes were no longer found; instead, the
addition of activator and UDP-N-acetylglucosamine
resulted in the production of chitin in a different
band corresponding to a lighter fraction of the homogenate. But subsequent removal of the digitonin
caused the chitosomes to reappear, indicating that they

60

CHAPTER 3

Fig. 3.13 Ribbon-like aggregates of
chitin microfibrils (R) produced in vitro
from chitosomes (C) isolated from
Mucor rouxii, when incubated with
substrate (N-acetylglucosamine) and a
proteolytic activator. (Courtesy of C.E.
Bracker; from Bartnicki-Garcia et al.
1978.)

are self-assembling aggregates of the enzyme chitin
synthase, each particle containing sufficient enzyme
molecules to produce, after proteolytic activation, a
chitin microfibril composed of several chitin chains. So,
this elegant collaborative study by biochemists and electron microscopists led to the identification of one of
the types of vesicle often seen in the hyphal apex. One
of the questions still to be resolved is how these particles reach the hyphal tip after they have been assembled further back in the hyphae. One suggested
mechanism is that they are packaged into membranebound multivesicular bodies such as those sometimes seen in electron micrographs (Fig. 3.20).

Vacuoles
The vacuolar system of fungi has several functions,
including the storage and recycling of cellular metabolites. For example the vacuoles of several fungi,
including mycorrhizal species (Chapter 13), accumulate
phosphates in the form of polyphosphate. Vacuoles also
seem to be major sites for storage of calcium which can
be released into the cytoplasm as part of the intracellular signalling system (Chapter 5). Vacuoles contain
proteases for breaking down cellular proteins and recycling of the amino acids, and vacuoles also have a role
in the regulation of cellular pH. All these important
physiological roles are in addition to the potential role
of vacuoles in cell expansion and (possibly) in driving
the protoplasm forwards as hyphae elongate at the tips.

Vacuoles often are seen as conspicuous, rounded
structures in the older regions of hyphae, but recent
work has shown that there is also a tubular vacuolar
system extending into the tip cells. It is an extremely
dynamic system, consisting of narrow tubules which
can dilate and contract, as inflated elements travel
along them in a peristaltic manner (Fig. 3.14). This was
demonstrated by studying the movement of a fluorescent compound, carboxyfluorescein (CF), in living
hyphae of a range of fungi. The hyphae were treated
with a nonfluorescent precursor, carboxyfluorescein
diacetate (CFDA), which is lipid-soluble so it enters
the plasma membrane and is then rapidly absorbed
from the cytosol into the vacuoles. There the acetate
groups are cleaved by esterases to yield CF, which is
membrane-impermeable so it remains in the vacuolar
system. Rees et al. (1994) showed that the tubular
vacuoles which contain CF form a more or less
continuous system which passes through even the
dolipore septa of Basidiomycota, transporting materials backwards and forwards in the hyphae. This has
important implications for the bidirectional translocation of materials within single hyphae (Chapter 7),
and perhaps especially for mycorrhizal systems (Chapter 13).

Endocytosis and vesicle trafficking
Studies on plant cells, animal cells, and budding yeast
suggest that the uptake of substances through the

FUNGAL STRUCTURE AND ULTRASTRUCTURE

61

Fig. 3.14 The dynamic tubular vacuolar system of living fungal hyphae, treated with a fluorescent dye that becomes
localized in the vacuoles. (a) Hypha of Penicillium expansum seen by normal bright-field microscopy, showing the presence of a septum (S). (b) The same hypha viewed by fluorescence microscopy, showing a narrow tubule (t) passing
through the septum and then branching. (c) The same hypha showing dilated vacuoles (V) after they have passed
through the septum. (d–f) Hypha of Aspergillus niger photographed at 8-second intervals, showing a succession of
peristalsis-like movements causing the vacuolar dilations to travel along the hypha from left to right. (Courtesy of
B. Rees, V. Shepherd and A. Ashford; from Rees et al. 1994.)

cell membrane might be achieved by an active process
of endocytosis – the converse of exocytosis, which is
widely recognized to occur when vesicles fuse with
the plasma membrane and release their contents into
the surrounding environment (Figs 3.2, 3.4). However, there is still some debate about whether fungal
hyphae have an endocytotic system, and (if they do
so) whether it is equivalent to the endosomal system
commonly reported in other cell types.
The evidence for endocytosis in fungal hyphae is
based on the use of amphiphilic steryl dyes such as
FM4-64 and FM1-43, which are reported to be marker
dyes for endocytosis in many different organisms. These
vital dyes can be taken up by cells and are then visual-

ized by laser scanning confocal microscopy. Figure 3.15
shows confocal images of Neurospora crassa treated
with two of these dyes – FM4-64 which strongly labels
the plasma membrane and Spitzenkörper, and FM1-43
which labels the mitochondria but only weakly labels
the Spitzenkörper. Essentially similar labeling patterns
with FM4-64 were found when hyphae of eight different fungi were tested, including representatives of
Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, mitosporic fungi, and
Zygomycota (Fig. 3.16). The reasons for the different
labeling patterns of these dyes are still unclear, but the
strong labeling of the plasma membrane by FM4-64
is consistent with reports that this dye becomes intercalated between the outer and inner layers of the cell

62

CHAPTER 3

On this basis, a hypothetical model of the organization of a vesicle-trafficking network, including the
possible involvement of endosomes, has been proposed (Fig. 3.18). This is, however, an area of controversy because Torralba & Heath (2002) did not find
evidence of endocytosis in Neurospora crassa hyphae.
Studies with mutants may be needed to resolve this
issue. Many proteins associated with endocytosis
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae have homologs in the
Neurospora genome sequence and could be candidates
for mutational studies to test whether filamentous
fungi have an equivalent endosomal system (Read &
Kalkman 2003).
(a)

The cytoskeleton and molecular motors

(b)
Fig. 3.15 (a,b) Hyphal tips of Neurospora crassa treated
with two steryl dyes to detect putative endocytosis. Both
steryl dyes, FM4-64 and FM1-43, became internalized,
and hyphae treated with both dyes continued to grow
during confocal laser imaging, as shown by the images
taken at 30-second intervals. (Courtesy of N.D. Read;
from Fisher-Parton et al. 2000.)

membrane. It then seems to be internalized by an
active process, because it cannot passively cross the inner
leaf of the plasma membrane. Similar hyphae treated
with a metabolic inhibitor (sodium azide) showed no
evidence of dye uptake.
In several instances (Fig. 3.17) a satellite
Spitzenkörper was seen to originate at some distance
behind the hyphal tip and it moved towards the tip,
ultimately fusing with the main Spitzenkörper.
Although none of these lines of evidence provides
definitive proof of the existence of an endosomal
system in filamentous fungi, the evidence is at least
compatible with an endosomal system in which vesicle
trafficking between different organelles provides a
mechanism for recycling of membranes and their
contents between different subcellular compartments.

The cytoskeleton plays a major role in the internal
organization of eukaryotic cells, providing a dynamic
structural framework for transporting organelles, for
cytoplasmic streaming, and for chromosome separation
during cell division. The three main elements of
the cytoskeleton are: (i) microtubules, consisting of
polymers of tubulin proteins, (ii) microfilaments,
consisting of the contractile protein actin, and (iii) intermediate filaments which provide tensile strength.
The distribution of the cytoskeletal components can be
visualized in living hyphae by using fluorescent vital
dyes (Fig. 3.19). These elements are considered to play
a major role in coordinating hyphal tip growth (Heath
1994).
In electron micrographs of hyphae, the microtubules are seen as long, straight tubules, about 25 nm
diameter, occurring either singly or as parallel arrays.
They are seen mainly in the peripheral regions of the
hypha but can also extend up to the membrane at the
extreme tip (Fig. 3.4). Microtubules are also seen to be
closely associated with membrane-bound organelles
(e.g. Fig. 3.20), indicating that they could provide a
tramline system for organellar movement. Consistent
with this, the benzimidazole fungicides that have
been used widely to control plant pathogens (Chapter
17) exert their antifungal action by binding to fungal
microtubules, and this causes hyphae to stop growing.
The benzimidazole compounds similarly block nuclear
division by binding to the spindle microtubules.
Microtubules are dynamic cellular components.
They depolymerize in response to treatments such as
cold shock, and conversely they can be stabilized by
compounds such as taxol, the toxin from yew trees
(which is also toxic to humans). In normally growing
cells the microtubules are thought to be continuously
degraded and reformed. Consistent with this, microtubules can polymerize by self-assembly in cell-free
systems. This is a two-stage process: in the first stage,
a molecule of the protein α-tubulin combines with a

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3.16 (a–d) Dye labeling (FM4-64)
of the cytoplasmic membrane and
Spitzenkörper of different fungi,
including Ascomycota (Neurospora
crassa), Basidiomycota (Sclerotinia and
Rhizoctonia), and mitosporic fungi
(Trichoderma
viride).
Phycomyces
(Zygomycota) also showed similar
labeling (not shown in this image).
(c)

(d)

(a)

(d)

(b)

(e)

Fig. 3.17 (a–f) Confocal images of an
FM4-64-stained satellite Spitzenkörper
(arrowhead) of Botrytis cinerea showing
a time course (seconds) of different
stages in its formation, migration, and
fusion with the main Spitzenkörper.
(Courtesy of N.D. Read; from FisherParton et al. 2000.)
(c)

(f)

E
V

SPK

ER
M

G
SSPK

Vesicle trafficking
Endocytosis
Exocytosis
Membrane
Cell wall
Fig. 3.18 Hypothetical model of the organization of the vesicle-trafficking network in a growing hypha, based on
the pattern of FM4-64 staining. E = endosome; ER = endoplasmic reticulum; G = Golgi cisterna; M = mitochondrion;
SPK = Spitzenkörper; SSPK = satellite Spitzenkörper; V = vacuole. (From Fisher-Parton et al. 2000.)

Fig. 3.19 Young (3 hour) germlings from a uredospore (Us) of the rust fungus Uromyces phaseoli, treated with different compounds to reveal the distribution of hyphal components. Scale bars = 10 µm. (Image 1) Treated with DAPI, a
compound that binds to A/T-rich regions of DNA, and observed by a combination of phase-contrast and fluorescence
microscopy. The two nuclei (N) in the germ-tube are seen by DAPI fluorescence. (Image 2) The same germling treated
with fluorochrome-labeled, anti-tubulin antibodies and observed by fluorescence microscopy. The many microtubules
that run longitudinally in the hypha are clearly seen. (Image 3) The same germling observed by fluorescence microscopy but treated with rhodamine-conjugated phalloin (a deadly toxin from toadstools of the “death cap” fungus Amanita
phalloides which exerts its effects by binding to actin). A conspicuous actin cap is seen in the hyphal tip. Actin is also
seen as peripheral plaques (p) and nuclear inclusions (ni) in zones similar to those in which microtubules are seen.
(Courtesy of H.C. Hoch; from Hoch & Staples 1985.)

FUNGAL STRUCTURE AND ULTRASTRUCTURE

65

been detected. However, the most compelling evidence
for a role of the actin cytoskeleton in organizing
fungal growth has come from studies on the yeast,
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. This fungus has microtubules
but, in contrast to mycelial fungi, the microtubules
of yeast do not seem to be involved in the transport
of major organelles; instead, they seem to function
mainly in orientation of the mitotic spindle. Yet, actin
cables do play a major role in directing secretory vesicles to growth sites in yeast, and by analogy actin might
play a similar role in distributing the apical vesicles to
sites of wall growth in hyphal tips.
In later chapters we return to the roles of the
cytoskeleton in fungal growth (Chapter 4), differentiation (Chapter 5), and the behavior of fungal
zoospores (Chapter 10). But we end this chapter by noting that fungal tubulins differ from those of plants and
animals. They are inhibited by the antibiotic griseofulvin
and by the benzimidazole fungicides, whereas plant and
animal tubulins are insensitive to these compounds. This
is why griseofulvin can be used to treat the dermatophytic (ringworm) fungal infections of humans, and
why the benzimidazoles can be used to treat fungal
infections of plants (Chapter 17). Conversely, the
fungal tubulins (with the exception of Oomycota) are
unaffected by colchicine (the toxin from the autumn
crocus) which inhibits nuclear division in plant and
animal cells.

Cited references

Fig. 3.20 A fungal microtubule (arrowhead) closely associated with a membrane-bound cellular organelle termed
a multivesicular body (MVB). Such close association indicates a potential role for moving the organelle, through
the activities of motor proteins. (Courtesy of R. Roberson;
from Roberson & Fuller 1988.)

molecule of a sister protein β-tubulin to form a dimer;
then the dimers polymerize to form tubulin chains. The
microtubules formed by this process interact with two
mechanochemical enzymes (motor proteins), kinesin
and dynein, and probably help to transport organelles
within the fungal hypha.
Actin microfilaments are much narrower than
microtubules, being about 5–8 nm diameter. In the
slime mould Physarum polycephalum the actin microfilaments are known to function in cytoplasmic
contraction, when actin associates with its motor protein, myosin. This could also be true of filamentous
fungi, where myosin-like proteins have recently

Bartnicki-Garcia, S., Bracker, C.E., Reyes, E. & Ruiz-Herrera,
J. (1978) Isolation of chitosomes from taxonomically
diverse fungi and synthesis of chitin microfibrils in
vitro. Experimental Mycology 2, 173–192.
Casadevall, A. (1995) Antibody immunity and
Cryptococcus neoformans. Canadian Journal of Botany 73,
S1180–S1186.
Fisher-Parton, S., Parton, R.M., Hickey, P., Dijksterhuis, J.,
Atkinson, H.A. & Read, N.D. (2000) Confocal microscopy of FM4-64 as a tool for analysing endocytosis and
vesicle trafficking in living fungal hyphae. Journal of
Microscopy 198, 246–259.
Grove, S.N. & Bracker, C.E. (1970) Protoplasmic organization of hyphal tips among fungi: vesicles and
Spitzenkörper. Journal of Bacteriology 104, 989–1009.
Heath, I.B. (1978) Nuclear Division in the Fungi. Academic
Press: New York.
Heath, I.B. (1994) The cytoskeleton in hyphal growth,
organelle movements, and mitosis. In: The Mycota,
vol. 1 (Wessels, J.G.H. & Meinhardt, F., eds), pp. 43–65.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Hoch, H.C. & Staples, R.C. (1985) The microtubule
cytoskeleton in hyphae of Uromyces phaseoli germlings:
its relationship to the region of nucleation and to the
F-actin cytoskeleton. Protoplasma 124, 112–122.
Howard, R.J. & Aist, J.R. (1979) Hyphal tip cell ultrastructure of the fungus Fusarium: improved preservation by

66

CHAPTER 3

freeze-substitution. Journal of Ultrastructural Research 66,
224–234.
Hunsley, D. & Burnett, J.H. (1970) The ultrastructural
architecture of the walls of some hyphal fungi. Journal
of General Microbiology 62, 203–218.
McCabe, P.M., Gallagher, M.P. & Deacon, J.W. (1999)
Microscopic observation of perfect hyphal fusion in
Rhizoctonia solani. Mycological Research 103, 487–490.
Read, N.D. & Kalkman, E.R. (2003) Does endocytosis
occur in fungal hyphae? Fungal Genetics and Biology 39.
199–203.
Rees, B., Shepherd, V.A. & Ashford, A.E. (1994) Presence
of a motile tubular vacuole system in different phyla of
fungi. Mycological Research 98, 985–992.

Roberson, R.W. & Fuller, M.S. (1988) Ultrastructural
aspects of the hyphal tip of Sclerotium rolfsii preserved
by freeze substitution. Protoplasma 146, 143–149.
Roberson, R.W. & Fuller, M.S. (1990) Effects of the demethylase inhibitor, Cyproconazole, on hyphal tip cells
of Sclerotium rolfsii. Experimental Mycology 14, 124–135.
Seviour, R.J., Kristiansen, B. & Harvey, L. (1984)
Morphology of Aureobasidium pullulans during polysaccharide elaboration. Transactions of the British Mycological
Society 82, 350–356.
Torralba, S. & Heath, I.B. (2002) Analysis of three separate probes suggests the absence of endocytosis in
Neurospora crassa hyphae. Fungal Genetics & Biology 37,
221–232.

Chapter 4

Fungal growth
The key to the fungal hypha lies in the tip (Noel Robertson)

This chapter is divided into the following major sections:
• apical growth of fungal hyphae
• spore germination and the orientation of hyphal tip
growth
• the yeast cell cycle
• kinetics of fungal growth
• commercial production of fungal biomass: Quorn™
mycoprotein
In this chapter we focus on the mechanisms of fungal
growth, with special reference to the organization of
growth and wall synthesis at the hyphal tip, which is
central to understanding the biology of fungi. We
also discuss the ways in which hyphal branches arise
and orientate themselves for maximum efficiency of
nutrient capture. And, we consider the kinetics of
fungal growth in batch culture and continuous culture
systems, relating this to industrial-scale processes,
including the commercial production of Quorn™
mycoprotein – a highly successful fermentation system for producing “single-cell protein.” Several topics
in this chapter are covered in depth by Gow & Gadd
(1995) and Howard & Gow (2001).

Apical growth of fungal hyphae
Apical growth is the hallmark of fungi. Apart from
the fungus-like Oomycota, which have adopted apical
growth by a remarkable degree of convergent evolution
(Latijnhouwers et al. 2003), no other organisms grow
continuously as a tube that extends at the extreme tip
by the localized synthesis of wall components, and,
arguably, no other group shows such extreme plasticity.
The hyphal apex can swell into a balloon-like structure
such as a spore or yeast cell, or it can taper to such a
degree that it can penetrate a layer of inert gold film
or the wall of a host plant by exerting turgor pressure
alone. In other circumstances, the fungal hypha can
give rise to complex tissues and infection structures,
discussed in Chapter 5.
Figure 4.1 illustrates part of this plasticity, when
hyphae of Neurospora crassa are observed by placing a

coverslip over the margin of a colony on an agar plate.
The sequence of nine frames was taken over a 1-hour
period, starting from the time when the coverslip was
added. In the first frame (a) the hyphal tip was growing normally, and two lateral branches had arisen
behind the growing tip. Soon afterwards (b and c) the
hyphal tips began to swell (a response to disturbance
caused by the coverslip) and then branched repeatedly
from the tips before resuming a more normal pattern
of apical growth.
By taking any convenient reference points, such as
the branching points shown as v1 and v2 in Fig. 4.1,
it is seen that the length of hypha already formed
remains unchanged, and all new growth occurs from
the original hyphal tip or from the branch tips. In
fact, the incorporation of new wall material is mainly
confined to the extreme tip. This is illustrated in
Fig. 4.2, where growing hyphae were exposed to a
short pulse of radiolabeled wall precursors such as
3
H-N-acetylglucosamine (from which chitin is synthesized) or 3H-glucose (from which wall glucans are
made) and then autoradiographed. The radiolabel is
incorporated maximally at the hyphal tip, and the rate
of label incorporation falls off sharply over the first few
micrometres – the apical dome of the hypha.
Rapid rates of hyphal tip extension (such as 40 µm
min−1 in N. crassa) can only be possible if the apex
is supplied with vesicles and other cytoplasmic components from behind. For this reason, what we term
apical growth is actually apical extension, because the
true rate of growth, defined as increase in biomass per
unit of time, is much slower. The length of hypha
needed to support an extending apex can be estimated
by making a diagonal cut across a colony margin with
a scalpel, so that individual hyphae are severed at different distances from their tips. Hyphae that are cut
too close to the tip die from physical damage. Hyphae
cut further back continue to extend but more slowly
than usual, and eventually a point is reached at which
the cut is so far back that it has no effect on the apical
extension rate. This distance is termed the peripheral
growth zone of a fungal colony, defined as the length
of hypha needed to maintain the maximum extension
rate of the leading hyphae at the colony margin; it
varies between fungi, from below 200 µm up to several
millimeters for the fastest-extending fungi.

68

CHAPTER 4

Fig. 4.1 (a–i) Sequence of frames from a videotape of Neurospora crassa growing over a 1-hour period beneath a
coverslip on an agar plate. (Frames (a–c) are shown at higher magnification than the other frames.)

Fig. 4.2 Incorporation of radiolabeled wall precursors
during a brief (5-minute) exposure.

Early experiments on the mechanism of
apical growth in fungi
Robertson (1958, 1959) did many of the key early
experiments on apical growth of fungi, using
extremely simple methods coupled with truly remarkable insight. He grew colonies of Fusarium oxysporum

or N. crassa on nutrient-rich agar, flooded them with
water and then observed the behavior of the tips. As
shown in Fig. 4.3, roughly half of the tips stopped
growing immediately and then resumed growth
within a minute, but from a narrower apex than
before. The other tips stopped growing for several
minutes, swelled into a diamond shape during this
time, and eventually regrew by producing one or
more narrow tips just behind the original apex. He then
repeated the experiments, again flooding the colonies
with water but replacing this within 40 seconds by a
solution of the same osmotic potential as the original
agar (an isotonic solution). This caused all the tips to
stop for several minutes, but they swelled during this
time and eventually regrew from narrow subapical
branches (Fig. 4.3).
To interpret these findings, Robertson hypothesized
that the normal pattern of apical growth involves two
independent processes: (i) continuous extension of a
plastic, deformable tip and (ii) rigidification of the
wall behind the extending tip. He envisaged these
two processes as occurring at the same rate, but with
rigidification always slightly behind the tip, like two
cars travelling along two lanes of a motorway at
exactly the same speed but one is always slightly
behind the other. Then, if extension growth is halted
by an osmotic shock (adding water) the process of
rigidification will continue and tend to “overtake” the

FUNGAL GROWTH

69

Fig. 4.3 Robertson’s experiments on hyphal
tip growth. See text for details.

apex. If the tip readjusts to the new osmotic conditions
in time it can grow on, but now from a thinner region
of the apex where the wall has not yet rigidified.
Roughly half of the tips in the original experiment
seemed to be able to do this. However, if the tip cannot adjust in time then the apex will be sealed off by
rigidification, and growth will only occur when new
tips have been produced – in this case behind the
original apex and by a process that takes several
minutes. This would explain why all the tips stopped
for several minutes when water was replaced by the
isotonic solution, because the tips would need to
make two separate osmotic adjustments and could not
do so before the apex had rigidified.
We shall see later that this explanation was essentially correct. It is now supported by many lines of
evidence from wall enzymology and ultrastructural
studies. But at this stage we should note some further
points. Sometimes the hyphal tips swell and burst in
response to flooding with water, perhaps because the
wall at the extreme apex is too fragile to adjust to
rapid changes in osmotic potential or perhaps because
the wall at the extreme apex is continuously being
degraded by wall-lytic enzymes. Sometimes the tips
grow on as usual after being flooded with water, but a
branch develops later from the position where the
apex had reached at the time of flooding. In any case,
growing hyphal tips are very sensitive to many types
of disturbance and they tend to respond in the same
way – by a “stop–swell–branch” sequence as shown in
Fig. 4.3. This response can be elicited by mild heat or
cold shock, by exposure to an intense light beam, or

even when hyphal tips encounter physical barriers.
Some morphological mutants of Neurospora and
Aspergillus even show this pattern regularly during
growth on agar plates. In Chapter 5 we shall see that
the stop–swell–branch sequence occurs during the
production of several differentiated structures, including the pre-penetration structures of fungal parasites of
plants and animals.

Assembly of the wall at the hyphal apex
Wall synthesis at the hyphal apex is a complex process, the details of which are still not fully known, but
from various lines of evidence we can construct a
composite picture of wall growth and subsequent wall
maturation (Figs 4.4, 4.5). Some of the main components of this system are discussed below.
Chitin synthase
Chitin synthase catalyses the synthesis of chitin
chains, and is therefore one of the principal enzymes
involved in fungal wall growth. Chitin is known to
be formed in situ at the apex, rather than arriving
in membrane-bound vesicles. When hyphal homogenates are tested for enzyme activity in vitro, chitin
synthase is found in at least two forms: as an inactive
zymogen in chitosomes (Chapter 3), and as an
integral membrane protein. We saw in Chapter 3 that
chitosomes resemble some of the microvesicles in
the hyphal apex (see Fig. 3.13). However, the “shell”

Fig. 4.4 Representation of the possible organization of wall growth at the hyphal apex. Only
half of the hypha is shown. Vesicles (V) derived
from the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi
body (G) are transported to the apex, probably
by microtubule (M)-associated motor proteins.
The vesicles can then be directed to the plasma
membrane, perhaps by actin-associated motor
proteins. The newly formed wall at the extreme
hyphal tip is thin and has few cross-linkages, but
becomes increasingly cross-linked further back.
By contrast, the actin cytoskeleton is highly
delevoped at the extreme tip (see Fig. 3.19) and
might help to provide structural support, compensating for the lack of wall cross-linking at
the tip. The concentration of actin progressively
decreases behind the tip.

Fig. 4.5 Diagram of some components of wall synthesis at the hyphal tip. Vesicles are thought to deliver the main wallsynthetic enzymes (chitin synthase and glucan synthase) to the tip, where they lodge in the plasma membrane as
integral membrane proteins. Mannoproteins and other glycoproteins are transported in vesicles from the endoplasmic
reticulum–Golgi secretory system (because the glycosylation of proteins occurs only in the Golgi). Multivesicular bodies,
whose functions are still unclear, may be carried as vesicular cargoes along microtubules. Enzyme activators and inhibitors
also are thought to be involved in the orchestration of tip growth, but the substrates for wall synthesis arrive from
metabolic reactions in the cytosol.

FUNGAL GROWTH

around a chitosome is not a phospholipid membrane,
so chitosomes might be packaged within phospholipid membranes for transport to the tip – perhaps in
the multivesicular bodies that are sometimes seen in
electron micrographs (see Fig. 3.20).
The zymogen form of chitin synthase, when inserted
into the membrane, must be activated by a protease
which probably arrives at the apex in other vesicles.
Then the substrate is delivered from the cytosol to the
inner face of the chitin synthase enzyme (anchored in
the membrane), and chitin chains are synthesized and
extruded from the membrane outer face (Fig. 4.5). The
substrate for chitin synthesis is N-acetylglucosamine,
but it is supplied as a sugar nucleotide, UDPN-acetylglucosamine (where UDP = uridine diphosphate), with a high-energy bond required for chitin
synthesis as explained in Chapter 6. Clearly, there must
be mechanisms for regulating the activity of chitin
synthase during wall growth. This could be achieved
in a number of ways, including enzyme inhibitors,
because the cytosol is known to contain a chitin synthase inhibitor, which might prevent any “spill-over.”
Glucan synthase
Glucan synthase is the other major enzyme involved
in wall growth. It catalyses the synthesis of β-1,3glucan chains, which often comprise the bulk of the
fungal wall. Like chitin synthase, glucan synthase is
thought to arrive in vesicles and becomes inserted in
the plasma membrane at the apex. The substrate for
this enzyme is a sugar nucleotide (UDP-glucose), supplied from the cytosol. However, the activity of glucan
synthase is regulated in a different way from chitin
synthase. The enzyme is composed of two subunits, one
of which (on the membrane outer face) contains the
catalytic site, and the other is a guanosine triphosphate
(GTP) binding protein. So the enzyme is thought to be
activated when GTP arrives at the cytoplasmic face,
then glucan chains are synthesized and extruded into
the wall. The glucan chains seem to undergo further
modification within the wall. In particular, short β-1,6linked side chains develop and link the β-1,3-glucan
chains. The number of these branched linkages
increases progressively as the wall matures behind the
apex.
Mannoproteins
Mannoproteins and other glycoproteins form a relatively
small proportion of the total wall composition of fungal hyphae, but are more common in yeasts and in the
yeast-like phase of dimorphic fungi. These glycosylated proteins are among the few wall components that
are pre-formed in the endoplasmic reticulum–Golgi
complex and are delivered to the apex in vesicles.

71

Cross-linking and maturation of the hyphal wall
Various types of cross-linkage occur between the
major wall polymers after these have been inserted in
the wall, and this seems to occur progressively back from
the hyphal tip. For example, essentially pure glucans
can be extracted from newly formed fungal walls
by using hot alkali, but in the older wall regions an
increasing proportion of the glucan is alkali-insoluble,
apparently because it is complexed with chitin. In
support of this view, the glucans can be extracted after
treating walls with chitinase to degrade the chitin. The
chitin and glucans are linked by covalent bonds. Little
is known about the process except that amino acids may
be involved, because the amino acid lysine is associated with up to half of the glucan–chitin linkages in
walls of Schizophyllum commune (Basidiomycota). In
addition to these intermolecular bonds, the chitin
chains associate with one another by hydrogen bonding, to form microfibrils. The glucans also associate with
one another. These additional bondings behind the
growing apex could serve to convert the initially
plastic wall into a progressively more cross-linked and
rigidified structure.
Wall lytic enzymes
There are opposing views on whether wall lytic
enzymes are necessary for apical growth. On the one
hand, it has been suggested that the existing wall
must be softened in order for new wall components to
be inserted, in which case wall growth would involve
a balance of wall lysis and wall synthesis. Consistent
with this, chitinase, cellulase (in Oomycota), and
β-1,3-glucanase activities can be found in hyphal wall
fractions, although these enzymes might exist usually
in a latent form. On the other hand, it has been argued
that the substantial cytoskeleton of tubulins and actin
could help to reinforce the hyphal tip, precluding
the need for a rigid wall and therefore precluding the
need for wall-degrading enzymes. However, there is no
doubt that wall-lytic enzymes would be required for the
production of new tips (new hyphal branches) that
emerge from the previously rigid wall further back
from the hyphal apex.

A steady-state model of wall growth
Wessels (1990) proposed a steady-state model of fungal tip growth that could make the role of tip-located
wall-lytic enzymes unnecessary, and also could explain several other features of tip growth. According to
this model, the newly formed wall at the extreme tip
is suggested to be viscoelastic, so that the wall polymers flow outwards and backwards as new components

72

CHAPTER 4

Fig. 4.6 Representation of the steady-state
model of hyphal tip growth, in which the
wall is envisaged as being viscoelastic. New wall
polymers synthesized at the extreme tip are
suggested to flow outwards and backwards
as new components are continually added at
the tip. The decreasing thickness of the arrows
behind the tip signifies progressively reduced
flow as the polymers become cross-linked.
(Based on a diagram in Wessels 1990.)

are continually added at the extreme tip (Fig. 4.6).
Then the wall rigidifies progressively by the formation
of extra bonds behind the tip. This is reminiscent
of Robertson’s original idea of a plastic, deformable
wall at the extreme tip, with subsequent rigidification
occurring behind the tip. Thus, for example, if the
supply of vesicles to the tip is slowed or halted (by
an osmotic shock, etc.) the rate of hyphal extension
would slow or stop, but wall cross-linking might be
unaffected if bonding occurs spontaneously within the
wall. We could therefore have at least some of the elements of a unifying theory of fungal tip growth, based
on much biochemical and ultrastructural evidence. It
is still necessary to explain how hyphae with an essentially fluid (viscoelastic) wall could resist turgor pressure, but the answer to this could lie in the structural
support provided by the massive actin cytoskeleton at
the hyphal tip, as we saw in Chapter 3.
Jackson & Heath (1990) investigated this for
Saprolegnia ferax (Oomycota). They showed that treatment of hyphae with cytochalasin E (one of several
cytochalasins, which disrupt cell dynamics by binding
to actin microfilaments) caused disruption of the actin
cap and led initially to an increase in the rate of tip
extension, but then the tips swelled and burst. The weakest region of the tip, most susceptible to bursting, was
not the extreme apex where the actin cap is densest
but on the shoulders of the apex where the actin is less
dense and where the wall presumably has not yet
rigidified sufficiently to compensate for the weaker
cytoskeleton. It will be recalled that the shoulder of the
apex is where new tips originate when hyphae are
flooded with water (Fig. 4.3).
Another important aspect of the steady-state model
is that it could help to explain how fungi release
enzymes into the environment for breakdown of complex polymers. As explained in Chapter 6, enzymes
are relatively large molecules, commonly in the range
of 30–50 kDa (kiloDaltons), and there is no evidence
that fungal walls have continuous pores of this size
through which enzymes could be released into the
environment. The viscoelastic wall model could help

to resolve this problem if the enzymes are released from
vesicles that fuse with the hyphal tip and these enzymes
then flow outwards through the developing wall.

The driving force for apical growth
Having considered the dynamics of wall growth and
wall rigidification, the remaining question concerns the
driving force for apical extension. The cytoskeletal
components have emerged as the strongest candidates
for this, consistent with many studies on animal cells
where protrusions such as pseudopodia are linked to
the polymerization of actin.
Studies on Saprolegnia (Oomycota) have shown
that the apex can extend even when hyphae have
negligible turgor pressure, presumably because actin
polymerization drives this process (reviewed by Money
1995). Actin is abundant in hyphal tips, and both
tip extension and cytoplasmic streaming can be halted
by treating fungi with cytochalasins (“cell-relaxers”)
which bind to actin. In S. cerevisiae there is strong
evidence that F-actin is involved in the localization of
bud formation and that it interacts with the motor protein myosin to transport vesicles to the bud site.
The question of whether microtubules are directly
involved in fungal tip growth is more problematical.
Hyphal extension can be halted by the benzimidazole
fungicides, the related azole drugs, and griseofulvin (see
Chapter 17), all of which interfere with microtubule
function. Coinciding with this stoppage of growth, there
is a progressive depletion of vesicles in the hyphal tip
(Howard & Aist 1980). Thus, microtubules must in some
way be involved in tip growth – perhaps by providing
tramlines for vesicle cargoes. Calcium also seems to be
intimately involved in tip growth (Jackson & Heath
1993) because the tips of several fungi, including
Neurospora, and also Saprolegnia (Oomycota), require
external calcium for continued tip growth. Moreover,
the plasmalemma at the extreme tip is reported to have
a high concentration of stretch-activated calcium
channels, allowing the ingress of calcium when the

FUNGAL GROWTH

membrane is stretched. The significance of this is that
the intracellular levels of free calcium are always
tightly regulated – cells maintain a low calcium level
by sequestering excess calcium in intracellular stores
such as the endoplasmic reticulum, mitochondria, and
vacuoles. So any localized ingress of calcium through
the plasma membrane would cause a perturbation,
including an interaction with the cytoskeleton, because
calcium is known to cause the contraction of F-actin.
There is abundant evidence for a role of calciummediated signaling in many fungi and other organisms,
but the details of calcium signaling and how it relates
to tip growth remain unclear. Bartnicki-Garcia (2002)
provides an excellent and thought-provoking review
of this and other outstanding questions in hyphal tip
growth.

Spore germination and the orientation of
hyphal tip growth
Fungi respond to many types of environmental signal,
including signals that trigger spore germination (i.e. the
production of a hyphal tip where none existed before
– see Chapter 10) and signals that change the orientation of hyphal tip growth. Below we consider several
examples of these processes.

Studies on germinating spores
Some fungal spores, such as the uredospores of rust
fungi (Basidiomycota), have a fixed point of germination termed the germ pore, where the wall is conspicuously thinner than elsewhere. Similarly, the
zoospores (motile, flagellate cells) of Chytridiomycota,
Oomycota, and plasmodiophorids have a fixed point
of germination, and they settle and adhere to recept-

Fig. 4.7 Stages in germination of spores
of Aspergillus niger. (a) In normal conditions (e.g. 30°C) the spore swells and
incorporates new wall material over the
whole of the cell surface (shown by stippling), then a germ-tube emerges and
all new wall incorporation is localized
to the hyphal tip. (b) At 44°C the spore
continues to swell and incorporates wall
material in a nonpolar manner, producing a giant cell with a thick wall. If the
temperature is lowered to 30°C this cell
produces an outgrowth, which immediately differentiates to produce a sporebearing head. (Based on Anderson &
Smith 1971.)

73

ive surfaces so that their future point of germ-tube
outgrowth is located next to that surface (Chapter 10).
However, many spores seem to be able to germinate
from any point on the cell periphery. The germination
process often follows a common pattern (Fig. 4.7).
Initially, the spore swells by hydration, then it swells
further by an active metabolic process and new wall
materials are incorporated over most or all of the cell
surface – the phase termed nonpolar growth. Finally
a germ-tube (a young hypha) emerges from a localized
point on the cell surface, and all subsequent wall
growth is localized to this region. The first sign that
an apex will emerge is the localized development of an
apical vesicle cluster.
In the conidia of Aspergillus niger the transition from
nonpolar to polarized growth is temperature-dependent
(Fig. 4.7). At a normal temperature of about 30°C, the
spore initially incorporates new wall material over the
whole surface and then an apex is formed. However
when the spores are incubated at 44°C they continue
to swell for 24–48 hours, producing giant rounded cells
up to 20–25 µm diameter (a 175-fold increase in cell
volume) with walls up to 2 µm thick. At this stage the
cells stop growing. But if these “giant cells” are shifted
down to 30°C before they stop growing they will
respond by producing a hyphal apex, and this behaves
in an unusual way: instead of forming a normal hypha
it produces a small spore-bearing head (Fig. 4.7). These
observations suggest two things. First, that the transition from nonpolar to polar growth in A. niger is
temperature-dependent – it is blocked at the restrictive
temperature (44°C). Second, that the fungus can still
“mature” at the restrictive temperature: it reaches a
developmental stage at which it is committed to
sporulate, and it does so as soon as the temperature is
lowered.
The production of spores from germinating spores
with a minimum of intervening growth is termed

74

CHAPTER 4

microcycle sporulation. It occurs naturally in some
fungi, especially if they grow in water films in nutrientlimited conditions. For example, microcycle sporulation
has been reported for some saprotrophs on leaf surfaces
(e.g. Cladosporium, Alternaria spp., Chapter 11), some
leaf-infecting pathogens (e.g. Septoria nodorum), several
vascular wilt pathogens that colonize xylem vessels (e.g.
Fusarium oxysporum, Chapter 14), and the rhizosphere
fungus Idriella bolleyi which is a biological control
agent of root pathogens. All these fungi will germinate
to form normal hyphae in nutrient-rich conditions, so
their microcycling behavior in nutrient-poor conditions
might be a means of spreading to new and potentially
more favorable environments.

Spore germination tropisms
A tropism is defined as a directional growth response
of an organism to an external stimulus. The spores of
some fungi show this very markedly, a classic example being the yeast-like fungus Geotrichum candidum
which is a common cause of spoilage of dairy products. As shown in Fig. 4.8, the cylindrical spores of this
fungus germinate typically from one or other pole, but
the site of germ-tube emergence is influenced strongly
by the presence of neighboring spores when the
spores are seeded densely on agar and covered with a
coverslip. In these conditions the germ-tubes always
emerge from the end furthest away from a touching
spore – a phenomenon termed negative autotropism.
The causes of this behavior are still unclear. On the one
hand, it has been suggested to involve the release of
auto-inhibitors, which would accumulate maximally in
the zone of contact of two spores but could diffuse away
from the “free” ends, leading to germination there. On
the other hand, oxygen depletion in the zone of spore
contact could be a critical factor for G. candidum

because the spores always germinate towards an oxygen source (a small hole in a plastic coverslip placed
over the spore layer) and this positive tropism to
oxygen could overcome the negative autotropism of
touching spore pairs.
The spores of Idriella bolleyi (a mitosporic fungus) also
show negative autotropism, but they show an even more
spectacular response when placed in contact with
cereal root hairs (Fig. 4.9). The spores of Idriella always
germinate away from living root hairs but towards
dead root hairs and rapidly penetrate them. This
behavior seems to be ecologically relevant because I.
bolleyi is a weak parasite of cereal and grass roots. It
exploits the root cortical cells as they start to senesce
naturally behind the growing root tip, and in doing
so it competes with aggressive root pathogens that
otherwise would use the dead cells as a food base for
infection. Thus, the spore germination tropisms of I.
bolleyi help to explain its role as a biological control
agent of cereal root pathogens, similar to the role of
nonpathogenic strains of the take-all fungus, discussed in Chapter 12. The tropic signals for I. bolleyi
spores seem to be quite specific, because G. candidum
and some other fungi tested in the same conditions
showed quite different responses; for example, G. candidum germinated towards both living and dead root
hairs (Allan et al. 1992).
Fungal spores can also show orientation responses
to electrical fields of sufficiently high strength (5–
20 V cm−1). For example, in one study the spores of
Neurospora crassa and Mucor mucedo were found to
germinate towards the anode, whereas spores of
Emericella nidulans showed no significant orientation
response. The somatic (older) hyphae of these and
other fungi showed an array of orientation responses:
Neurospora hyphae grew towards the anode and
formed branches towards the anode; but hyphae of E.
nidulans and M. mucedo grew and branched towards the

Fig. 4.8 Germination behavior of spores of
Geotrichum candidum, when incubated in
a thin water film beneath a coverslip. The
spores always germinate from positions
near their poles. Arrows indicate the positions of germ-tube outgrowth in different
conditions. (a–d) Negative autotropism of
spores touching in pairs or in groups – the
spores always germinate from a position
furthest from a touching spore. (e) The
presence of oxygen (a small hole in the
coverslip) negates the negative autotropism
– the spores germinate from a point closest to the oxygen source. (Redrawn from
Robinson 1973.)

FUNGAL GROWTH

75

example, towards a nutrient source or away from a
potential inhibitor. Despite the fact that all fungi
require nutrients, and therefore might be expected
to orientate towards nutrient-rich zones, there is no
evidence that the normal somatic hyphae of true
fungi do this. Only the Oomycota show this nutrientseeking behavior, and it can be strain-specific – some
strains of Saprolegnia or Achlya spp. orientate towards
mixtures of amino acids, whereas other strains show
no response. Where it occurs, the response can be very
striking. On a nutrient-poor medium the hyphae will
turn through 180 degrees to an agar disk containing
casein hydrolysate or other amino acid mixtures
(Fig. 4.10) and the hyphae also branch from the side

(a)

(a)

(b)
Fig. 4.9 Behavior of spores (S) of Idriella bolleyi on wheat
root hairs in aseptic conditions. (a) Spores germinate towards a dead root hair, and then envelop and penetrate
the root hair. (b) Spores germinate away from a living root
hair (rh). (From Allan et al. 1992.)

cathode. In a more recent study (Lever et al. 1994) the
galvanotropic responses of somatic hyphae were found
to be pH- and calcium-dependent. Neurospora hyphae
even changed from being strongly cathodotropic at
pH 4.0 to strongly anodotropic at pH 7. Given the range
of different responses to electrical fields it is difficult to
summarize this topic, except to say that fungal hyphae
can be responsive to electrical/ionic fields. Gow (2004)
recently reviewed this topic.
(b)

Hyphal tropisms
In all the examples above we have used the term tropism loosely to describe the position where a hyphal tip
emerges. But, strictly, a tropism is a bending response
that orientates a hypha in a particular direction – for

Fig. 4.10 (a) Orientation of hyphal tips and orientated
emergence of hyphal branches of Achlya and Saprolegnia
spp. towards an agar disk (black circle) containing a
mixture of amino acids. (b) Reorientation of hyphae from
germinating spores of Pythium aphanidermatum towards
a mixture of amino acids (Mitchell & Deacon 1986).

76

CHAPTER 4

closest to the amino acid source. Manavathu &
Thomas (1985) investigated this for a strain of Achlya
ambisexualis and found that, of all the single amino acids
tested, only the sulfur-containing amino acid methionine could elicit hyphal tropism. However, gradients
of many other single amino acids would elicit tropism
if the medium contained a uniform background of
cysteine. As an explanation of this it was suggested
that cysteine, when taken up by cells, can donate one
of its sulphydryl (-SH) groups to other amino acids and
thereby generate methionine. In bacteria the attraction
of cells to several types of compound is mediated by
chemoreceptor complexes, and this involves a role for
methionyl derivatives which donate methyl groups
to the interior domains of the receptor complexes
(Armitage & Lackie 1990).
A similar system might be involved in chemotropism by the Oomycota, because Manavathu &
Thomas found that several methyl-donor compounds
could elicit a tropic response. In work with a strain of
Achlya bisexualis, Schreurs et al. (1989) found that the
hyphal tips orientate towards the tips of micropipettes
containing either methionine or phenylalanine. Also,
when micropipettes containing attractant amino acids
were placed behind the hyphal tips the branches
emerged from the hyphae and grew towards the
attractants. Thus it seems that the initiation of
branching and the tropism of hyphal tips are closely
related responses to environmental signals, and in
some Oomycota these responses might be mediated by
plasma membrane receptors for specific amino acids.

The hyphae of many fungi show tropic responses to
non-nutrient factors of potential ecological relevance. For
example, germ-tubes arising from spores of the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (Glomeromycota; Chapter 2)
can grow towards volatile metabolites (perhaps aldehydes) from roots; some wood-rotting fungi (e.g.
Chaetomium globosum, Ascomycota) orientate towards
volatile compounds from freshly cut wood blocks, and
hyphae of the seedling pathogen Athelia (Sclerotium) rolfsii (Basidiomycota) orientate towards methanol and
other short-chain alcohols from freshly decomposing
organic matter (Chapter 14). Sexual pheromones also
elicit orientation responses (discussed in Chapter 5).

The yeast cell cycle
In contrast to fungal hyphae, which grow continuously
from a hyphal tip, yeasts typically grow by a repeated
budding process to produce colonies of single cells.
As shown for Saccharomyces cerevisiae in Fig. 4.11,
in each “turn” of the yeast cell cycle a young bud
emerges from a predictable point on the mother cell.
The bud grows apically by channeling of wall components to the bud tip, but at a later stage the mode
of growth switches and wall components are inserted
uniformly over the cell, so that the bud becomes more
swollen. Meanwhile, the cell has undergone mitosis,
and one of the two daughter nuclei enters the bud. The
final stage of cytokinesis (cell separation) occurs by
the development of a primary septum, composed of

Fig. 4.11 Events in the cell cycle of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. (Based on a drawing by Hartwell 1974.)

FUNGAL GROWTH

chitin, between the mother and daughter cells. This
plate of chitin is then overlaid by β-glucan and mannan (the major wall components) to form the secondary
septum, and the cells finally separate, leaving the
chitin plate on the mother cell.
The yeast cell cycle has been studied intensively as
a model of the regulation of cell growth and division.
Four stages in this cycle are recognized: G1 (first gap),
S (DNA synthesis), G2 (second gap), and M (mitosis).
In each turn of the cycle a bud emerges, grows to nearly
full size, receives one of the daughter nuclei from
nuclear division and then separates from the parent
cell. At its fastest the cycle takes about 1.5 hour in
S. cerevisiae, but the time can vary within wide limits,
depending on the availability of nutrients. Almost all
of this variation occurs in G1, because S, G2, and M
together occupy a more or less constant time.
The most important checkpoint in this cycle is
termed start. It occurs during G1 in S. cerevisiae and it
is the stage where the cell integrates all the information from intracellular and environmental signals to
determine whether the cell cycle will continue, or
enter stationary phase, or the cell will undergo sexual
reproduction (Chapter 5). Many cell division cycle

77

(CDC) genes have been identified in the budding
yeast S. cerevisiae, and homologous genes that regulate
development have also been found in the distantly
related fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
Analysis of the genes and gene products of these
two organisms has helped us to understand how
cells establish their polarity of growth (Fig. 4.12). In
budding yeast (sequence shown in Fig. 4.12a) the first
bud develops at one of the poles of the cell. When this
bud has developed and separated from the mother cell,
the next bud arises at a point adjacent to the bud scar.
It grows initially by polar growth (stage 4) but then
by wall growth over most of the bud surface (stage 5).
At the time of bud emergence, a “tag” or “landmark”
is laid down at the site where a new bud will form,
and a ring of septin proteins is deposited at this point.
At a later stage of development (stage 6) the cellular
machinery, including actin microfilaments, will direct
vesicles and wall precursors to this site, resulting in
the localized development of a septum to separate the
daughter cell. The fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces
pombe (Fig. 4.12b), grows in a different way from
Saccharomyces, because it produces cylindrical cells
that extend at both ends, with tags at the poles of the

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Fig. 4.12 Comparison of cell division in the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae (a,c) and the fission yeast
Schizosaccharomyces pombe (b,d), showing how an axis of polarity is established at different points during cell development. (Reprinted from Mata, J. & Nurse, P. (1998) Discovering the poles in yeast. Trends in Cell Biology 8, 163–167,
copyright 1998, with permission from Elsevier.)

78

CHAPTER 4

cell. When the cell has reached a critical volume the
nucleus divides, and tags then direct the production of
a septum at the site where the cell will divide (stages
5–7). Both Saccharomyces and Schizosaccharomyces can
undergo mating under the influence of pheromones
produced by cells of opposite mating types, so this
represents yet another developmental stage involving
the establishment of polar sites (Fig. 4.12c,d).
The CDC42 gene is a key component in the establishment of polarized growth of Saccharomyces. It
encodes a GTP (guanosine triphosphate)-binding protein, which acts in concert with the protein products
of other genes (CDC24 and BEM1) to recruit septins and
actin microfilaments to the sites where localized wall
growth will occur. Less is known about the establishment of polarity in fission yeast, but homologs of
some of the key budding yeast genes have been
identified in Schizosaccharomyces – for example, the
fission yeast genes ral1/sdc1 (homologous to CDC24)
and ral3/scd2 (homologous to BEM1). Some human
genes also show base sequence homology with CDC
genes of Saccharomyces, indicating a degree of gene conservation through evolutionary time. Thus, the yeast
cell cycle can be used to investigate cellular events of
much wider significance, including the regulation (or
deregulation) of normal cell division.

Do mycelial fungi have a cell cycle?
The essence of the yeast cell cycle described above is
that, during a certain length of time (which varies
depending on nutrient availability and other environ-

mental factors) one cell produces two cells, while
the biomass doubles, and the number of nuclei also
doubles. This raises the question of whether an
equivalent cycle occurs in mycelial fungi. The first
clear evidence that there is such a cycle in mycelial fungi
was obtained with an unusual fungus, Basidiobolus
ranarum (previously assigned to the Zygomycota, but
now transferred to Chytridiomycota based on its small
subunit rRNA gene sequence). This fungus usually
grows as single large cells in the hind gut of frogs or
other amphibiams, where it causes little or no damage.
But it will grow as hyphae with complete, unperforated
septa on agar plates. B. ranarum also has extremely large
nuclei (about 20 µm diameter) which are easily seen by
light microscopy and which are arranged regularly, one
per cell. As shown in Fig. 4.13, the hyphae extend
by tip growth on agar, synthesizing protoplasm and
drawing it forwards as the tip grows. When a critical
volume of protoplasm has been synthesized, the large
central nucleus divides and a septum is laid down at
the point of nuclear division, creating two cells, each
with one nucleus. The new apical cell then grows on,
and it repeats the whole process when enough protoplasm has been synthesized. The penultimate cell,
which has been isolated by the complete septum, produces a new branch apex and its protoplasm flows into
this. In effect, therefore, two hyphal tips (each with a
given protoplasmic volume) are formed from the
original single tip cell, and there is a clear relationship
between cytoplasmic volume, nuclear division, and
branching, exactly like the cell cycle of yeasts. However, it is termed a duplication cycle rather than a cell
cycle, and the cells remain attached to one another.

Fig. 4.13 The duplication cycle of
Basidiobolus ranarum, a fungus that grows
as hyphae with complete, unperforated
septa on agar plates. (a,b) An apical cell
extends, synthesizes new protoplasm,
and continually draws the protoplasm
forwards. (c) When the protoplasmic
volume attains a critical size the nucleus
divides and a septum is formed. (d,e)
The new apical cell grows on and repeats
the process; the subapical cell produces
a branch, and the protoplasm and nucleus
migrate into this, producing a second
apical cell.

FUNGAL GROWTH

A similar duplication cycle has been shown to occur
in many fungi, even those with normal, perforated septa
(Trinci 1984). This was done by allowing the spores of
various fungi to germinate on agar and the developing colonies were photographed at intervals (for an
example of this, see Fig. 3.5). From the photographs,
the number of hyphal tips and the total hyphal length
were recorded at different times and used to calculate
a hyphal growth unit (G) where:
G=

Total length of mycelium
Number of hyphal tips

After initial fluctuations in the very early stages of
growth, the value of G became constant and characteristic of each fungal species or strain. For example, a
G value of 48 µm (equivalent to a hyphal volume of
217 µm3) was calculated for hyphae of Candida albicans,
and values of 32 µm (629 µm3), 130 µm (4504 µm3), and
402 µm (11,986 µm3) were found for a wild-type strain
and two “spreading” mutants of Neurospora crassa.
The constancy of these values for individual strains
demonstrates that, as a colony grows, the number of
hyphal tips is directly related to the cytoplasmic
volume. For example, when a colony of C. albicans had
produced an additional 48 µm length of hypha (or a
hyphal volume of 217 µm3) it had synthesized enough
protoplasm to produce a new tip. We can therefore consider a fungal colony as being composed of a number
of “units” (the hyphal growth units), each of which
represents a hyphal tip plus an average length of
hypha (or volume of cytoplasm) associated with it. They
are not seen as separate units because they are joined
together, but in some respects they are equivalent to
the separate cells produced in the yeast cell cycle. In
fact, the duplication cycle of a typical mycelial fungus,
Emericella nidulans, has been shown to be closely associated with a nuclear division cycle. The apical compartment grows to about twice its original length,
then the several nuclei in this compartment divide more
or less synchronously and a septum is laid down near
the middle of the apical compartment. After this, a series
of septa are formed in the new subapical compartment
to divide it into smaller compartments, each with just
one or two nuclei, while the multinucleate tip grows
on and will repeat the process in due course.
Earlier in this chapter we mentioned the peripheral
growth zone of a fungal colony – the length of hypha
needed to support the normal extension rate of tips
at a colony margin. It can be estimated by cutting the
hyphae at different distances behind the tips, and
it can be as large as 5–7 mm. Clearly, this is quite
different from the hyphal growth unit which ranges
from about 30 to 400 µm. The difference is explained
by the fact that the hyphal growth unit is measured
in nutrient-rich conditions and is a true reflection

79

of growth (increase in biomass, or numbers of tips)
whereas the peripheral growth zone is a reflection
of the rate of extension of a colony margin, and it
applies to older colonies, where some of the hyphae
become leading hyphae, which are much wider and
have much faster extension rates than the rest.

The fungal mycelium as a nutrientcapturing system
The fungal mycelium is a highly efficient and adaptable
device for capturing nutrients. Over a wide range of
nutrient concentrations, a fungal colony will extend
across an agar plate at the same rate – whether on water
agar or a standard nutrient-rich medium. But on water
agar the colony is very sparsely branched, whereas on
nutrient-rich agar the branching pattern is dense. This
high degree of adaptability is a key feature of fungi,
especially in soil and bodies of water where nutrients
are likely to occur in localized pockets.
Figure 4.14 is a classic demonstration of this behavior. A young larch seedling was inoculated with a

Fig. 4.14 The fungal nutrient-capturing system. (Courtesy
of D.J. Read; from Read 1991.)

80

CHAPTER 4

mycorrhizal fungus and grown in peat against the face
of a transparent perspex box. The root system itself
is quite limited: it consists of the region marked by
double arrowheads (<<) where the roots are enveloped
by a mycorrhizal sheath (Chapter 13). Most of the
branching network that we see is a system of aggregated
fungal hyphae, termed mycelial cords (Chapter 5)
whch explore the soil for nutrients. When they find
a localized pocket of organic nutrients (see the large
arrowhead in Fig. 4.14) they produce a mass of hyphae
to exploit the nutrient-rich zone.

Kinetics of fungal growth
Growth can be defined as an orderly, balanced increase
in cell numbers or biomass with time. All components
of an organism increase in a coordinated way during
growth – the cell number, dry weight, protein content,
nucleic acid content, and so on.
Figure 4.15 shows a typical growth curve of a yeast
in shaken liquid culture, when the logarithm of cell
number or dry weight is plotted against time. An initial lag phase is followed by a phase of exponential
or logarithmic growth, then a deceleration phase, a
stationary phase, and a phase of autolysis or cell
death. During exponential growth one cell produces
two in a given unit of time, two produce four, four
produce eight, and so on. Provided that the culture
is vigorously shaken and aerated, exponential growth
will continue until an essential nutrient or oxygen
becomes limiting, or until metabolic byproducts accumulate to inhibitory levels.

Fig. 4.15 Typical growth curve of a batch culture: a, lag
phase; b, exponential or logarithmic growth phase; c, deceleration phase; d, stationary phase; e, phase of autolysis.

This type of curve is typical of a batch culture,
i.e. a closed culture system such as a flask in which all
the nutrients are present initially. The rate of growth
during the exponential phase is termed the specific
growth rate ( µ) of the organism, and if all conditions
are optimal then the maximum specific growth rate,
µ max, is obtained. This is a characteristic of a particular organism or strain.
The value of µ is calculated by measuring log10 of the
number of cells (N0 ) or the biomass at any one time
(t 0 ) and log10 of cell number (Nt ) or biomass at some
later time (t ), according to the equation:
log10 Nt − log10 N0 =

µ
(t − t 0 )
2.303

where 2.303 is the base of natural logarithms.
Rewritten, this equation becomes:

µ = [(log10 Nt − log10 N0)/ t − t 0] × 2.303
If, for example, N0 = 103 cells ml−1 and Nt = 105 cells
ml−1, 4 hours later, then:

µ =

2.303
(5 − 3) 2.303
=
= 1.15 h−1
4
2

From this we can compute the mean doubling
time, or generation time ( g), of the organism, as the
time needed for a doubling of the natural logarithm,
according to the equation:
g =

0.693
loge 2
=
1.15
µ

So, in our example, g = 0.60 h. For S. cerevisiae at
30°C, near-maximum values of µ and g are 0.45 h−1
and 1.54 h respectively. For the yeast Candida utilis at
30°C, µ = 0.40 h−1 and g = 1.73 h.
Mycelial fungi also grow exponentially because they
have a duplication cycle. Averaged for a colony as a
whole, they grow as hypothetical “units,” one producing
two in a given time interval, two producing four,
and so on. Representative values of µ max and g for
mycelial fungi are: 0.35 h−1 and 1.98 h for Neurospora
crassa at 30°C; 0.28 h−1 and 2.48 h for Fusarium
graminearum at 30°C, and 0.80 h−1 and 0.87 h for
Achlya bisexualis (Oomycota) at 24°C.
These values compare quite favorably with those of
yeasts. However, it is difficult to maintain exponential
growth of mycelial fungi, because the hyphae do not
disperse freely. Instead, they form spherical pellets in
shaken liquid culture, and this leads to problems of
nutrient and oxygen diffusion. This problem can be
overcome to some degree by using compounds (paramorphogens) that alter the hyphal branching pattern,

FUNGAL GROWTH

such as sodium alginate, carboxymethylcellulose, and
other anionic polymers. They cause fungi to grow as
more dispersed, loosely branched mycelia, perhaps by
binding to hyphae and causing ionic repulsion. This
can be desirable in some industrial processes but not
in others. For example, dispersed filamentous growth
favors the industrial production of fumaric acid by
Rhizopus arrhizus and of pectic enzymes by Aspergillus
niger, but pelleted growth is preferred for industrial
production of itaconic acid and citric acid by A. niger
(Morrin & Ward 1989).

Batch culture versus continuous culture
systems
Batch culture systems are used commonly in industry
because useful primary metabolites such as organic
acids, and secondary metabolites such as antibiotics
(Chapter 7), are produced in the deceleration and
early stationary phases. Batch cultures are also used for
brewing and wine-making, because the culture broth
is the marketable product.
Continuous culture systems (Fig. 4.16) are an alternative to batch culture. In these systems, fresh culture
medium is added at a continuous slow rate, and a
corresponding volume of the old culture medium
together with some of the fungal biomass is removed
by an overflow device. Such culture systems are
monitored automatically so that factors such as pH,
temperature, and dissolved oxygen concentration are
maintained at the desired levels. They are stirred vigorously to keep the organism in suspension and to facilitate diffusion of nutrients and metabolic byproducts.
There are various types of continuous culture system
but the most common type is the chemostat. In this
system the concentrations of nutrients are adjusted
deliberately so that one essential nutrient is at a relatively low concentration while all other components

Medium in
Stirrer

Hyphae
Cells

81

are present in excess. When the number of cells in
the culture starts to increase, the rate of exponential
growth becomes limited by the growth-limiting nutrient. At this stage the rate of growth of the culture can
be controlled precisely by adjusting the rate at which
fresh culture medium is supplied; this is termed the
dilution rate of the culture. However, it is important
to note that the fungus is always growing exponentially
– only the rate of exponential growth is governed by
the dilution rate. In theory, by adjusting the dilution
rate the culture growth rate can be adjusted to any
desired level, up to µ max (any further increase in dilution rate would cause “wash-out” because the cells
would be removed by overflow faster than they can
grow). In practice, however, these cultures become
unstable as they approach µ max because then even a
minor, temporary fluctuation in growth rate can cause
wash-out.
Chemostats are useful for many experimental purposes, because the physiology of fungi can change
at different growth rates or in response to different
growth-limiting nutrients. These changes can be
studied in detail in chemostats whereas they occur
transiently in batch cultures. For example, when
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is grown at low dilution rates
(slow growth) in glucose-limited culture it uses a substantial proportion of the substrate for production of
biomass. By contrast, S. cerevisiae produces ethanol at
the expense of biomass at higher dilution rates. It
switches from cell production to alcohol production
in conditions favoring rapid metabolism, even though
glucose is the growth-limiting nutrient in both cases.
Chemostats also are useful for industrial processes,
because cells or cell products (e.g. antibiotics) can be
retrieved continuously from the overflow medium.
In practice, however, most of the traditional industrial
processes rely on batch cultures, either because the cost
of converting to continuous culture systems does not
justify the increased efficiency or because it is difficult
to design and operate full production-scale chemostat
systems. The batch cultures used industrially are often
“fed batch” systems, in which nutrients or other substrates are added periodically to sustain the production
of useful metabolites. As we will see in Chapter 7, by
keeping cells perpetually growth limited in stationary
phase and then “feeding” the culture with selected
metabolic precursors, batch cultures can be used to produce substantial quantities of antibiotics or other
commercial products.

Outflow

Commercial production of fungal biomass
(Quorn™ mycoprotein)
Fig. 4.16 Diagram of a continuous culture system to produce fungal biomass.

The most interesting recent application of continuous
culture systems has been the development of an entirely

82

CHAPTER 4

novel food product, termed Quorn mycoprotein. In fact,
this is the sole survivor of the much-heralded “singlecell protein” revolution of the late 1900s, when
scientists and international aid agencies attempted to
develop protein-rich foods from microbial biomass, to
meet the impending protein shortage in the developing world.
The development of Quorn is a major technological
success, which took over 20 years to reach fruition. Now
Quorn products are available in many supermarkets
and are widely used as alternatives to meat products
because of their nutritional profile (see Table 1.2).
Quorn mycoprotein is produced commercially from
chemostat cultures of the fungus Fusarium venenatum,
which is grown at 30°C in a medium composed of glucose (the carbon source), ammonium (the nitrogen
source), and other mineral salts. The fungal mycelium
is retrieved continuously from the culture outflow,

then aligned to retain the fibrous texture, and vacuumdried on a filter bed before being constituted into
meat-like chunks. In this case a continuous culture system was deemed necessary in order to ensure a high
degree of reproducibility of the product, and also for
economic reasons because the yield of mycelium over
a period of time was about five times higher than if a
series of batch cultures were used. Glucose is used as
the growth-limiting nutrient in the production system,
and the dilution rate is set to give a doubling time (µ)
of 0.17–0.20 h−1, which is below the µ max of 0.28 h−1.
The rate of substrate conversion to protein is extremely
high, about 136 g protein being produced from every
1000 g sugar supplied. For comparison with this, the
equivalent production of protein by chickens, pigs, and
cattle would be about 49, 41, and 14 g respectively.
Trinci (1992) has described the many stages in
the development of this fermentation technology.

Fig. 4.17 Diagram of the air-lift fermenter used by Marlow Foods for the
production of mycoprotein in continuous
flow culture. (From Trinci 1992.)

FUNGAL GROWTH

Initially, many potential fungi were screened to find
a suitable organism for commercial use. Then a suitable large-scale fermenter system had to be designed
because fungal mycelia have viscous properties in
solutions, so the cultures are difficult to mix to achieve
adequate oxygenation – the fungus uses 0.78 g oxygen
for every 1 g biomass produced. The system used
commercially is a 40 m3 air-lift fermenter (Fig. 4.17)
about the height of Nelson’s column! Compressed air
is used to aerate and circulate the culture. This avoids
the heating that would be caused by a mechanical
stirrer, saving on cooling costs. There is a potential
problem with the high nucleic acid content of any type
of microbial biomass when used as a human food
source, because our bodies metabolize RNA to uric acid
which can cause gout-like symptoms. So, the nucleic
acid content of the harvested mycelium needed to be
reduced while retaining as much of the protein as
possible. This was achieved by exploiting the higher
heat-tolerance of RNAases than of proteases. The culture outflow containing the biomass is collected in a
vessel and its temperature is raised rapidly to 65°C
and maintained at this level for 20–30 minutes. The
growth of the fungus is stopped at this temperature and
the proteases are destroyed so that relatively little protein is lost, but the ribosomes break down and the fungal RNAases degrade much of the RNA to nucleotides
which are released into the spent culture filtrate. Then
the mycelium can be harvested for drying.
A final problem has still not been overcome completely
and it limits the efficiency of commercial production.
During prolonged culture in fermenter vessels the fungus is subjected to selection pressure and it mutates
to “colonial forms” with a high branching density
but relatively low extension rate of the main, leading
hyphae. These forms predominate over the wild-type
after about 500–1000 hours of continuous culture.
Their hyphal growth unit lengths range from 14 to
174 µm, compared with 232 µm for the wild-type, so
they give a significantly less fibrous biomass, which
is undesirable in the end product. The production
runs have to be terminated prematurely to avoid this
problem. Nevertheless, the development of Quorn is
a significant technological achievement as well as a
commercial success.

Cited references
Allan, R.H., Thorpe, C.J. & Deacon, J.W. (1992) Differential tropism to living and dead cereal root hairs by
the biocontrol fungus Idriella bolleyi. Physiological and
Molecular Plant Pathology 41, 217–226.
Anderson, J.G. & Smith, J.E. (1971) The production of
conidiophores and conidia by newly germinated conidia
of Aspergillus niger (microcycle conidiation). Journal of
General Microbiology 69, 185–197.

83

Armitage, J.P. & Lackie, J.M., eds (1990) Biology of the
Chemotactic Response. Society for General Microbiology Symposium 46. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Bartnicki-Garcia, S. (2002) Hyphal tip growth: outstanding
questions. In: Molecular Biology of Fungal Development
(H.D. Osiewacz, ed.), pp. 29–55. Marcel Dekker, New
York.
Gow, N.A.R. (2004) New angles in mycology: studies in
directional growth and directional motility. Mycological
Research 108, 5–13.
Gow, N.A.R. & Gadd, G.M., eds (1995) The Growing
Fungus. Chapman & Hall, London.
Hartwell, L.L. (1974) Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle.
Bacteriological Reviews 38, 164–198.
Howard, R.J. & Aist, J.R. (1980) Cytoplasmic microtubules
and fungal morphogenesis: ultrastructural effects of
methyl benzimidazole-2-yl-carbamate determined by
freeze-substitution of hyphal tip cells. Journal of Cell
Biology 87, 55–64.
Howard, R.J. & Gow, N.A.R., eds (2001) Biology of the Fungal
Cell. The Mycota, VIII. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Jackson, S.L. & Heath, I.B. (1990) Evidence that actin reinforces the extensible hyphal apex of the oomycete
Saprolegnia ferax. Protoplasma 157, 144–153.
Jackson, S.L. & Heath, I.B. (1993) Roles of calcium ions
in hyphal tip growth. Microbiological Reviews 57, 367–
382.
Latijnhouwers, M., de Wit, P.J.G.M. & Govers, F. (2003)
Oomycetes and Fungi: similar weaponry to attack
plants. Trends in Microbiology 11, 462–469.
Lever, M.C., Robertson, B.E.M., Buchan, A.D.B., Miller,
P.F.P., Gooday, G.W. & Gow, N.A.R. (1994) pH and
Ca2+ dependent galvanotropism of filamentous fungi:
implications and mechanisms. Mycological Research 98,
301–306.
Manavathu, E.K. & Thomas, D. des S. (1985) Chemotropism of Achlya ambisexualis to methionine and
methionyl compounds. Journal of General Microbiology 131,
751–756.
Mata, J. & Nurse, P. (1998) Discovering the poles in yeast.
Trends in Cell Biology 8, 163–167.
Mitchell, R.T. & Deacon, J.W. (1986) Chemotropism
of germ-tubes from zoospore cysts of Pythium spp.
Transactions of the British Mycological Society 86, 233–
237.
Money, N.P. (1995) Turgor pressure and the mechanics
of fungal penetration. Canadian Journal of Botany 73,
S96–102.
Morrin, M. & Ward, O.P. (1989) Studies on interaction
of Carbopol-934 with hyphae of Rhizopus arrhizus.
Mycological Research 92, 265–272.
Read, D.J. (1991) Mycorrhizas in ecosystems – nature’s
response to the “Law of the Minimum”. In: Frontiers
in Mycology (Hawksworth, D.L., ed.), pp. 29–55. CAB
International, Wallingford, Oxon, pp. 101–130.
Robertson, N.F. (1958) Observations of the effect of water
on the hyphal apices of Fusarium oxysporum. Annals of
Botany 22, 159–173.
Robertson, N.F. (1959) Experimental control of hyphal
branching forms in hyphomycetous fungi. Journal of the
Linnaean Society, London 56, 207–211.

84

CHAPTER 4

Robinson, P.M. (1973) Oxygen – positive chemotropic
factor for fungi? New Phytologist 72, 1349–1356.
Schreurs, W.J.A., Harold, R.L. & Harold, F.M. (1989)
Chemotropism and branching as alternative responses
of Achlya bisexualis to amino acids. Journal of General
Microbiology 135, 2519–2528.
Trinci, A.P.J. (1984) Regulation of hyphal branching and
hyphal orientation. In: The Ecology and Physiology ot the

Fungal Mycelium ( Jennings, D.H. & Rayner, A.D.M.,
eds), pp. 23–52. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Trinci, A.P.J. (1992) Myco-protein: a twenty-year overnight success story. Mycological Research 96, 1–13.
Wessels, J.G.H. (1990) Role of cell wall architecture in
fungal tip growth generation. In: Tip Growth in Plant and
Fungal Cells (Heath, I.B., ed.), pp. 1–29. Academic Press,
New York.

Chapter 5

Differentiation and development

This chapter is divided into the following major
sections:
•
•
•
•

mould-yeast dimorphism
infection structures of plant pathogens
sclerotia
nutrient-translocating organs: mycelial cords and
rhizomorphs
• asexual reproduction
• sexual development
Differentiation can be defined as the regulated change
of an organism from one state to another. These states
can be physiological, morphological, or both. So the
germination of fungal spores (Chapter 10) and the
switch from primary to secondary metabolism (Chapter 7) are examples of differentiation. But here we focus
on the developmental changes that lead to the production of a wide range of differentiated structures, such
as the infection structures of fungal pathogens, the regulation of sexual and asexual development, the switch
between hyphal and yeast forms of some humanpathogenic fungi, and other developmental processes.
We consider both the underlying control mechanisms
and the functions of the differentiated structures.

Mould-yeast dimorphism
Most fungi grow either as hyphae (the mycelial,
mould, or M-phase) or as single-celled yeasts (the
Y-phase). In general, yeasts and yeast phases are found
in environments with high levels of soluble sugars
that can diffuse towards the cells, or where the cells

can be dispersed in liquid films or circulating fluids
to obtain nutrients. Yeasts have little or no ability to
degrade polymers such as cellulose or proteins, etc.,
and they also have no penetrating power, unlike the
mycelial fungi which commonly have these abilities.
So, the yeast form and the mycelial form represent two
different growth strategies, suited to particular environments and conditions.
However, some fungi can alternate between a
mycelial form and a yeast-like form, in response to
environmental factors. These dimorphic fungi (with
two forms) include several pathogens of humans. For
example, Candida albicans commonly grows as a yeast
on the mucosal membranes of humans, but converts
to hyphae for invasion of host tissues (see Fig. 1.4).
This dimorphic switch can be induced experimentally
by growing C. albicans in horse serum of low nutrient
content (Chapter 16). Similarly, the fungi such as
Metarhizium and Beauveria spp., which commonly parasitize insects, penetrate the insect cuticle by hyphae
but then proliferate in a single-celled form in the circulating fluids of the host (Chapter 15). As a further
example, the vascular wilt pathogens of plants (e.g.
Fusarium oxysporum, Ophiostoma novo-ulmi) penetrate
initially by hyphae but then spread as yeast-like forms
in the xylem vessels (Chapter 14).
The switch between mycelial (M) and yeast-like
(Y) growth of dimorphic fungi occurs in response to
environmental factors, and can be reproduced experimentally as shown in Table 5.1. Several opportunistic
pathogens of humans grow in the M phase as saprotrophs in plant and animal remains (their normal
habitat, Chapter 16) and also grow as mycelia in laboratory culture at 20–25°C. But they convert to budding
yeasts or swollen cells in the body fluids or when
grown at 37°C in laboratory culture. This thermally

86

CHAPTER 5

Table 5.1 Some environmental or genetic factors that cause transitions between mycelial growth or swollen, yeast-like
growth.

Fungus

Conditions for mycelial growth

Conditions for swollen or
yeast-like growth

Human pathogens
Histoplasma capsulatum
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis
Sporothrix schenckii
Coccidioides immitis
Candida albicans

20–25°C
20–25°C
20–25°C
20–25°C
20–25°C
Low nutrient levels

37°C
37°C
37°C
37°C
37°C
High nutrient levels

Aeration

Anaerobiosis

Calcium
Some nitrogen sources

Low calcium

Saprotrophs
Mucor rouxii and some
other Zygomycota
Plant pathogens
Ophiostoma ulmi
Phialophora asteris
Ustilago maydis
Insect pathogens
Metarhizium anisopliae
Beauveria bassiana

Dikaryon

Flooding with water
Monokaryon

Solid media
Solid media

Submerged liquid culture
Submerged liquid culture

regulated dimorphism is a significant factor in human
pathogenesis. By contrast, the dimorphic saprotrophic
Mucor species (e.g. M. rouxii, M. racemosus) do not
respond to temperature changes but respond to oxygen levels. They grow as budding yeasts in anaerobic
conditions but as mycelia in the presence of even
low concentrations of oxygen. Ustilago maydis and
other plant-pathogenic smut fungi (Basidiomycota)
are yeast-like in their monokaryotic phase but hyphal
in the dikaryotic form (Chapter 2) so their transition
is governed genetically.
This range of responses shows that there is no common environmental cue that governs the M–Y transition, and instead we need to consider the underlying
control mechanisms (Gow 1994; Orlowski 1995). In this
regard, the studies on cell polarity of budding yeasts
and fission yeasts (see Fig. 4.12) are particularly important because several of the genes that regulate polarity
have been identified.

Control of the dimorphic switch
The usual approach to identifying the underlying
basis of dimorphism is to grow a fungus in conditions

that are, as nearly as possible, identical except for one
factor that changes the growth form. Then populations
of M and Y forms can be compared for differences
in biochemistry, physiology, or gene expression. Even
so, it is difficult to establish an obligatory, causal relationship between these differences and a change of cell
shape, because the altered environmental factor might
cause coincidental changes in biochemistry and gene
expression. In fact, most of the differences that have
been found to date are quantitative rather than qualitative. Some examples are given below.
Differences in wall composition
The wall components of M and Y forms sometimes
differ:
• in Mucor rouxii the Y form has more mannose than
the M form;
• in Paracoccidioides brasiliensis the Y form has α-1,3
glucan, whereas the M form has β-1,3 glucan;
• in Candida albicans the M form has more chitin
than the Y form;
• in Histoplasma capsulatum and Blastomyces dermatitidis
the M form has less chitin than the Y form.

DIFFERENTIATION AND DEVELOPMENT

Perhaps these differences are not surprising, given that
wall composition and wall bonding are intimately
linked with cell shape (Chapter 4). However, the lack
of consistency between the fungi suggests that wall
composition alone cannot provide a common basis for
understanding dimorphism.
Differences in cellular signaling and regulatory factors
Environmental signals often affect cellular behavior
through a signal transduction pathway leading to
altered metabolism or gene expression. The intracellular factors involved in this include calcium and
calcium-binding proteins, pH, cyclic AMP, and protein
phosphorylation mediated by protein kinases.
The complexing of calcium with the calciumbinding protein calmodulin was found to be essential
for mycelial growth of Ophiostoma ulmi (Dutch elm disease); otherwise, the fungus grew in a yeast form.
Consistent with this, the levels of calmodulin typically
are low (0.02–0.89 µg g−1 protein, for 14 species)
in fungi that always grow as yeasts, but tend to be
higher (2.0–6.5 µg g−1 protein) in mycelial fungi
(Muthukumar et al. 1987). An external supply of
calcium is required for apical growth of Neurospora
crassa and many other fungi, and calcium is needed in
larger amounts for initiation of the M form than for
budding in C. albicans. High intracellular levels of
cyclic AMP are associated with yeast growth in Mucor
species, C. albicans, H. capsulatum, B. dermatitidis, and
P. brasiliensis, whereas low cAMP levels are associated
with hyphal growth. The supply of cAMP externally can
also cause a dimorphic switch. Changes in cytosolic
pH have been associated with the M–Y transition of C.
albicans, and with polar outgrowths in some other cell
types. Thus, it seems clear that intracellular signaling
compounds are associated with phase transitions, but
they are the messengers and mediators not necessarily
the direct cause of changes in cell morphology.
Differences in gene expression
Differences in gene expression in the M and Y phases
can be detected by extracting messenger RNA and
comparing the mRNA banding patterns by gel electrophoresis. Or, preferably, by using the messenger
RNAs as templates to produce complementary DNA
(cDNA), which is more stable. An example of this
approach, though relating to the development of
fungal fruitbodies, is discussed later in this chapter. In
several cases it has been shown that a few polypeptides
are constantly associated with only the M or the Y
phase. But for dimorphic fungi there seems to be no
case in which a gene or gene product is obligatorily
involved in the generation of cell shape. Harold
(1990), in a review of the control of cell shape in

87

general, wrote: “. . . form does not appear to be hardwired into the genome in some explicit, recognizable
fashion. It seems to arise epigenetically . . . from the
chemical and physical processes of cellular physiology.”
In other words, there are no cell-shape genes, as such!
A potentially unifying theme – the vesicle
supply center
Given that a wide range of environmental factors can
influence cell shape, although in different ways in different organisms, Bartnicki-Garcia and his colleagues
(see Bartnicki-Garcia et al. 1995) have adopted a different approach, using computer simulations as a basis
for understanding the dimorphic switch and fungal
morphogenesis in general. The central feature of
the simulations is a postulated vesicle supply center
(VSC) such as a Spitzenkörper, envisaged as releasing
vesicles in all directions to “bombard” the cell membrane and synthesize the wall. As shown in Fig. 5.1,
it is then possible to simulate almost any change in
growth form by changing the spatial location and/or
the rate of movement of the VSC. If the VSC remains
fixed then the cell will expand uniformly as a sphere.
If the VSC moves rapidly and continuously forward it
will produce an elongated structure, like a hypha. If
it moves more slowly it will produce an ellipsoidal
cell; if it moves to one side of the hypha it will cause
bending, and so on. Thus, the key to morphogenesis
could be the rate of displacement of the VSC. Other
variations in shape and size could occur if the rate of
vesicle release from the VSC were altered relative to
its rate of movement. We saw in Chapters 3 and 4
that the apical vesicle cluster is intimately associated
with cytoskeletal components that are implicated in
cellular movements, so it is feasible that the rate of
displacement of a VSC could be altered by factors that
affect the cytoskeleton. Video-enhanced microscopy
of hyphal tips shows that the Spitzenkörper exhibits
random oscillations in growing hyphal tips, associated
with oscillations in the direction of growth, and the
Spitzenkörper also can divide to leave a “daughter” VSC
at a future branch point (Chapter 3).
We return to the subject of dimorphism in Chapter
16, when we discuss the human-pathogenic fungi.

Infection structures of plant pathogens
Fungal pathogens of plants can penetrate either
through an intact host surface or through natural
openings such as stomata, but in any case the invasion of a host is preceded by production of specialized
infection structures of various types (Fig. 5.2). In
this section we focus on plant-pathogenic fungi,
but equivalent structures are produced by fungal

88

CHAPTER 5

Fig. 5.1 Computer simulation of dimorphism in Candida albicans, based on the assumption that wall growth occurs by
bombardment of the wall by apical vesicles generated from a vesicle-supply center (VSC, black dot). The yeast (top
series) and hyphal shapes (lower series) were “grown” simultaneously at the same rate (10,000 vesicles per frame).
Each frame indicates a unit of time. The VSC was moved at different rates to generate the shapes. Between frames 4
and 5 the speed of VSC movement was increased fourfold to produce a cell outgrowth. Then it was returned to its
previous rate to produce the yeast bud, but continued at a fourfold rate to generate the hypha. (Based on BartnickiGarcia & Gierz 1993.)

pathogens of insects, discussed in Chapter 15. The
simplest pre-penetration structures are terminal swellings called appressoria (singular: appressorium) if
they occur on germ-tubes, or hyphopodia if they
develop on short lateral branches of hyphae. More complex infection cushions can be formed if a fungus
infects from a saprotrophic food base and needs to
overcome substantial host resistance. In these cases
the fungus penetrates from several points beneath the
infection cushion, helping to overwhelm the host
defenses.
All these pre-penetration structures serve to anchor
the fungus to the host surface, usually by secretion of
a mucilaginous matrix. Enzymes such as cutinase
sometimes are secreted into this matrix. The penetration process is achieved by a narrow hypha, termed
an infection peg, which develops beneath the prepenetration structure. There has been much debate
about the relative roles of enzymes and mechanical
forces in the infection process. Enzymes probably are
involved locally, to aid the passage of the penetration
peg through the wall, but they do not cause generalized
dissolution of host walls. Mechanical forces almost
certainly are involved, and have been documented in
detail for Magnaporthe grisea, the fungus that causes rice
blast disease. The penetration pegs of this fungus can

penetrate inert materials such as Mylar and even
Kevlar, the polymer used to manufacture bullet-proof
vests. A turgor pressure of about 8 MPa (mega-Pascals)
is generated in the appressorium of this fungus by the
conversion of stored glycogen into osmotically active
compounds before the penetration peg develops
(Howard et al. 1991). This force is channeled into the
narrow peg because the wall of the upper surface of the
appressorium is heavily melanized and resists deformation. By contrast, the underside of the appressorium
has a very thin wall, or perhaps none at all, but the
adhesive released by the appressorium is extremely
strong and forms an “O-ring” seal on the host surface
so that the force generated by the infection peg is not
dissipated.
Many appressoria and infection cushions develop
a melanized wall, and this can enable the fungus
to persist on the plant surface until the plant-host
resistance declines. Classic examples of this are found
in Colletotrichum spp. that cause leaf and fruit spots,
including C. musae which causes the small brown
flecks on the skins of ripe bananas (Figs 5.3, 5.4).These
fungi are weak parasites that infect fruit tissues only
after the fruit has ripened. But their splash-dispersed
spores can land on the host surface at any time and,
being thin-walled and hyaline (colorless), they cannot

Fig. 5.2 Examples of infection structures of plant-pathogenic fungi. (a) Diagrammatic representation of an appressorium
produced from a germinating spore. A narrow penetration peg develops from beneath the appressorium, to breach the
host cell wall, and then expands to produce an infection hypha. (b) An infection cushion composed of a tissue-like mass
of melanized hyphae, from which multiple penetration pegs invade the host plant. (c–e) Lobed hyphopodia of one of
the take-all fungi (Gaeumannomyces graminis var. graminis) growing on a cereal stem base. (c) Shows the structures in
surface view, whereas (d) is a hyphopodium in side view. The arrowhead in (d) is a papilla (a localized ingrowth of the
wall of the plant cell that the fungus is attempting to penetrate) signifying that the plant cell is still alive and resisting
invasion. (e) Lobed hyphopodia of G. graminis produced on the plastic base of a Petri dish. (f) The hypothesized mode
of development of lobed hyphopodia by repeated stoppage, swelling and branching of a hyphal tip.

90

(a)

CHAPTER 5

(b)

(c)

Fig. 5.3 (a–c) Bananas infected by Colletotrichum musae, photographed over a 10-day period after the fruit ripened.
Small brown flecks on the fruit surface (a) result from the activation of single-celled, melanized appressoria that remained
dormant for several months. The lesions progressively expand and coalesce, leading to softening and over-ripening of
the fruit tissues.

Fig. 5.4 Dense clusters of flask-shaped phialides (P) and
spores (S) of Colletotrichum musae scraped from the surface of a brown lesion on a ripe banana.

survive desiccation or exposure to UV irradiation. So,
the spores often germinate immediately and the germtube produces a melanized appressorium which persists
on the host surface until the onset of host senescence.
Some of the fungi that depend on melanized
infection structures can be controlled by antifungal
antibiotics that specifically block the pathway of
melanin biosynthesis. Both Magnaporthe grisea and
Rhizoctonia oryzae (which causes sheath blight of rice)
are examples of this, although the level of disease control in practice has been disappointing because these
pathogens can easily mutate and become resistant to
the antibiotics (Chapter 17).

The morphogenetic triggers for
differentiation of infection structures
Several physical and chemical factors have been
reported to influence the development of appressoria
and other infection structures, but the main require-

ment is contact with a surface of sufficient hardness.
In vivo this could be a leaf cuticle or an insect cuticle.
In vitro it can be simulated by various artificial membranes. Thus, contact-sensing seems to be one of the
key morphogenetic triggers.
Contact-sensing can be either topographical or
nontopographical. In nontopographical contactsensing the fungus merely responds to the presence
of a hard surface, and this is true of the air-borne
conidia of Blumeria (Erysiphe) graminis (powdery mildew
of cereals). These spores have minute warts on their
surface, and within a few minutes of landing on a leaf
or of being placed on a glass surface, the warts in contact with the surface secrete an adhesive containing
wall-degrading enzymes. This is a localized response
because the warts on the rest of the spore surface do
not secrete the adhesive. By contrast, topographical sensing is more specific, because the fungus responds to
ridges or grooves of particular heights (or depths) or
spacing on the host surface, and recognition of this
surface topography is used to locate the preferred
infection site. Examples of this are found in the germtubes produced from the uredospores of several cereal
rust fungi (Puccinia graminis, P. recondita, etc.). As
shown in Figs 5.5 and 5.6, the germ-tubes initially grow
at random on cereal leaves, but when they encounter
the first groove on the leaf surface (the junction of
two leaf epidermal cells) they orientate perpendicular
to this groove and then grow across the leaf surface.
This is thought to maximize the chances of locating
a stomatal pore, because the stomata are arranged
in staggered rows along the leaf. These fungi show
precisely the same behavior on inert grooved surfaces
such as leaf replicas made of polystyrene, confirming
that the response is to topographical signals and not
to chemical stimuli.
The “nose-down” orientation of the germ-tube tips
shown in Fig. 5.6 indicates that the Spitzenkörper is

DIFFERENTIATION AND DEVELOPMENT

91

Fig. 5.5 Scanning electron micrograph
showing directional growth of hyphae
arising from uredospores of Puccinia
graminis on an inert replica of the
lower surface of a wheat leaf. Note the
perpendicular alignment of the hyphae
to the contours of the leaf replica, and
the short lateral branches that arise in
the grooves. The hyphae arising from
two spores have located the “stomata”
on the leaf replica and produced
appressoria directly over the stomatal
pores. (Courtesy of N.D. Read; from
Read et al. 1992.)

Fig. 5.6 Scanning electron micrograph of two hyphae of Puccinia
graminis growing perpendicularly over
the ridges and grooves of a polystyrene
replica of a microfabricated silicon
wafer. The germ-tube tips have a
“nose-down” orientation which might
facilitate topographical sensing. Arrowheads indicate the dried remains of
mucilage that adhered the germ-tubes
to the surface. Although it is not clearly
shown in this image, the hyphae
also form projections that grow into
the grooves (arrows), equivalent to the
short lateral branches shown in Fig. 4.6.
(Courtesy of N.D. Read; from Read
et al. 1992.)

displaced towards the surface on which the fungus
is growing, facilitating contact-sensing. Consistent
with this, transmission electron micrographs show
that parallel arrays of microtubules are abundant just
beneath the plasma membrane of the lower surface
of the germ-tube, where they could be involved in
transducing the contact signals. All of this depends
on close adhesion to the surface, mediated by the
extracellular matrix, and in the rust Uromyces appendiculatus the digestion of this matrix by applying a protease, Pronase E, prevents the topographical signaling.
By preparing protoplasts of this fungus and using
the patch-clamp technique it has been shown that
the plasma membrane at the germ-tube tip contains
stretch-activated ion channels. So it is believed that
stretching of the membrane when the germ-tube tip

encounters a ridge or groove leads to an ion flux (possibly Ca2+ ) through these channels, that coordinates the
orientation response.
The alignment of a germ-tube is the first stage in an
intricate developmental sequence which ensures that
infection from uredospores of rust fungi always occurs
through the stomata of a leaf surface. This sequence is
shown in Fig. 5.7, for the bean rust fungus Uromyces
appendiculatus.
When a germ-tube locates a stomatal ridge, it stops
growing after about 4 minutes, and the apex swells
to form an appressorium. The original two nuclei in
the germ-tube migrate into the appressorium, then
divide, and a septum develops to isolate the appressorium from the germ-tube. About 120 minutes after
contacting the stoma, an infection peg grows into

92

CHAPTER 5

Fig. 5.7 Infection structures of the bean rust fungus,
Uromyces appendiculatus, penetrating a stomatal opening
from a germinating uredospore. A = appressorium; GC =
stomatal guard cell; GT = germ-tube; H = haustorium;
HMC = haustorial mother cell; IH = infection hypha; IP =
infection peg; SSC = substomatal cavity; U = uredospore;
V = substomatal vesicle. (Based on a drawing by H.C. Hoch
& R.C. Staples; see Hoch et al. 1987.)

the substomatal cavity and produces a substomatal
vesicle. Then an infection hypha develops from this to
produce a haustorium mother cell on one of the leaf
parenchyma cells. The infection process is completed
when the fungus penetrates the host cell to form a
haustorium, a specialized nutrient-absorbing structure (Chapter 14).
Studies of this sequence for U. appendiculatus have
shown that all the events up to, and including, the
development of the infection hypha are induced when
germ-tubes locate the “stomata” on nail varnish replicas
of leaf surfaces. These events can also be induced by

scratches on other artificial surfaces. But the formation of the haustorial mother cell usually depends on
chemical recognition of a leaf cell wall. Thus, most of
this developmental process is pre-programmed and it
requires only an initial topographical signal. To investigate this further, Hoch and his co-workers exploited
the techniques of microelectronics to make silicon
wafers with precisely etched ridges and grooves of
different heights and spacings. The wafers were then
used as templates to produce transparent polystyrene
replicas on which rust spores would germinate and
the responses to surface topography could be studied.
Initial studies with U. appendiculatus showed that
appressoria were induced in response to single ridges
or grooves of precise height (or depth), about 0.5 µm,
but little or no differentiation occurred in response
to ridges or grooves lower or higher than this (Hoch
et al. 1987). The inductive height corresponds to the
height of the lip on the guard cells of bean stomata,
which probably is the inductive signal in vivo.
In a further study, a total of 27 rust species were tested
on ridges of different heights (Allen et al. 1991), and
this enabled the species to be categorized into four
groups. Group 1 included U. appendiculatus and seven
other species, which produced appressoria in response
to a single ridge or groove of quite precisely defined
height; ridges or grooves higher or lower than this had
little effect (Fig. 5.8a). Group 2 included Puccinia menthae (mint rust) and three other species, which needed
a minimum ridge height (0.4 µm for P. menthae) for
production of appressoria but also responded to all ridge
heights above this, up to at least 2.25 µm (Fig. 5.8b).
Group 3 was represented by a single species, Phakopsora
pachyrhizi (soybean rust), which could form appressoria

Fig. 5.8 Production of appressoria by two rust fungi in response to single ridges of different heights on polystyrene
replicas of microfabricated silicon wafers. (a) Uromyces appendiculatus responded only to ridges of narrowly defined
height. (b) Puccinia menthae responded to all ridges above a minimum height. (Based on Allen et al. 1991.)

DIFFERENTIATION AND DEVELOPMENT

even on flat surfaces. Group 4 included many cereal
rusts (Puccinia graminis, P. recondita, etc.) that did not
respond to single ridges of any dimension. However,
the cereal rusts have since been shown to differentiate
in response to multiple, closely spaced ridges of optimal 2.0 µm height and 1.5 µm spacing. The finding
that either ridges or grooves elicit the same response
indicates a minimum requirement for two consecutive
right angles as the topographical signal. It is suggested
that the different requirements for ridge heights or
spacings by different rust species could reflect adapta-

93

tion to the stomatal topography of the host, consistent
with the high degree of host specificity of these
biotrophic parasites (Chapter 14). Further details of contact sensing and the possible underlying mechanisms
can be found in Read et al. (1992).

Sclerotia
Sclerotia (singular: sclerotium) are specialized hyphal
bodies involved in dormant survival (Fig. 5.9).

(a)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 5.9 Sclerotia: specialized multicellular dormant survival bodies. (a) Colony of Sclerotinia sclerotiorum that has
produced a ring of sclerotia on an agar plate. (b) Diagram of part of a cross-section of a sclerotium of Athelia rolfsii,
showing a crushed, melanized rind, a tissue-like cortex of thick-walled cells, and a central medulla of normal hyphae.
(c) Scanning electron micrograph of a mature sclerotium of the mycorrhizal fungus Paxillus involutus. This sclerotium
developed from nutrients that were translocated along a mycelial cord (an aggregated mass of hyphae) shown at the
bottom of the image. (d) Scanning electron micrograph of a cut sclerotium of Cenococcum geophilum (a mycorrhizal
fungus), showing the internal zonation of the tissues. ((c,d) Courtesy of F.M. Fox; see Fox 1986.)

94

CHAPTER 5

Fig. 5.10 Conservation of mycelial carbon
(glucose equivalents) and nitrogen (glycine
equivalents) into newly formed sclerotia
of Athelia rolfsii, 4 days after mycelial mats
were transferred to starvation conditions.
The values shown are percentages of the
original carbohydrate or nitrogen in the
mycelial mats that became incorporated
into sclerotia or that were lost by respiration or by leakage into the glass beads on
which the mycelial mats were incubated.
(From Christias & Lockwood 1973.)

They are formed by relatively few fungi – mainly
Basidiomycota. At their most complex they can be up
to 1 cm diameter, with clearly defined internal zonation. Sclerotia of this type are produced by omnivorous
plant pathogens such as Athelia (Sclerotium) rolfsii and
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, by the ergot fungus Claviceps
purpurea, and by some mycorrhizal fungi such as
Cenococcum geophilum and Paxillus involutus (although
the sclerotia of these mycorrhizal fungi are quite
small). Some other fungi produce microsclerotia less
than 100 µm diameter; these are merely clusters of
melanized chlamydospore-like cells – for example, in
the plant pathogen Verticillium dahliae. Between these
extremes lie a range of types, such as the spherical or
crust-like sclerotia of Rhizoctonia solani (sexual stage:
Thanatephorus cucumeris) commonly seen as brown,
scurfy patches on the surface of potato tubers.
All sclerotia develop initially by repeated, localized
hyphal branching, followed by adhesion of the
hyphae and anastomosis of the branches. As the sclerotial initials develop and mature, the outer hyphae
can be crushed to form a sheath, while the interior of
the sclerotium differentiates into a tissue-like cortex of
thick-walled, melanized cells, and a central medulla
consisting of hyphae with substantial nutrient storage
reserves of glycogen, lipids, or trehalose (Chapter 7).
Sclerotia can survive for considerable periods, sometimes
years, in soil. They germinate in suitable conditions,
either by producing hyphae (the myceliogenic sclerotia
of A. rolfsii, Cenococcum, R. solani, etc.) or by producing a sexual fruiting body (the carpogenic sclerotia of
Claviceps and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum).
Nutrient depletion is one of the most important
triggers for sclerotial development. In these conditions,
sclerotia develop rapidly from pre-existing mycelia or
from sclerotial initials laid down at an earlier time,
and a large proportion of the mycelial reserves of the
fungal colony are remobilized and conserved in the
developing sclerotia. Christias & Lockwood (1973)
demonstrated this by growing four sclerotium-forming

fungi in potato-dextrose broth, collecting the mycelial
mats before they had produced sclerotial initials, then
washing the mats and placing them either on the
surface of normal, unsterile soil or on sterile glass
beads through which water was percolated continuously
to impose a nutrient-stress equivalent to that in soil
(Chapter 10). In all cases the mycelia responded by
initiating sclerotia within 24 hours, and the sclerotia
had matured by 4 days. When these sclerotia were
harvested and analyzed for nutrient content, they
contained up to 58% of the original carbohydrate in
the mycelia and up to 78% of the original nitrogen.
An example is shown in Fig. 5.10, for A. rolfsii on
leached glass beads. Such high levels of carbohydrate
conservation could only be explained if some of the
wall polymers of the fungal hyphae are broken down
and the products are remobilized into the developing
sclerotia. As we shall see later, wall polymers can be
degraded by controlled lysis and used as nutrient
reserves to support differentiation of many types of
structure, including the “fruiting bodies” of mushrooms and toadstools.

Nutrient-translocating organs
All fungi translocate nutrients in their hyphae, but some
fungi produce conspicuous differentiated organs for
bulk transport of nutrients across nutrient-free environments. Depending on their structure and mode of
development, these translocating organs are termed
mycelial cords or rhizomorphs. They are quite common among wood-rotting fungi, and also among the
ectomycorrhizal fungi of tree roots, where carbohydrates
are transported from the roots to the mycelium in
soil, and mineral nutrients and water are translocated
back towards the roots. Mycelial cords are also found
at the bases of the larger mushrooms and toadstools,
serving to channel nutrients for fruitbody development (Fig. 5.11).

DIFFERENTIATION AND DEVELOPMENT

Fig. 5.11 Fruitbodies and mycelial cords of a puffball
(Lycoperdon sp.) growing on decayed wood.

Mycelial cords
Mycelial cords have been studied most intensively in
Serpula lacrymans (Basidiomycota) which causes dry-rot
of timbers in buildings (Chapter 7). Once this fungus
is established in the timbers, it can spread several
meters beneath plaster or brickwork to initiate new sites
of decay. It spreads across non-nutritive surfaces as
fans of hyphae, which draw nutrients forwards from
an established site of decay. The hyphae differentiate
into mycelial cords behind the colony margin.
The early stage of differentiation of mycelial cords
occurs when branches emerge from the main hyphae
and, instead of radiating, they branch immediately
to form a T-shape and these branches grow backwards
and forwards close to the parent hypha. The branches
produce further branches that repeat this process, so
the cord becomes progressively thicker, with many
parallel hyphae. Consolidation occurs by intertwining
and anastomosis of the branch hyphae and by secretion of an extracellular matrix which cements them
together. Some of the main hyphae then develop into
wide, thick-walled vessel hyphae with no living cytoplasm, while some of the narrower hyphae develop into
fiber hyphae with thick walls and almost no lumen.
Interspersed with these types of hyphae are normal,
living hyphae rich in cytoplasmic contents. The cords
of other fungi, such as the mycorrhizal species Leccinum
scabrum (Fig. 5.12), do not have fibre hyphae but
otherwise show a similar pattern of development. In
mature hyphal cords there is evidence of a large
degree of degeneration of hyphal contents and of the
deposition of large amounts of cementing material
between the hyphae (Fig. 5.13).
The factors that control the development of mycelial
cords are poorly understood, but studies on S. lacrymans

95

Fig. 5.12 Scanning electron micrograph of a mycelial
cord of the mycorrhizal fungus Leccinum scabrum, broken
to show the internal distribution of hyphae. The wide,
central vessel hyphae (vh) are surrounded by narrower
sheathing hyphae (sh). The surface of the mycelial cord
is covered with extracellular matrix materials, and hyphae
(e.g. arrow) radiate into the soil to explore for nutrients.
(Courtesy of F.M. Fox; from Fox 1987.)

Fig. 5.13 Transmission electron micrograph of a section
of a mycelial cord of Leccinum scabrum, showing wide,
thick-walled, empty vessel hyphae (vh), thin-walled
sheathing hyphae (sh), and abundant intercellular matrix
material (m). Some hyphae (labeled d and also near the
top right) have been sectioned through dolipore septa.
(Courtesy of F.M. Fox; from Fox 1987.)
suggest that the availability of nitrogen is a key factor.
Cords were found to develop on media containing
inorganic nitrogen (e.g. nitrate) but not on media containing amino acids. Also, cords growing from a mineral
nutrient medium onto an organic nitrogen medium
gave rise to normal, diverging hyphal branches. So it
was suggested that cords develop when the parent
hyphae leak organic nitrogen in nitrogen-poor conditions, causing branch hyphae to grow close to the

96

CHAPTER 5

parent hyphae in the nitrogen-rich zone. Regulatory
control by nitrogen seems logical for wood-decay
fungi, because wood has a very low nitrogen content
and these fungi could have evolved special mechanisms
for conserving and remobilizing their organic nitrogen
(Chapter 11). This could apply also to the cords of
ectomycorrhizal fungi, because these fungi have a
significant role in degrading organic nitrogen in otherwise nitrogen-limiting soils (Chapter 13). In terms of
function, mycelial cords have been shown to translocate carbohydrates, organic nitrogen, and water over
considerable distances between sources and sinks of
these materials. The vessel hyphae seem to act like xylem
vessels of plants, transporting water by osmotically
driven mass flow (Chapter 7). The combination of their
thick walls, the extensive extrahyphal matrix and reinforcement by fiber hyphae could enable vessel hyphae
to withstand considerable hydrostatic pressure.

Rhizomorphs
Rhizomorphs serve similar functions to mycelial
cords but have a more clearly defined organization.
A notable example is the rhizomorph of Armillaria
mellea, a major root-rot pathogen of broad-leaved
trees. It spreads from tree to tree by growing as rhizomorphs through the soil, and it also spreads extensively
up the trunks of dead trees by forming thick, black
rhizomorphs beneath the bark. These rhizomorphs

(a)

resemble boot laces, hence the common name for this
fungus – the boot-lace fungus (Fig. 5.14).
As shown in Fig. 5.15, the rhizomorph has a specially
organized apex or growing point similar to a root tip,
with a tightly packed sheath of hyphae over the apex,
like a root cap. Behind the apex is a fringe of short
hyphal branches. The main part of the rhizomorph
has a fairly uniform thickness and is differentiated
into zones: an outer cortex of thick-walled melanized
cells in an extracellular matrix, a medulla of thinnerwalled, parallel hyphae, and a central channel where
the medulla has broken down, serving a role in
gaseous diffusion. Rhizomorphs branch by producing
new multicellular apices, either behind the tip or by
bifurcation of the tip.
Rhizomorphs extend much more rapidly than the
undifferentiated hyphae of A. mellea, and they can grow
for large distances through soil. However, they need
to be attached to a food base because their growth
depends on translocated nutrients, so one of the
traditional ways of preventing spread from tree to tree
is by trenching of the soil to sever the rhizomorphs.
Almost nothing is known about the developmental
triggers of rhizomorphs, except that ethanol and other
small alcohols can induce them; similarly, almost
nothing is known about their mode of development
because they originate deep within an established
colony in laboratory culture. However, the behavior of
rhizomorphs is of considerable interest, as shown
by the work of Smith & Griffin (1971) on Armillariella

(b)

Fig. 5.14 Armillaria mellea, “boot-lace fungus”, growing on a decaying tree trunk. (a) Typical fruiting bodies of Armillaria.
(b) Thick, black rhizomorphs that grow beneath the bark of dead trees.

DIFFERENTIATION AND DEVELOPMENT

97

Fig. 5.15 Diagram of a rhizomorph of
Armillariella.

elegans (related to A. mellea). In this fungus, the rhizomorph apex will only grow if it remains hyaline, and
this means that the partial pressure of oxygen at the
surface of the apex must be 0.03 or less (compared with
about 0.21 in air). Above this level, the apex rapidly
becomes melanized, stopping its growth. Yet growth of
the apex is strongly oxygen-dependent, and the fungus seems to resolve this dilemma by a combination
of factors. A high respiration rate is maintained at the
apex, supported partly by diffusion of oxygen along the
central channel, while the surface of the apex is covered by a water film which limits the rate of oxygen
diffusion: at 20°C, oxygen diffuses about 10,000 times
more slowly through water than through air. The
dependence on a water film ensures that rhizomorphs
grow naturally at a specific depth in soil, depending
on the soil type and the climate. If a tip grows too
close to the soil surface then the width of the water
film is reduced and oxygen diffuses to the tip more
rapidly, causing melanization. These tips near to the
soil surface then break down to produce “breathing
pores” connected to the central channel. Conversely,
if the apex grows too deeply into moist soil then the
water film increases and the rate of growth becomes
oxygen-limited. Thus, the peculiar organization of a
rhizomorph helps to regulate growth to specific zones
in the soil, and these zones are where tree roots occur,
maximizing the opportunities for infection.

Asexual reproduction
The enormous diversity of asexual spores of fungi is
discussed in Chapter 10. Here we focus on the developmental processes leading to spore formation, and
in this respect there are two fundamentally different
patterns. Sporangiospores are formed by cleavage of
the protoplasm within a multinucleate sporangium
(Chytridiomycota, Oomycota, and Zygomycota).
Conidia develop directly from hyphae or special
hyphal cells (Ascomycota, mitosporic fungi, and some
Basidiomycota) but never within a sporangium.

Sporangiospores
Sporangiospores are usually formed within a thinwalled sporangium, like the well-known sporangia
of Mucor and other Zygomycota (Fig. 5.16). Within
a sporangium the nuclei undergo repeated mitotic
divisions, then the cytoplasm is cleaved around the
individual nuclei by the alignment and fusion of
membranes. This is followed by production of a wall
around each of the spores in the Zygomycota, or by
the development of flagella in the wall-less spores of
Chytridiomycota and Oomycota. Finally, the spores
are released by controlled lysis of all or part of the
sporangium wall.
The process of cytoplasmic cleavage to produce
sporangiospores seems to occur in several ways.
In Gilbertella persicaria (Zygomycota; Fig. 5.16) and
Phytophthora cinnamomi (Oomycota) a large number of
cleavage vesicles are produced and these migrate
around the nuclei so that they are aligned; then they
fuse with one another so that their membranes
become the plasma membranes of the spores. However, in Saprolegnia and Achlya (Oomycota) a large
central vacuole develops in the sporangium and forms
radiating arms between the nuclei, then the arms
fuse with the plasma membrane of the sporangium
to delimit the spores. The cytoskeleton is intimately
involved in these processes, as Heath & Harold (1992)
showed by the use of an actin-specific fluorescent
stain (phalloidin conjugated to rhodamine). The
cleavage planes in these sporangia of Saprolegnia and
Achlya were associated with sheet-like arrays of actin
which only appeared at the beginning of cleavage and
disappeared when cleavage was complete.
In a study of cleavage in the zoosporic fungus
Phytophthora cinnamomi (Hyde et al. 1991) the flagellar
axonemes (microtubular shafts) were found to develop
in a different class of vesicle – the flagellar vacuoles near
each nucleus, rather than the normal cleavage vesicles.
Then the flagellar vacuoles fused with the cleavage vesicles so that the flagella were located on the outside of

98

(a)

CHAPTER 5

(b)

Fig. 5.16 (a) Sporangia of Mucor containing darkly pigmented spores. (b) Mid-cleavage stage in the sporangium of
Gilbertella persicaria (Zygomycota). Cleavage vesicles (CV) fuse and extend between the nuclei (N) to separate the
sporangium contents into uninucleate spores. ER = endoplasmic reticulum; L = lipid; M = mitochondrion. (Courtesy of
C.E. Bracker; from Bracker 1968.)
the spores and were surrounded by flagellar membranes.
This difference in origin of the flagellar membrane and
the plasma membrane that surrounds the rest of the
zoospore body could be significant for zoospore function, because there is evidence that different putative
chemoreceptors occur on the flagella compared with
on the body of a zoospore (Chapter 10).
The cleavage and release of zoospores of the
Oomycota is strongly influenced by environmental
factors; typically, the sporangia must be washed
to remove nutrients and then flooded with water to
induce the cleavage and release of zoospores. Most
members of the Oomycota have remained essentially
aquatic, producing zoospores from sporangia that
remain attached to the hyphae; but some of the
plant-pathogenic Phytophthora species and the related
downy mildew fungi have detachable, wind-dispersed
sporangia. In the case of Phytophthora infestans (potato
blight; Fig. 5.17) and P. erythroseptica (pink rot of
potatoes) these wind-dispersed sporangia will undergo
cleavage and release their zoospores when incubated
in water at a temperature of 12° or lower, but at higher
temperatures (around 20°) the detached sporangia
exhibit “direct” germination by producing a hypha.
This temperature-regulated development seems to
be functionally significant. In Britain and other cool
regions, zoospores are thought to be the main infect-

ive agents of P. infestans because the sporangia are produced, dispersed and land on potato leaves early in the
growing season when the cool, wet conditions would
favor zoospore production. But “direct” germination
of sporangia (by hyphal outgrowth) might be more
important for infection of the tubers later in the
growing season when the temperatures are warmer.
Some of the downy mildew pathogens such as
Pseudoperonospora humuli on hops and Plasmopara
viticola on grapevine typically produce zoospores for
infection through the host stomata. However, some
other downy mildew pathogens (Bremia lactucae on lettuce, Peronospora parasitica on cruciferous hosts) have
sporangia that usually or always germinate by hyphae,
which then invade through the host epidermal walls.
Several Oomycota are sensitive to the antibacterial
agent streptomycin. At high concentrations this
compound is toxic, but at sublethal concentrations
it interferes with zoospore cleavage, causing the sporangium contents to be released as a multinucleate
mass with several flagella and incapable of coordinated swimming. For this reason, streptomycin was used
at one time to control Pseudoperonospora humuli (hop
downy mildew), although now it has been replaced
by conventional fungicides (Chapter 17). The mode
of action of streptomycin on sporangia is unclear,
but it does not necessarily involve the inhibition of

DIFFERENTIATION AND DEVELOPMENT

99

(a)

(b)
Fig. 5.17 (a,b) Detached sporangia of Phytophthora infestans, incubated at 12°C. The sporangial contents cleave to
produce zoospores, then the apical papillum of the sporangium breaks down and the zoospores are released by
squeezing through the narrow opening.

protein synthesis on 70S ribosomes, as occurs in
bacteria. Griffin & Coley-Smith (1975) investigated this
by adding radiolabeled streptomycin to P. humuli. Up
to 95% of the label remained on or near the cell
surface and could not be removed with water, but it
was readily displaced by calcium ions. Consistent
with this, streptomycin acts like a divalent cation in
solution, so it might interfere with calcium-mediated
processes by competing for calcium-binding sites on
or near the cell surface.

Conidia
Conidia are formed in a variety of ways (see Fig. 2.12;
Fig. 5.18) but always “externally” on a hypha or a conidiophore rather than by cytoplasmic cleavage within
a sporangium. For example, conidia can be produced
by the swelling of a hyphal tip followed by septation
(Thermomyces lanuginosus; Fig. 5.18), by a sequential
budding process (the “monilinia” stage of Sclerotinia
fructingena; Fig. 5.18), by hyphal fragmentation, or by
successive extrusion from flask-shaped cells (phialides)
leading to chains of spores (Penicillium expansum, Fig.

5.18). In a few fungi the conidia develop on or in more
complex structures such as a coremium (an aggregated
mass of conidiophores; Fig. 5.18) or within a flaskshaped pycnidium, or on a pad of tissue (an acervulus
– for example, Colletotrichum musae; Fig. 5.4). These
developmental (ontogenic) patterns have been studied
intensively, at least partly in an attempt to find natural relationships and thus a natural approach to the
classification of the mitosporic fungi. Details can be
found in Cole & Samson (1979).
Although the patterns of conidium development
are diverse, a basic distinction can be made between
blastic conidia which are formed by a budding or
swelling process and then become separated from the
parent cell, and thallic conidia which are formed
essentially by a fragmentation process.
Neurospora crassa can be used as an example of
blastic conidial development. This fungus sporulates by
producing aerial hyphae (conidiophores) that grow for
some distance away from the substrate then swell at
their tips. The tip of the swelling produces a broad, budlike outgrowth which swells and repeats this process,
so that a branched chain of proconidia is formed,
resembling the Monilinia stage of Sclerotinia fructigena

100

(a)

CHAPTER 5

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 5.18 Some examples of conidial development. (a) Single conidia of Thermomyces lanuginosus, produced at the
ends of short hyphal branches. (b) Branched chains of conidia of Monilinia (the asexual stage of Sclerotinia fructigena)
produced by a repeating budding-like process before the spores separate by the development of septa. (c) Penicillium
expansum conidiophores with phialides that produce chains of spores. (d) Coremia of Ophiostoma ulmi; the conidiophores are aggregated to form stalk-like structures that produce masses of spores at their tips (but most of the spores
have been dislodged during preparation of this specimen).

in Fig. 5.18. The proconidia become conidia when
septa develop to separate them, starting at the base
of the chain. At this stage the spores of Neurospora
develop their characteristic pink color. Each conidium
of Neurospora contains several nuclei because it has
developed by the budding of a multinucleate hyphal
(conidiophore) tip. However, in some other types of
blastic development the conidia are characteristically
uninucleate. For example, in Penicillium, Aspergillus, and

Trichoderma the conidiophore produces flask-shaped
phialides (Fig. 2.33) each of which is uninucleate. The
phialide extrudes a spore from its tip, and during this
process the nucleus divides so that one daughter
nucleus enters the developing spore while the other
nucleus remains in the phialide to repeat this process.
Essentially the same pattern occurs in Fusarium species
(Fig. 9.5) which produce a succession of spores from the
phialides. But in this case the single nucleus that enters

DIFFERENTIATION AND DEVELOPMENT

the spore often undergoes repeated divisions, while the
spore elongates into a banana shape; the resulting
macroconidia of Fusarium have several septa and one
nucleus in each spore compartment. These different
sporulation strategies have important consequences in
fungal genetics, which are discussed in Chapter 9.
Dipodascus geotrichum (Fig. 2.33) is a good example
of thallic conidial development. In this case a hyphal
branch grows to some length, then stops and develops
multiple septa which separate it into short compartments. The septal pores are then plugged and the
middle zone of each septum is enzymatically degraded
to separate the spores.

Regulation and control of conidiation
Asexual sporulation occurs during normal colony
growth, but in zones behind the extending colony
margin or in the aerial environment rather than on the
substrate. The factors that control conidial development are difficult to study in these conditions because
development is not synchronized over the whole
colony. Ng et al. (1973) overcame this problem by
growing Aspergillus niger in a chemostat so that the
hyphae grew synchronously, then the culture conditions could be adjusted to trigger the developmental
stages. Conidiophores were found to be produced only
in nitrogen-limited growth conditions but when the
medium was carbon-rich. Apparently, this is the trigger that switches this fungus from vegetative growth
to sporulation. However, the conidiophores did not
develop further unless the medium was changed to
contain nitrogen and a TCA cycle intermediate such
as citrate. Then the tips of the conidiophores swelled
into vesicles (large swollen heads – see Fig. 2.33)
which produced phialides. The production of conidia
from the phialides required yet another change – to a

Fig. 5.19 Diagrammatic representation of stages in the
development of conidia of Botrytis cinerea. (a) After
exposure to near-ultraviolet (NUV) irradiation the
aerial hyphae are transformed into branched conidiophores which swell at the tips to form small globose
vesicles. Conidia are formed on minute projections
from these vesicles, so the mature clusters resemble
bunches of grapes – see Fig. 5.20. (b) A short exposure to blue light at different times after triggering
of development by NUV causes development to be
arrested. The fungus then switches back to a hyphal
growth form – for example, the swelling of the immature conidia stops and the fungus produces narrow
hyphal outgrowths from the immature conidia.
(Based on Suzuki et al. 1977.)

101

medium that contained both nitrogen and glucose. On
agar plates this whole developmental sequence occurs
in a zone of about 1–2 mm diameter, located a few
millimeters behind the colony margin. Presumably, there
is a succession of physiological changes in the hyphae
that co-ordinates the developmental sequence, but only
by growing the fungus in chemostat culture was it possible to show that each stage is differentially regulated.
An even more comprehensive study of sporulation
has been made with Emericella nidulans, where the
sequential activation of many sporulation-related
genes has been demonstrated (Adams 1995). The
details are complex, but essentially the genes are suggested to fall into three categories – those involved in
the switch from somatic growth to sporulation, those
that regulate the developmental stages of sporulation,
and those that govern secondary aspects such as spore
color.
Although many fungi such as Aspergillus and
Penicillium can sporulate in darkness, some require a
light trigger (Schwerdtfeger & Linden 2003). The most
common response is to near-ultraviolet irradiation
(NUV; 330–380 nm wavelength) which can induce
sporulation after a short (1 hour) exposure if the
colony is then kept in darkness. However, a subsequent
exposure to blue light can reverse the process because
the photoreceptor exists in alternating forms, one
responsive to NUV and one responsive to blue light.
Botrytis cinerea (Fig. 5.20), which causes gray mould
disease of strawberries and other soft fruits, behaves
in this way. It never becomes wholly committed to
sporulation, as Suzuki et al. (1977) demonstrated by
subjecting the colonies to 1-hour exposures of NUV
and blue light in different sequences. As shown in
Fig. 5.19, at almost any stage during sporulation an
exposure to blue light caused the fungus to form
hyphal outgrowths instead of continuing the developmental pathway.

102

CHAPTER 5

(a)

(b)

Fig. 5.20 Botrytis cinerea (sexual stage: Botryotinia fuckeliana), which commonly causes “grey mould” of soft fruits. (a)
Low-power view of the characteristic branching conidiophores which bear clusters of grey conidia at their tips. (b) Closeup view showing the bulbous tips of the conidiophore branches, bearing immature conidia.

Roles of hydrophobins in fungal
differentiation
Hydrophobins are a class of small secreted proteins
that were discovered relatively recently and that
seem to be unique to fungi. These proteins were discovered by chance, when Wessels and his colleagues
were investigating the transcriptome (messenger RNA
profiles) of monokaryotic and dikaryotic strains of
a small bracket-producing fungus, Schizophyllum commune. Among the most abundantly expressed genes
were a group that encoded hydrophobic proteins.
Because of their strongly hydrophobic nature, these
proteins cannot be detected by conventional protein
purification. Subsequent studies have revealed similar
proteins in a wide range of fungi and have shown that
they have important roles in fungal differentiation.

All the hydrophobins studied to date have similar
structure and properties. They consist of about 100
amino acids, including eight cysteine residues that
occur in a specific pattern so that the protein can
fold to produce a highly hydrophobic domain. The
hydrophobins are soluble in water, but at an interface with air they self-assemble into a film with a
hydrophobic face and a hydrophilic face. As shown in
Fig. 5.21, this is thought to happen when a hypha forms
an aerial branch so that the aerial portion is coated
by a hydrophobic film. The potential significance for
differentiation is that hyphae with hydrophobic surfaces might interact with one another in specific ways,
as discussed later. For conidial fungi the most obvious
significance is that hydrophobins could affect the
surface properties and thus the functions of the
spores (Chapter 10). The conidia of Emericella nidulans,

Fig. 5.21 Release of hydrophobin proteins
from hyphae of Schizophyllum commune
submerged in a culture medium (left), and
spontaneous polymerization of hydrophobins into water-repellent films (right)
when the hyphae emerge into an aerial
environment. (Based on a diagram in
Wessels 1996.)

DIFFERENTIATION AND DEVELOPMENT

A. fumigatus, and N. crassa are seen to have a pattern
of hydrophobic rodlets on their surface, but the rodlets
are absent when the hydrophobin genes are inactivated
by targeted gene disruption. Identical rodlets are
formed when solutions of pure hydrophobins are
allowed to dry. Talbot (2001) recently reviewed the structure and roles of hydrophobins. We return briefly to
this subject later in this chapter.

Sexual development
Sexual reproduction in all organisms involves three
fundamental events: the fusion of two haploid cells
(plasmogamy) so that their nuclei are in a common
cytoplasm; nuclear fusion (karyogamy) to form a
diploid; and meiosis to produce recombinant haploid
nuclei. Depending on the fungus, these events can
occur in close succession or separated in time; also, they
occur at different stages of the life cycle according
to whether the fungus is normally haploid or diploid.
These points were outlined in Chapter 2 (see Figs 2.1,
2.8, 2.14, 2.15, 2.16).
Two further points must be made. First, some
fungi are homothallic (self-fertile) but many are heterothallic (outcrossing). in which case sexual reproduction is governed by mating-type (compatibility)
genes. Often there are two mating types, governed by
a single gene locus (bipolar compatibility); in these
cases the alternative genes are not an allelic pair but
usually are quite different from one another so they
are called idiomorphs. Some Basidiomycota have two
mating-type loci (tetrapolar compatibility) with multiple idiomorphs at each locus. In these cases a successful
mating occurs between two fungal strains that differ
from one another at each gene locus. In most fungi
the mating-type genes are regulatory genes, producing
protein products that bind to DNA and control the
expression of several other genes.
The second point is that the sexual spores of many
fungi function as dormant spores (e.g. zygospores,
oospores, ascospores, and some basidiospores). So sexual reproduction serves an important role in survival,
and the sexual spores are typically produced at the onset
of unfavorable conditions for growth. Fungi that do not
undergo regular sexual reproduction sometimes produce
alternative survival structures such as chlamydospores,
sclerotia, or melanized hyphae. Other fungi adopt
different strategies. For example, Pythium oligandrum
produces sexual spores by parthenogenesis, and
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and a few other Ascomycota
undergo regular mating-type switching to ensure
that there will always be a mixture of the two mating
types (a or α) in a population. In this case, every time
that an a cell buds, the parent cell switches to α while
the daughter cell remains a. In fact, wild populations

103

of S. cerevisiae are always diploid because the a and
α cells fuse and undergo karyogamy, then the diploid
cell buds to form further diploids which can respond
rapidly to unfavorable conditions by undergoing
meiosis and producing ascospores. For this reason, all
the laboratory strains used by yeast geneticists have
been mutated so that they do not undergo mating-type
switching, and this enables the sexual crosses to be
controlled experimentally.
Against this background, the rest of this chapter
will focus on two topics: the roles of the mating-type
genes, especially in hormonal regulation of mating
(reviewed by Gooday & Adams 1993), and the development of fruiting bodies of Basidiomycota because
these are the most advanced differentiated structures
in the fungal kingdom.

Mating and hormonal control
Chytridiomycota
Most of the information on the control of sexual
reproduction in Chytridiomycota has come from studies on Allomyces spp. (see Fig. 2.1 for the life cycle).
These fungi are homothallic (self-fertile), but they
produce motile male and female gametes (sex cells)
from different gametangia. The female gametes are
larger, hyaline and they release a pheromone, sirenin
(Fig. 5.22), to attract the male gametes. The male
gametes are small, and orange colored due to the presence of a carotenoid pigment. Sirenin is a powerful
attractant, active at concentrations as low as 10−10 M,
but optimally at 10−6 M. Compounds that attract cells
at these concentrations can be assumed to alter the
swimming pattern by binding to a surface-located
receptor (Chapter 10). Although there is no information on this possible receptor, the male gametes are
known rapidly to inactivate sirenin, which could aid
their movement up a concentration gradient. It is
interesting that both sirenin (from the female gametes)
and the carotenoid pigment of the male gametes are
produced from the same precursor isoprene units
[CH2=C(CH3)−CH=CH2] (see Fig. 7.14). So this is an
example where cells of the same genetic make-up
show different biochemical properties because they have
been produced in different gametangia, separated by a
complete cross wall.

Oomycota
The Oomycota can be homothallic (e.g. most Pythium
species) or heterothallic with two mating types. But in
all cases a single colony produces both the “male” and
“female” sex organs (antheridia and oogonia – see Fig.
2.34), so the mating-type genes govern compatibility,

104

CHAPTER 5

Sirenin
(Allomyces)
CH3

Antheridiol
(Achlya)
O
CH2OH
CH2OH

OH

O
O

OH
Oogoniol
(Achlya)

O
OCCH2OH

O
HO

Fig. 5.22 Three pheromones that regulate
sexual reproduction in zoosporic organisms.
Sirenin is released by female gametes of
Allomyces spp. Antheridiol and oogoniols
regulate sexual attraction and mating in
Achlya spp. (Oomycota) and possibly in other
Oomycota.

OH
HO

not the development of the sex organs themselves. In
a few cases, notably in Achlya, a single colony can show
“relative sexuality” – it will behave as a male (fertilizing the oogonium from its antheridium) or “female”
depending on the strain with which it is paired.
The hormonal control of mating has been studied
intensively in Achlya. The hormones are steroids
(Fig. 5.22) derived from the isoprenoid pathway, like
sirenin discussed above. They were discovered by
growing “strong female” and “strong male” strains in
separate dishes of water, then passing the water over
colonies of the opposite strain. The hyphae of the female
produce the hormone antheridiol, which causes the
male strain to increase its rate of cellulase enzyme production and to form many hyphal branches (the
antheridial branches – see Fig. 2.34). Once it has been
triggered by antheridiol, the male strain produces
other steroid hormones, termed oogoniols, which
trigger the development of oogonia (sex organs) in the
female strain. In normal conditions the antheridial
hyphae then grow towards the oogonia, clasp onto
them, and produce fertilization tubes to transfer the
“male” nuclei into the oogonium (see Fig. 2.34). Similar
hormonal systems might occur in other Oomycota
such as Pythium and Phytophthora spp., but they have
not been characterized. A notable feature of Pythium
and Phytophthora is that they cannot synthesize sterols

from nonsterol precursors, and often do not need
sterols for somatic growth, but they always require trace
amounts of sterols for both sexual reproduction and
asexual reproduction. They would be able to obtain
them from a plant host or other natural sources.
Zygomycota
The Zygomycota can be homothallic, or heterothallic
with two mating types (termed “plus” and “minus”).
One of the roles of the mating-type genes is to regulate the production of hormone precursors (prohormones) from β-carotene, which is another product
of the isoprenoid pathway already mentioned. This
hormonal system is shared by many members of
the subgroup Mucorales because, for example, a plus
strain of Mucor can elicit a sexual response from a minus
strain of Rhizopus, even though the development of a
hybrid is blocked at a later stage due to incompatibility.
As shown in Fig. 5.23, the prohormones of the plus
and minus strains are similar molecules but they
differ slightly, owing to the different enzymes of the
two strains. The prohormones are volatile compounds
which diffuse towards the opposite mating type; then
they are absorbed and converted to active hormones,
the trisporic acids, by the complementary enzymes
of the opposite strain. Initially, only low levels of

DIFFERENTIATION AND DEVELOPMENT

105

β-Carotene
OH
O

CH2OH
+ Mating type
prohormone

– Mating type
prohormone
O

OH
O

COOH

O

CH2OH

Converted
via + mating type

Converted
via – mating type

O
O

COOH
Trisporic acid

Sporangia

Fig. 5.23 The trisporic acid hormonal system
of Zygomycota. See text for details.

+ strain

the prohormones are produced by each strain, but
trisporic acids cause gene derepression so that increasing levels of prohormones are produced. Trisporic
acids produced by this mutual escalation cause the
production of zygophores (aerial sexual branches)
which grow towards one another and lead to sexual
fusion (see Fig. 2.8).
Ascomycota
The Ascomycota usually have two mating types,
termed A and a, but a and α in Saccharomyces. These

Zygophores

Sporangia

– strain

mating-type genes are regulatory elements, controlling
the activities of other genes, but only the system in
yeasts has been well characterized. One of the chromosomes (III) of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has a
MAT gene locus, which is flanked by two other loci
termed MATa and MATα. Haploid cells will normally
behave as α mating type, but can change to a mating
type when the information at the MATa locus is
copied and transferred into the MAT locus (the expression of the MATα. locus is then shut down). This is a
natural transposition event, which causes the switching of mating type every time a cell produces a bud.

106

CHAPTER 5

The MAT locus is a regulatory locus, governing the
expression of several genes. These include:
• The genes responsible for producing hormones
termed a-factor and α-factor, consisting of 12 and
13 amino acids respectively:
• a-Factor: NH2-Trp-His-Trp-Leu-Gln-Leu-Lys-ProGly-Gln-Pro-Met-Tyr-COOH;
• α-Factor: NH2-Tyr-Ile-Ile-Lys-Gly-Val-Phe-Trp-AspPro-Ala-Cys(S-farnesyl)-COOCH3.
• The genes that code for hormone receptors on the
cell surface.
• The genes that code for cell surface agglutinins.
The α strains produce α-factor constitutively and it
diffuses to a cells where it is recognized by a specific
receptor. This receptor binding causes the growth of a
cells to be arrested at “start” during G1 of the cell cycle
– the only stage at which they are competent to mate
(Chapter 4). The a strain then produces a-factor which
diffuses to the α strain where it is, again, recognized
by a specific receptor. Receptor binding in both cases
leads to other changes in the cells: they produce short
outgrowths which function as conjugation tubes, and
the surfaces of these are covered by a strain-specific
glycoprotein, so that when an a cell and an α cell make
contact they adhere tightly by their complementary
agglutinins. The conjugation tubes then fuse, and the
two nuclei fuse to form a diploid cell. At this stage the
cell can go on to produce a diploid budding colony
or it can undergo meiosis, depending on whether
the environmental conditions are suitable for growth.
An essentially similar hormone and receptor system
to this is found in other yeasts such as Pichia and
Hansenula spp, and in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
The sex pheromones of several mycelial Ascomycota
and Basidiomycota have now been characterized.
They are peptides, such as the α-factor of S. cerevisiae,
or more often lipopeptides such as the a-factor of S.
cerevisiae. There is considerable variation in the amino
acid substitutions of these pheromones, but their basic
structures are similar. For example, the jelly fungus
Tremella mesenterica (Basidiomycota; see Fig. 2.7) produces a pheromone termed tremerogen. This is a
highly lipophilic molecule with the structure shown
below. It closely resembles the a-factor of S. cerevisiae:
Tremerogen A-10: NH2-Glu-His-Asp-Pro-Ser-Ala-ProGly-Asn-Gly-Tyr-Cys(S-farnesyl)-COOCH3
The tetrapolar compatibility system in Basidiomycota
Most Basidiomycota are heterothallic, with matingtype genes at either one locus or two loci, termed A
and B. There are multiple idiomorphs at each locus,

Table 5.2 Roles of mating-type genes in basidiomycota.
Pairing of strains with

Events observed

Different A, different B
idiomorphs (dikaryon)

1 Septal dissolution
2 Nuclear migration
3 Clamp branches arise
and fuse with hypha

Common A, different B
idiomorphs

1 Septa dissolve
2 Nuclei migrate

Common B, different A
idiomorphs

1 Septa remain intact
2 No nuclear migration
3 Clamp branches arise
but do not fuse

Common A, common B
idiomorphs

1 No septal dissolution
2 No nuclear migration
3 No clamp connections

and a successful mating will occur between any two
strains that differ from one another at each locus. This
greatly increases the chances of finding a mate, compared with fungi that have only two idiomorphs.
The basic mating behavior of Basidiomycota was
outlined in Chapter 2 (see Fig. 2.18). Strains derived
from haploid basidiospores are monokaryons and they
can fuse with other compatible monokaryons to form
a dikaryon. All subsequent growth involves the synchronous division of the two nuclei in each hyphal
compartment and their regular distribution as nuclear
pairs throughout the mycelium. In several members
of the group this regular arrangement is aided by the
production of clamp connections (see Fig. 2.20). Eventually, the dikaryotic colony will produce a fruitbody,
and nuclear fusion and meiosis occur in the basidia.
By experimentally pairing strains with the same A or
the same B ideomorph, it has been possible to deduce
the regulatory roles of the A and B loci (Casselton et al.
1995). As summarized in Table 5.2, pairings of fully
compatible strains (with different A and different B) lead
to reciprocal exchange of nuclei, because the dolipore
septa which normally prevent nuclear migration are
digested, and clamp branches are formed at each septum to fuse with the compartment behind. In pairings
of strains with the same A and same B (common A,
common B) there is no septal breakdown, no nuclear
migration, no dikaryotization, and no clamp connections. Pairings of strains with different A but common
B loci show nuclear pairing, synchronous division of the
nuclei and formation of clamp branches; but the dolipore
septa do not break down, and the clamp branches do
not fuse with the parent hypha. Pairings of strains with
different B but common A lead to septal dissolution
but none of the other events. Thus, the A locus (com-

DIFFERENTIATION AND DEVELOPMENT

mon B pairings) controls the pairing and synchronous
division of nuclei and also the formation of clamp
branches, whereas the B locus controls septal dissolution and the fusion of clamp branches. Septal dissolution coincides with a marked increase in the activity
of β-glucanase in the hyphae, indicating that the B
locus controls the derepression of glucanase genes.

Development of fruitbodies
The toadstools, brackets and other fruitbodies of
Basidiomycota are the largest and most complex
differentiated structures in the fungal kingdom. Their
development is correspondingly complex and still only
poorly understood. Here we consider one example
where a start has been made to dissect this process at
the biochemical and molecular level, and we end with
a discussion of commercial mushroom production
because of its economic importance.
Schizophyllum commune
Schizophyllum commune is ideally suited for laboratory
studies because it grows readily in agar culture and produces its small (about 1–2 cm) fan-shaped fruitbodies
in response to light. Actually, this trigger leads only
to the development of fruitbody primordia – compact
clusters of hyphae which are overarched by other
hyphae. Further development from the primordia
occurs when carbon nutrients are depleted from the
medium, and is then fuelled by carbon reserves within
the mycelium. Early in this process the mycelial
storage compounds such as glycogen are converted
to sugars, which are translocated to the developing
primordia. Then, as the sugar levels in the hyphae
decline, the hyphal walls begin to break down and the
breakdown products are translocated to the primordia.
The wall glucans seem to provide the major source of
sugars, because fruitbody development is associated
with a marked rise in glucanase activity in the mycelia.
We have already seen that synthesis of this enzyme
is derepressed by the B mating-type locus, but it is
still subject to catabolite repression by sugars; so its
generalized activity in the hyphae, as opposed to
its localized activity in degrading septa, depends on
depletion of the mycelial sugar reserves. The breakdown
of hyphal walls to recycle nutrients for differentiation
is, in fact, quite common in fungi. An example was
seen earlier in the production of sclerotia (Fig. 5.10).
The breakdown of wall glucans also fuels the developing ascocarps of Emericella nidulans.
Wessels and his colleagues (see Wessels 1992)
identified several differentiation-associated genes in
S. commune. In order to do this, they crossed and repeatedly back-crossed strains to generate monokaryons
that were essentially isogenic except for the mating-type

107

locus. Then the monokaryons, and the dikaryons
synthesized from them, were compared for their production of polypeptides and messenger RNAs when
grown in different conditions. Any differentiationspecific mRNAs in the dikaryon were confirmed by
making complementary DNA (cDNA) and testing
this for lack of hybridization to the mRNA from the
monokaryons. All these comparisons were made in
two sets of conditions: (i) for 2-day-old colonies, when
the monokaryons and dikaryons were growing as
mycelia with similar colony morphology, and (ii) for
4-day-old colonies grown in light, when the monokaryon had produced copious aerial hyphae but the
dikaryon had produced numerous small fruitbodies.
The following principal findings emerged from this
work.
• For the 2-day colonies, 20 or so proteins were found
only in the monokaryon and 20 or so only in the
dikaryon. Yet there was no detectable difference
in the bands of mRNA, suggesting that the same
mRNAs are transcribed but their products undergo
different post-translational modification in monokaryons and dikaryons.
• For the 4-day colonies, eight proteins were found only
in the monokaryon, and 37 only in the dikaryon.
Some of these 37 occurred only in the fruitbodies;
others were found in both the fruitbodies and the
mycelium of the dikaryon. These proteins included
some that were secreted into the growth medium.
• For the 4-day colonies, about 30 unique mRNAs
were found only in the dikaryon, whereas no unique
mRNA was found in the monokaryon. cDNA was
used as a probe to assess the levels of the “fruitingassociated mRNAs” during development. They were
scarce in young vegetative colonies of both strains,
and they remained scarce in the monokaryon, but
they increased in the dikaryon when this began to
fruit.
• Some of the secreted proteins were the cysteinerich hydrophobins, mentioned earlier; in fact, the
hydrophobins were first discovered in this work on
S. commune. The gene (SC3) for one of these hydrophobins was expressed by both the monokaryon
and dikaryon during the emergence of aerial hyphae;
this hydrophobin is now known to cover the
aerial hyphae and the hydrophobic hyphae on the
fruitbody surface, but the gene is not expressed by
hyphae that make up the main fruitbody tissue.
Three other hydrophobin genes (SC1, SC4, and
SC6 ) were highly expressed only in the dikaryon
and especially in the developing fruitbody tissues
(Wessels 1996). Hydrophobin genes have been
shown to contain a putative signal peptide sequence
at the N-terminus, a feature associated with secretion
from the hyphal tips. It is suggested that the specific
properties of different hydrophobins might affect

108

CHAPTER 5

the surface interactions of hyphae, contributing to
features such as the hydrophobicity of cells lining the
internal air spaces, to prevent water-soaking of the
fruitbody tissues.
Commercial mushrooms: the exploitation
of differentiation
Mushroom production is a substantial industry. The
major cultivated “white button” mushroom Agaricus
bisporus (or A. brunnescens) had an annual global
retail value of more than $US 10 billion in 1999. But
this species accounts for only about 40% of the total
production of cultivated mushrooms. Other important species include the oyster mushroom Pleurotus
ostreatus (about 20% of total production), the Shiitake
mushroom Lentinula edodes (about 10%), and Volvariella
volvacea (5% or more).
The commercial production process for A. bisporus is
described by Flegg (1985). A mixture of composted straw
and animal dung is pasteurized and placed in wooden
trays, then inoculated with a commercially supplied
“spawn” consisting of sterilized cereal grains permeated
with hyphae of A. bisporus. The spawn is allowed
to “run” for 10–14 days so that the fungus thoroughly
colonizes the compost. Then a thin casing layer of
pasteurized, moist peat and chalk is added to the
compost surface. Over the next 18–21 days the fungus
colonizes this casing layer by producing mycelial
cords, and fruitbodies are produced on these cords. The
cropping of fruitbodies is done over a 30- to 35-day
period, because the fungus produces “flushes” of fruitbodies at 7- to 10-day intervals.
In terms of differentiation there are several interesting features of this system. The casing layer is essential for a high fruitbody yield, and part of its role
involves the activities of pseudomonads which are
stimulated to grow in the casing layer by volatile
metabolites, including ethanol, released by A. bisporus.
In experimental conditions the role of the casing layer
can be replaced by using activated charcoal, suggesting that the fungus produces autoinhibitors of fruiting
which are removed by pseudomonads in the normal
mushroom-production process. The casing layer also
provides a non-nutritive environment in which the
fungus produces mycelial cords. As we saw earlier, these
translocating organs develop in nutrient-poor conditions
and they would be necessary for channeling large
amounts of nutrients to the developing fruitbodies. The
regular periodicity of fruiting is also of interest. In commercial conditions the crop must be harvested regularly
at the “button” stage to achieve this, and any delay
in harvesting until the fruitbodies have opened will
cause a corresponding delay in the next flush. Yet, most
of the fruitbody primordia are already present at the
time of the first flush, and mushrooms at the button

stage have already received all or nearly all of their
nutrients from the mycelium. So, the effect of delayed
picking must be to delay the release of other primordia
for further development. The mechanism of this is
not fully known, but the cellulase activity of the
mycelium in the compost increases markedly as
each flush of fruitbodies develops. It seems that the
expression of cellulase genes is closely linked to fruiting, presumably when the mycelial sugar reserves are
depleted (Chapter 6). Removal of the existing fruitbodies
might act as a signal for a further round of mycelial
activity, providing extra nutrients for the next batch
of fruitbodies.
A final point of interest concerns the mechanism of
fruitbody expansion from the button stage to the fully
expanded mushroom. This must involve the differential expansion of tissues, and studies on this have
been done mainly with a much simpler experimental
system – the expansion of stipes (stalks) of Coprinus spp.
In field conditions these “ink-cap” toadstools elongate
very rapidly from the button stage to the mature stage.
In laboratory conditions the initially short stipes can
be severed at both ends and incubated in humid conditions, when they will elongate to more than seven
times their original length within 24 hours. Most of
this increase occurs by cell expansion rather than cell
division, and it correlates with an increase in chitinase
activity, presumably for loosening of the existing
hyphal walls, and an increase in chitin synthase
activity for new wall synthesis. But, unlike the apical
growth of normal hyphae, new wall material is
inserted along the length of the existing hyphae in the
stipes. So, the wall extension is mainly by intercalary
growth. This form of growth is also found in other
rapidly extending structures, such as the sporangiophores of Phycomyces (Zygomycota) on herbivore dung
(Chapter 11). The rapid expansion of mushrooms
from the button stage depends on the intake of water
from the mycelium. This is probably driven by the
conversion of storage reserves into osmotically active
compounds (Chapter 7). Consistent with this, mushroom fruitbodies contain high levels of mannitol
which accounts for 25% or more of the dry weight,
compared with only 1.5–4.5% in the mycelia. Horgen
& Castle (2002) discuss several molecular approaches
for improving mushroom production. Moore et al.
(1985) and Moore (1998) discuss many aspects of the
developmental biology of Basidiomycota, and of fungal
morphogenesis in general.

Cited references
Adams, T.H. (1995) Asexual sporulation in higher fungi.
In: The Growing Fungus (Gow, N.A.R. & Gadd, G.M., eds),
pp. 367–382. Chapman & Hall, London.

DIFFERENTIATION AND DEVELOPMENT

Allen, E.A., Hazen, B.A., Hoch, H.C., et al. (1991)
Appressorium formation in response to topographical
signals in 27 rust species. Phytopathology 81, 323–331.
Bartnicki-Garcia, S., Bartnicki, D.D. & Gierz, G. (1995)
Determinants of fungal cell wall morphology: the
vesicle supply center. Canadian Journal of Botany 73,
S372–378.
Bartnicki-Garcia, S. & Gierz, G. (1993) Mathematical analysis of the cellular basis of dimorphism. In: Dimorphic
Fungi in Biology and Medicine (Van den Bossche, H.,
Odds, F.C. & Kerridge, D., eds), pp. 133–144. Plenum
Press, New York.
Bracker, C.E. (1968) The ultrastructure and development
of sporangia in Gilbertella persicaria. Mycologia 60,
1016–1067.
Casselton, L.A., Asante-Owusu, R.N., Banham, A.H., et al.
(1995) Mating type control of sexual development in
Coprinus cinereus. Canadian Journal of Botany 73, S266–
S272.
Christias, C. & Lockwood, J.L. (1973) Conservation of
mycelial constituents in four sclerotium-forming fungi
in nutrient-deprived conditions. Phytopathology 63,
602–605.
Cole, G.T. & Samson, R.A. (1979) Patterns of Development
in Conidial Fungi. Pitman, London.
Flegg, P.B. (1985) Biological and technological aspects of commercial mushroom growing. In: Developmental Biology of
Higher Fungi (Moore, D., Casselton, L.A., Wood, D.A. &
Frankland, J.C., eds), pp. 529–539. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Fox, F.M. (1986) Ultrastructure and infectivity of sclerotia
of the ectomycorrhizal fungus Paxillus involutus on
birch (Betula spp.) Transactions of the British Mycological
Society 87, 627–631.
Fox, F.M. (1987) Ultrastructure of mycelial strands of
Leccinum scabrum, ectomycorrhizal on birch (Betula spp.).
Transactions of the British Mycological Society 89, 551–560.
Gooday, G.W. & Adams, D.J. (1993) Sex hormones and
fungi. Advances in Microbial Physiology 34, 69–145.
Gow, N.A.R. (1994) Yeast-hyphal dimorphism. In: The Growing Fungus (Gow, N.A.R. & Gadd, G.M., eds), pp. 403–
422. Chapman & Hall, London.
Griffin, M.J. & Coley-Smith, J.R. (1975) Uptake of streptomycin by sporangia of Pseudoperonospora humuli and
the inhibition of uptake by divalent metal cations. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 65, 265–278.
Harold, F.M. (1990) To shape a cell: an inquiry into the
causes of morphogenesis of microorganisms. Microbiological Reviews 54, 381–431.
Heath, I.B. & Harold, R.L. (1992) Actin has multiple roles
in the formation and architecture of zoospores of the
oomycetes, Saprolegnia ferax and Achlya bisexualis.
Journal of Cell Science 102, 611–627.

109

Hoch, H.C., Staples, R.C., Whitehead, B., Comeau, J. &
Wolfe, E.D. (1987) Signaling for growth orientation
and differentiation by surface topography in Uromyces.
Science 235, 1659–1662.
Horgen, P.A. & Castle, A. (2002) Application and potential of molecular approaches to mushrooms. In: The
Mycota X1. Agricultural Applications (Kempken, F., ed.),
pp. 3–17. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Howard, R.J., Ferrari, M.A., Roach, D.H. & Money,
N.P. (1991) Penetration of hard surfaces by a fungus
employing enormous turgor pressures. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science, USA 88, 11281–11284.
Hyde, G.J., Lancelle, S., Hepler, P.K. & Hardham, A.R.
(1991) Freeze substitution reveals a new model for
sporangial cleavage in Phytophthora, a result with implications for cytokinesis in other eukaryotes. Journal of
Cell Science 100, 735–746.
Moore, D. (1998) Fungal Morphogenesis. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Moore, D., Casselton, L.A., Wood, D.A. & Frankland, J.C.
(1985) Developmental Biology of Higher Fungi. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Muthukumar, G., Nickerson, A.W. & Nickerson, K.W.
(1987) Calmodulin levels in yeasts and mycelial fungi.
FEMS Microbiology Letters 41, 253–255.
Ng, A.M.L., Smith, J.E. & McIntosh, A.F. (1973) Conidiation of Aspergillus niger in continuous culture. Archives
of Microbiology 88, 119–126.
Orlowski, M. (1995) Gene expression in Mucor dimorphism. Canadian Journal of Botany 73, S326–S334.
Read, N.D., Kellock, L.J., Knight, H. & Trewavas, A.J.
(1992) Contact sensing during infection by fungal
pathogens. In: Perspectives in Plant Cell Recognition
(Callow, J.A. & Green, J.R., eds), pp. 137–172. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Schwerdtfeger, C. & Linden, H. (2003) VIVID is a protein
and serves as a fungal blue light photoreceptor for
photoadaptation. EMBO Journal 22, 4846–4855.
Smith, A.M. & Griffin, D.M. (1971) Oxygen and the ecology of Armillariella elegans Heim. Australian Journal of
Biological Sciences 24, 231–262.
Suzuki, Y., Kumagai, T. & Oka, Y. (1977) Locus of blue and
near ultraviolet reversible photoreaction in the stages
of conidial development in Botrytis cinerea. Journal of
General Microbiology 98, 199–204.
Talbot, N.J. (2001) Fungal hydrophobins. In: The Mycota
VIII. Biology of the Fungal Cell (Howard, R.J. & Gow, N.A.R.,
eds), pp. 145–159. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Wessels, J.G.H. (1992) Gene expression during fruiting in
Schizophyllum commune. Mycological Research 96, 609–620.
Wessels, J.G.H. (1996) Fungal hydrophobins: proteins
that function at an interface. Trends in Plant Science 1,
9–15.

Chapter 6

Fungal nutrition

This chapter is divided into the following major sections:
•
•
•
•

the basic nutrient requirements of fungi
carbon and energy sources of fungi
fungal adaptations for nutrient capture
the breakdown of cellulose: a case study of extracellular enzymes
• mineral nutrient requirements: nitrogen, phosphorus,
and iron
• efficiency of substrate utilization
• fungi that cannot be cultured
Fungi have quite simple nutritional requirements.
They need a source of organic nutrients to supply their
energy and to supply carbon skeletons for cellular
synthesis. But, given a simple energy source such as
glucose, many fungi can synthesize all their other cellular components from inorganic sources – ammonium
or nitrate ions, phosphate ions and trace levels of other
minerals such as calcium, potassium, magnesium, and
iron. Fungi that normally grow in a host environment
or in other nutrient-rich substrates might require
additional components, but still the nutrient requirements of most fungi are quite simple.
Having said this, fungi need to capture nutrients from
their surroundings. The cell wall prevents fungi from
engulfing food particles, so fungi absorb simple, soluble nutrients through the wall and plasma membrane.
In many cases this is achieved by releasing enzymes
to degrade complex polymers and then absorbing the
nutrients released by these depolymerase enzymes.
Fungi produce a huge range of these enzymes, to
degrade different types of polymer. In fact, there is

hardly any naturally occurring organic compound that
cannot be utilized as a nutrient source by one fungus
or another.
In this chapter we consider the many adaptations
that fungi have evolved for nutrient capture.

The nutrient requirements of fungi
For routine laboratory culture, most fungi are grown
on media with natural components, such as potatodextrose agar (extract of boiled potatoes, with 2% w/v
glucose), malt extract agar (usually containing 2% malt
extract), or cornmeal (or oatmeal) agar – a culture
medium often used to promote sexual development.
Fungal growth media are usually slightly acidic (pH 5–6)
and rich in carbohydrates. This contrasts with bacterial
culture media such as “nutrient agar” (beef extract and
peptone) which are usually neutral or alkaline (pH 7–8)
and rich in organic nitrogen. This difference reflects the
higher gross protein content of bacteria compared with
fungi. Other types of agar are used to culture specific
fungi or to promote specific developmental stages.
However, in order to determine the minimum
nutrient requirements, a fungus must be grown in
chemically defined liquid culture, because agar contains
impurities. Table 6.1 shows a typical minimal medium,
containing only mineral salts and glucose. Several
common fungi will grow on this medium. The main
exceptions are noted below.
• Some fungi need to be supplied with one or more
vitamins, the most common requirements being for
small amounts of thiamine, biotin, or both.

FUNGAL NUTRITION

Chemical

Quantity

NaNO3 or NH4NO3 or
L-asparagine at equivalent
nitrogen content
KH2PO4 (alone or in a buffered
mixture with K2HPO4)
MgSO4
KCl
CaCl2
FeSO4, ZnSO4, CuSO4
Sucrose or glucose
Distilled water

2g

1g
0.5 g
0.5 g
0.5 g
0.005–0.01 g each
20 g
1 liter

Note: Common supplements required by fungi include the vitamins biotin (10 mg) or thiamine (100 mg).

The carbon and energy sources of fungi
An enormous range of organic compounds can be
utilized by one fungus or another. This is illustrated
diagrammatically in Fig. 6.1, where nutrients are
arranged in approximate order of structural complexity from left to right, and in approximate order
of their degree of utilization (vertical axis).
At one extreme, the simplest organic compound,
methane (CH4), can be used by a few yeasts. They convert methane to methanol by the enzyme methane
monooxygenase. Then this is converted to formaldehyde by the enzyme methanol dehydrogenase. Then
formaldehyde combines with ribulose-5-phosphate,
and two further reaction steps generate fructose-6phosphate.
CH4 → H3C—OH → H—C—H → → → fructose-6-phosphate

—
—

Table 6.1 A chemically defined liquid culture medium for
fungi.

O
methane methanol

• Some fungi cannot utilize nitrate or ammonium
as their sole nitrogen source; instead they require
a source of organic nitrogen. In these cases the
requirement usually can be met by supplying a
single amino acid such as asparagine. Several
Basidiomycota fall in this category.
• Some fungi have more specific individual requirements, which will be found in their natural habitats.
For example, some Oomycota (e.g. Phytophthora
infestans) need to be supplied with sterols for
growth; some other Oomycota (e.g. Leptomitis
lacteus) need sulfur-containing amino acids such as
cysteine, because they cannot use inorganic sulfur.
Some of the fungi from animal dung need to be supplied with the iron-containing haem group, a component of cytochromes in the respiratory pathway.
It should be emphasized that all these comments refer
to the minimum requirements for growth, not to
the optimal requirements. Also, they relate to somatic
(vegetative) growth, and additional nutrients may
be required to complete the life cycle. For example,
several Pythium and Phytophthora spp. do not require
sterols for hyphal growth but they need them for both
sexual and asexual reproduction. Many fungi have
extra nutrient requirements for growth in suboptimal
environmental conditions. For example, Saccharomyces
cerevisiae has relatively simple requirements for
growth in aerobic culture but needs to be supplied
with a wide range of vitamins and other growth
factors in anaerobic conditions, because some of the
basic metabolic pathways that normally supply these
requirements do not operate in anaerobic conditions
(Chapter 7).

111

formaldehyde

Several more yeasts (e.g. Candida spp.) and a few
mycelial fungi can grow on the longer-chain hydrocarbons (C9 or larger) in petroleum products. The
main limitation with these compounds, as with
methane, is that they are not miscible with water
and so growth is restricted to the water–hydrocarbon
interface. Two mycelial fungi are notorious for their
growth on the long-chain hydrocarbons in aviation
kerosene: Amorphotheca resinae (Ascomycota) and
Paecilomyces varioti (a mitosporic fungus). A. resinae has
the dubious distinction of having caused at least one
major aircrash, by blocking filters and corroding the
walls of fuel storage tanks, but this problem is easily
avoided (Chapter 17).
Moving further along the spectrum in Fig. 6.1, a larger
number of fungi can utilize the common alcohols
such as methanol and ethanol. In fact, ethanol is an
excellent carbon source for Candida utilis, Emericella
nidulans, and Armillaria mellea, and it can even be
their preferred carbon substrate. Glycerol and fatty
acids will support the growth of several fungi, and
can be the preferred substrates for a few fungi such
as the common “sewage fungus,” Leptomitus lacteus
(Oomycota). Amino acids also can be utilized, but
they contain excess nitrogen in relation to their carbon content, so ammonium is released during their
metabolism and this can often lower the pH to
growth-inhibitory levels unless the culture medium is
strongly buffered.
The vast majority of fungi can utilize glucose and
other monosaccharides or disaccharides. Some also
can use sugar derivatives such as aminosugars (e.g.
glucosamine), sugar acids (e.g. galacturonic acid), or
sugar alcohols (e.g. mannitol). However, the utilization

112

CHAPTER 6

Fig. 6.1 Some of the major carbon substrates of fungi.

of any sugar or sugar derivative depends on the presence of appropriate membrane transport proteins, and
these have different substrate-specificities. Fungi usually have a constitutive transport protein for glucose.
It transports glucose in preference to other sugars in a
mixture, but it has a relatively low binding specificity
and so, in the absence of glucose, it will transport some
other sugars. The uptake of these sugars leads to the
induced synthesis of their specific carrier proteins.
This can be demonstrated easily when Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is grown in a shaken liquid culture medium
containing a disaccharide such as lactose as the sole
carbon source (Fig. 6.2). The fungus degrades lactose
to glucose and galactose by means of a wall-bound
enzyme, β-galactosidase, then the fungus grows
rapidly by taking up the glucose preferentially, while
galactose remains in the culture medium. When the
glucose is depleted the growth rate slows for about 30
minutes while a galactose carrier protein is synthesized,
and then the growth rate increases again, using galactose
as the substrate. This type of biphasic growth curve (Fig.
6.2) is termed a diauxic growth curve. Sucrose is used
in a similar way: it is cleaved to glucose and fructose
by the wall-bound enzyme invertase, then the glucose
is taken up before fructose. However, a few fungi cannot use sucrose as a substrate (e.g. Rhizopus nigricans,

Fig. 6.2 A diauxic growth curve of a fungus grown
on the disaccharide lactose: a, initial phase of growth on
glucose; b, temporary slowing of growth while a galactose transporter is inserted in the membrane; c, resumed
growth on galactose.
Zygomycota; Sordaria fimicola, Ascomycota) because
they do not produce invertase.
The utilization of polymers requires the release of
specific enzymes. For example, many fungi can utilize

FUNGAL NUTRITION

starch (by producing amylase), some can utilize lipids
(by producing lipases) or proteins (by producing proteases), and some can grow on cellulose, hemicelluloses,
pectic compounds (Chapter 14), or chitin. Often, these
enzymes occur as complexes, consisting of two or
more enzymes that attack the polymer at different
sites, acting synergistically. We will see this in the case
of cellulose breakdown, later in this chapter. At the
extreme end of the spectrum in Fig. 6.1, a few highly
specialized fungi degrade the most structurally complex,
cross-linked polymers. For example, lignin is degraded
by enzymes of a few wood-rotting Basidiomycota termed
“white rot fungi” (Chapter 11). Similarly, “hard keratin” in the horns and hoofs of animals is degraded by
a few keratinophilic fungi, including species related
to the dermatophytic pathogens of humans (Chapter
16).
To summarize this section, fungi exploit a wide
range of organic nutrient sources, but in all cases they
depend on the uptake of simple, soluble nutrients
which diffuse through the wall and enter the cells
via specific transport proteins. These only allow the
passage of small molecules such as monosaccharides,
amino acids, and small peptides of two or three amino
acids. Even disaccharides such as sucrose and cellobiose (a breakdown product of cellulose) may need to
be degraded to monosaccharides before they are taken
up by most fungi. Any larger molecules have to be broken down by extracellular enzymes (depolymerases)
which are secreted by the fungus.

113

Fungal adaptations for nutrient capture
An electrical dimension to hyphal growth
The growing tips of fungi generate an electrical
field around them. It can be mapped by placing a
tiny vibrating electrode in the liquid film around a
hypha, resulting in a trace like that shown in Fig. 6.3.
Typically, the exterior of the hypha is more electronegative at the apex than further back, showing that
current (which is positive by convention) enters at
the tip and exits in the subapical regions. In most
fungi that have been examined in sufficient detail
– for example Achlya (Oomycota) and Neurospora
(Ascomycota) – the current seems to be carried by protons (H+) because it corresponds with a gradient of pH
along the hyphal surface and the current still occurs
when other candidate ions are reduced or eliminated
from the growth medium. However, in marine fungi
the current might be carried by K+. For several years it
was speculated that the electrical field might be the
driving force for apical growth, perhaps by affecting the
activities of membrane proteins or the cytoskeleton.
However, this now seems unlikely because the direction of current flow can be reversed without affecting
tip growth (Cho et al. 1991). Instead, the electrical field
seems to be intimately involved in nutrient uptake.
The uptake of organic nutrients is an energydependent process. Ions (e.g. H+) are pumped to the

Fig. 6.3 (a) Typical current profile around an individual hypha of a growing fungus (Achlya sp.). (b) Interpretation of the
current, involving proton export through ATPase-driven proton pumps behind the hyphal tip, and uptake of protons
at the hyphal tip through symport proteins that simultaneously transport amino acids. ((a) From Gow 1984. (b) Based
on Kropf et al. 1984.)

114

CHAPTER 6

Fig. 6.4 Fungal strategies for growth on insoluble polymers. (a) Hyphae extend continuously
at the apex, drawing protoplasm forward to
evacuate the zones of enzyme erosion of the
substrate. Yeasts do not utilize insoluble
(nondiffusible) polymers because they would
become trapped in their own substrate erosion
zones. (b) Suggested defense of a substrate
by a hypha of a polymer-degrading fungus.
Enzymes are secreted at the apex to degrade the
polymer, and the soluble nutrients released
by these enzymes are absorbed subapically.
Antibiotics or other inhibitors (shown as arrowheads) may be released subapically into the
substrate erosion zone to prevent competing
organisms from using the enzyme digestion
products.

outside of the cell by membrane-located ion pumps,
using energy derived from the dissociation of ATP.
The ions then re-enter the cell through specific types
of membrane proteins termed symporters, which
simultaneously transport an organic molecule into
the cell. This seems to apply generally in fungi, because
their plasma membranes have been shown to have
H+-coupled transport systems for sugars, amino acids,
nitrate, ammonium, phosphate, and sulfate, as well as
other ion channels such as stretch-activated channels
for calcium, and nonselective channels for both cations
and anions (Garrill 1995).
But, fungi are thought to differ from most other
organisms in one significant respect: in most cell types
the ion pumps and the symport proteins probably
occur in close proximity to one another, whereas in
tip-growing fungi the ion pumps are thought to be most
active behind the apex, whereas the symport proteins
are active close to the tip. This spatial separation
would explain the external electrical field (Fig. 6.3)
and it makes sense intuitively. The nutrient-uptake
symporters would be of most value at the hyphal
tip, which extends continuously into fresh zones
of nutrients, while immediately behind the tip there
is a dense zone of mitochondria that could supply
the ATP needed for the proton pumps (see Figs 3.2,
3.4, 3.15).

Enzyme secretion
The need to obtain nutrients has, literally, shaped the
way that fungi grow. The rate of diffusion of soluble
organic nutrients to a stationary cell would always

tend to be growth-limiting, and the need to release
degradative enzymes imposes even greater constraints.
Enzymes are large molecules, about 20,000–60,000
Daltons in the case of fungal cellulases, so they do not
diffuse far from the hyphal surface. As a result, fungi
create localized zones of substrate erosion (nutrient
depletion) when growing in substrates such as cellulose,
and the hyphae must extend continuously into fresh
zones (Fig. 6.4). This explains why yeast cells never produce depolymerase enzymes, because they would have
no way of escaping from the erosion zones they had
created. Instead, yeasts occur in environments rich
in simple soluble nutrients – on leaf, fruit and root
surfaces, or on mucosal membranes in the case of
Candida albicans. They depend either on a continuous
supply of nutrients from the underlying substratum, or
on water currents to bring fresh supplies of nutrients.
The large size of enzymes creates a potential problem for their release through the hyphal wall, because
this would require the presence of continuous pores
of sufficiently large size. Estimates of wall porosity
can be obtained by studying the permeability of walls
to molecules of known molecular mass such as commercially available polyethylene glycols and dextrans.
These studies suggest a cut-off of wall porosity at
between 700 and 5000 Da, which is much lower than
the size of most enzymes. These findings apply mainly
to yeasts, and might be different for mycelial fungi.
However, recent studies indicate that enzymes are
released mainly and perhaps exclusively in the regions
of new wall growth. This was first shown when a
cellulase gene was cloned into yeast (S. cerevisiae) and
the enzyme was found to be released from the growth
sites of the bud. Also, a glucoamylase has been shown

FUNGAL NUTRITION

to be secreted exclusively at the tips of Aspergillus
niger. So it seems that enzymes destined for release
through the wall are transported to the hyphal tip,
where they are released by exocytosis and might flow
outwards with the newly formed wall components,
according to the steady-state model of wall growth
described in Chapter 4 (Wessels 1990). Some of these
enzymes would reach the cell surface and be released
into the external environment, whereas others might
become locked in the wall and serve as wall-bound
enzymes – for example, degrading disaccharides and
other small molecules (oligomers) to monosaccharides,
amino acids, etc.

Defense of territory
The release of enzymes to degrade a polymer represents
an investment of resources, so we can expect it to be
coupled with defense of the territory, preventing
other organisms from sharing the breakdown products.
There are a few known examples of noncellulolytic fungi
that grow in close association with cellulose-degraders
(Chapter 12), utilizing some of the enzyme breakdown
products. But these fungi might grow in a mutualistic
association that benefits the cellulolytic fungus.
In general, three factors might help polymerdegrading fungi to defend their territory.
1 The synthesis of depolymerases is tightly regulated
by feedback mechanisms, discussed later, so the rate
of enzyme production is matched to the rate at
which the breakdown products can be utilized.
2 The final stages of polymer breakdown are achieved
by wall-bound enzymes, so that the most readily utilizable monomers are not available to other organisms; we will see this later in the case of cellulose.
3 A polymer-degrading fungus might produce antibiotics or other suppressive metabolites. This is
difficult to demonstrate at the scale of individual
hyphae, but Burton & Coley-Smith (1993) reported
that antibacterial compounds were released by
hyphae of Rhizoctonia species – members of the
Basidiomycota that are known to degrade cellulose.
H OH

H
H O

HO
HO

H
H

H
OH β1

H
HO
O

OH β1
H

It may be significant that antibiotics are produced
mainly by polymer-degrading fungi (Chapter 12) and
their production in vitro is associated with nutrientlimiting growth conditions (Chapter 7). These are the
conditions that polymer-degrading fungi would experience most of the time, because depolymerases are produced only when more readily available nutrients are
in short supply. Thus, antibiosis might have evolved
not as an aggressive strategy but for the defense of
territory.

The breakdown of cellulose: a case study of
extracellular enzymes
Cellulose is the most abundant natural polymer on
earth, representing about 40% of all the plant biomass
that is produced and recycled on an annual basis.
Fungi play the principal role in degrading cellulose and
also in utilizing the cellulose breakdown products. So,
we will consider the structure of cellulose and the role
of cellulase enzymes in some detail as a model of how
enzymes function in natural environments.

The chemistry of cellulose
In terms of its chemical structure, cellulose is a relatively simple polymer. It consists mainly of long,
unbranched, chains of between 2000 and 14,000
glucose residues, linked by β-1,4 bonds. The β configuration means that each glucose unit is rotated 180
degrees to the next, and the whole chain is made up
of these repeating pairs, shown between the brackets
in Fig. 6.5. Such a molecule should be easily degraded
by the extracellular enzymes of fungi, but the physical structure of cellulose presents problems of enzyme
access to the substrate. The individual cellulose chains
stack closely together in a near-crystalline manner
to form micelles, which are reinforced by hydrogenbonding, and the micelles themselves align to form
microfibrils of about 10 nm diameter, visible in electron micrographs. These rigid, insoluble microfibrils
H OH

H OH

H

4

H O

O
HO

4

115

H

H
H

H
H

HO
O
OH β1
H

OH

4
n

OH

H H

H OH

Fig. 6.5 Structure of a single cellulose chain, composed of thousands of repeated disaccharide (cellobiose) units; one
disaccharide unit is shown within the brackets. The β1-4 bonds are also shown.

116

CHAPTER 6

present a quite formidable obstacle to enzymatic
degradation, but several types of fungus have evolved
means of degrading them.

The cellulase enzymes
At least three types of enzyme are involved in the complete breakdown of a cellulose chain to its constituent
glucose units, and some of these enzymes exist in
multiple forms of different molecular mass. Collectively
they are termed “cellulase” or, more precisely, the
cellulase enzyme complex. The three main enzymes
in this complex are:
β-1,4-glucanase), which
1 An endoglucanase (endo-β
acts at random points within a cellulose chain,
breaking the molecule into successively smaller
fragments. This enzyme is found in multiple forms,
ranging from about 11,000 to 65,000 Da.

2 An exo-acting enzyme, termed cellobiohydrolase,
which acts only on the ends of cellulose chains,
cleaving off successive disaccharide units (cellobiose). This enzyme is more uniform than the
endoglucanase, ranging from about 50,000 to
60,000 Da.
3 β-glucosidase (or “cellobiase”), which cleaves the
disaccharide cellobiose to glucose, for uptake by
the fungus. This is a wall-bound enzyme, like many
enzymes involved in the final stages of degradation
of polymers.
The combined actions of these three types of enzyme
are shown diagrammatically in Fig. 6.6. All three
enzymes act synergistically and are tightly regulated,
to ensure that a cellulose-degrading fungus does not
release sugars at a faster rate than it can use them. The
endoglucanases, by attacking the cellulose chains at
random, progressively create more ends on which
cellobiohydrolase can act. But the resulting cellobiose

Fig. 6.6 Structure and enzymatic breakdown of cellulose. The enzyme cellobiohydrolase (CBH) cleaves disaccharide
residues (cellobiose) from the nonreducing ends of the cellulose chains. The enzyme endo-b-1,4-glucanase (EBG) cleaves
the chains at random to generate shorter chains, thereby providing further ends for the action of CBH. The enzyme
b-glucosidase cleaves cellobiose to two glucose residues for uptake by the fungus.

FUNGAL NUTRITION

117

Fig. 6.7 Sydowia polyspora (Aureobasidium pullulans), one of the “sooty
moulds” of leaf surfaces. It has short
hyphal compartments and forms budlike conidia at the septa.

can bind to the active site of cellobiohydrolase, and
competitively inhibit the enzyme action. Thus, if
cellobiose accumulates then the rate of cellulose
breakdown will automatically be slowed, and this
regulation links the rate of breakdown to the rate
at which the fungus requires glucose for growth and
metabolism. In addition to this, the regulation of cellulose breakdown is achieved by the common feedback
system termed catabolite repression, whereby genes
encoding the enzymes are repressed when more readily
utilizable substrates like glucose are available.
The presence of cellulose is known to induce the
synthesis of cellulase enzymes. It is difficult to imagine that cellulose itself could be the inducer because
it is insoluble. Instead, cellulose-degrading fungi are
thought to produce very low (constitutive) levels of
cellulase enzymes so that the breakdown products
such as cellobiose can act as signals for enzyme
induction when cellulose is present in the environment. Cellobiose has been found to act as a weak
inducer of cellulases in some fungi, and a derivative
of cellobiose, termed sophorose, is a much stronger
inducer for Trichoderma reesei, the fungus used commonly as a model organism for studies of cellulase
action.
In summary, by a combination of gene repression
(by high levels of glucose or cellobiose), competitive
inhibition of enzyme action (by the partial breakdown products of cellulose, such as cellobiose), and gene
induction (in the absence of glucose but presence
of low levels of cellobiose or its derivatives), the rate
of cellulose breakdown is matched closely to the rate
at which a fungus can use the sugars released from the
substrate.

Commercial and ecological aspects of
cellulases
The ability to degrade “crystalline” cellulose (cotton fabrics, etc.) is found in relatively few fungi, but several
fungi can degrade the “soluble substituted celluloses”

such as carboxymethyl cellulose in which about
30% of the glucose residues bear a substituent methyl
group. These soluble celluloses form gels in water and
are produced commercially for many purposes, such as
wallpaper pastes and paint thickeners. The fungi that
degrade these products secrete an endoglucanase but
not cellobiohydrolase, and they include several common leaf-surface saprotrophs such as Cladosporium spp.
and Sydowia polyspora (Fig. 6.7).
This raises the question of why some fungi produce
only part of the cellulase enzyme complex if they
cannot degrade natural forms of cellulose. A likely
explanation was discovered more than 40 years ago by
Taylor & Marsh (1963) but has been largely ignored.
These workers found that several Pythium spp. (which
are not generally considered to be cellulolytic fungi)
could degrade cotton fibres taken from unopened cotton bolls on cotton plants, but could not degrade the
cotton fibres once the cotton bolls had opened and the
fibres had air-dried. Simple rewetting of the dried
fibres did not render them degradable. But they could
be degraded if they were “swollen” by treatment with
KOH. The implication is that the cellulose in natural,
moist plant cell walls may be susceptible to attack, providing a substrate that several fungi can use. But the
cellulose chains bond together tightly when the tissues
have dried, and then only a restricted group of fungi
can degrade them.
Among the typical cellulose-degraders is Trichoderma
reesei, originally isolated from rotting cotton fabric. By
routine, repeated selection in laboratory conditions,
some strains of this fungus have been obtained that
can release as much as 30 g dry weight of cellulase
enzymes per liter of culture broth (Penttila et al.
1991). The gene for a cellobiohydrolase of this fungus
has been cloned into Saccharomyces cerevisiae under
the control of a constitutive promoter. The yeast
then secretes large amounts of a functional cellulase,
even in the absence of the substrate. Such enzymes,
whether produced by conventional or genetically
engineered strains, have significant commercial roles,
for example in abrading denim products.

118

CHAPTER 6

Mineral nutrient requirements: nitrogen,
phosphorus, and iron
Fungi need many mineral nutrients in at least trace
amounts (Table 6.1) but nitrogen, phosphorus, and iron
merit special mention because of their significance for
fungal activities and interactions in nature.

Nitrogen
Of all the mineral nutrients, nitrogen is required in the
largest amounts and can often be the limiting factor
for fungal growth in natural habitats (Chapter 11).
Fungi do not fix atmospheric N2 but they can use many
combined forms of nitrogen. We will discuss this in
relation to the enzyme-mediated sequence below,
which represents the normal pathway for assimilation
of nitrogen by fungi and many other organisms.

NO3–
nitrate

nitrate
reductase

glutamate
dehydrogenase

NO2–
nitrite

glutamate

nitrite
reductase

glutamine
synthase

NH4+
ammonium

glutamine

All fungi can use amino acids as a nitrogen source.
Often they need to be supplied with only one amino
acid such as glutamic acid or glutamine, and from this
they can produce all the other essential amino acids
by transamination reactions. The standard form of
these reactions is shown below, using as an example,
the production of alanine from glutamic acid, or vice
versa:
HOOC.CH2.CH(NH2).COOH + CH3.CO.COOH
glutamic acid
+ pyruvic acid
HOOC.CH2.CO.COOH + CH3.CH(NH2).COOH
α-ketoglutaric acid +
alanine
Most fungi can use ammonia or ammonium (NH4) as
a nitrogen source. After uptake, ammonia/ammonium
is combined with organic acids, usually to produce either
glutamic acid (from α-ketoglutaric acid) or aspartic
acid; then the other amino acids can be formed by
transamination reactions, as noted above. The relatively few fungi that cannot use ammonium and thus
depend on organic nitrogen sources include some
water moulds (Saprolegnia and Achlya spp.), several
Basidiomycota, and the mycoparasitic Pythium spp.
such as P. oligandrum (Chapter 11). However, ammonia/
ammonium is often not an ideal nitrogen source in
culture media, even for many of the fungi that can use

it. The reason is that NH4+ is taken up in exchange
for H+, and this can rapidly lower the pH of a culture
medium to 4.0 or less, inhibiting the growth of many
fungi.
Many fungi can use nitrate as their sole nitrogen
source, converting it to ammonium by the enzymes
nitrate reductase and nitrite reductase. The fungi
that cannot use nitrate include Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and many Basidiomycota, whereas some other fungi
such as Neurospora crassa are induced to express the
genes for nitrate reductase and nitrite reductase only
when a preferred nitrogen source is unavailable.
By referring to the nitrogen assimilation pathway
(above), it is clear that any fungus that can use NO3
(or another nitrogen source towards the left of this
pathway) must also be able to use the other forms of
nitrogen towards the right. But, the regulatory controls
on nitrogen uptake ensure that nitrogen sources are
not necessarily used in the ways we might expect. If a
fungus is supplied with a mixture of nitrogen sources,
then ammonium is taken up in preference to either
nitrate or amino acids. The reason is that ammonium,
or glutamine which is one of the first amino acids
formed from it, prevents the synthesis of membraneuptake proteins for other nitrogen sources, and also
prevents the synthesis of enzymes involved in nitrate
utilization.

Phosphorus
All organisms need significant amounts of phosphorus,
in the form of phosphates, for production of sugar phosphates, nucleic acids, ATP, membrane phospholipids,
etc. But phosphorus is often poorly available in natural environments, because even soluble phosphate
fertilizers are soon rendered insoluble when they complex with organic matter or with calcium and magnesium ions in soil. Plant roots, in particular, have
difficulty in extracting phosphorus from soil, because
they deplete the small pool of soluble phosphate in their
immediate vicinity and then have to depend on the
slow solubilization and diffusion of phosphate from
further away. By contrast, fungi are highly adept at
obtaining phosphorus, and they achieve this in several
ways (Jennings 1989):
• They respond to critically low levels of available
phosphorus by increasing the activity of their
phosphorus-uptake systems;
• they release phosphatase enzymes that can cleave
phosphate from organic sources;
• they solubilize inorganic phosphates by releasing
organic acids to lower the external pH;
• their hyphae, with a high surface area/volume ratio,
extend continuously into fresh zones of soil.

FUNGAL NUTRITION

119

Fig. 6.8 The hydroxamate siderophores of fungi, used to capture ferric iron. The simplest of these are the linear fusarinines,
widely found in species of Fusarium, Penicillium, and Gliocladium. They sequester iron at the position marked by the
asterisk. More complex siderophores such as coprogen have several fusarinine units that bind iron in a ring-like structure (one of these units is shown by the broken line).

In addition to these points, fungi accumulate and
store phosphates in excess of their immediate requirements, typically as polyphosphates in the vacuoles.
It is not surprising that plants have mycorrhizal associations with fungi, because this is probably the most
efficient way for the plant to obtain its phosphorus
supply. The mycorrhizal fungal hyphae have a very
high surface area for uptake of phosphorus and other
mineral nutrients. The cost to the plant in terms of
supplying sugars to the fungus would be much less
than the cost of continuously producing new roots
(Chapter 13).

Iron
Iron is needed in relatively small amounts but is
essential as a donor and acceptor of electrons in
cellular processes, including the cytochrome system in
aerobic respiration (Chapter 7). Iron normally occurs
in the ferric (Fe3+) form, insolubilized as ferric oxides
or hydroxides at a pH above 5.5, and it is taken up by
a different process compared with other mineral nutrients. Iron must be “captured” from the environment
by the release of iron-chelating compounds termed
siderophores. These compounds chelate a ferric ion
(Fe3+ ) then they are reabsorbed through a specific
membrane protein and Fe3+ is reduced to Fe2+ within
the cell, causing its release because the siderophore
has a lower affinity for Fe2+ than for Fe3+. Finally, the

siderophore is exported again to capture a further
ferric ion. Siderophores and their specific membrane proteins are produced only in response to iron-limiting
conditions.
All the fungal siderophores that have been characterized to date are of the hydroxamate type (Fig. 6.8).
Their structures, functions, and applications are
reviewed by Renshaw et al. (2002). Despite their
high affinity for Fe3+, these fungal siderophores have
much lower affinity than do the siderophores (e.g.
pseudobactin and pyoverdine) produced by fluorescent pseudomonads which are common on plant
roots. This raises the possibility that fluorescent
pseudomonads could be used for the control of
plant-pathogenic fungi in the root zone of crops.
For example, pseudobactin-producing pseudomonads
can suppress germination of the chlamydospores
of Fusarium oxysporum on low-iron media, whereas
mutant pseudomonads, deficient in siderophore production, are ineffective. However, we shall see in
Chapter 12 that competition for iron is only one of
several ways in which Pseudomonas spp. can control
plant-pathogenic fungi.

Efficiency of substrate utilization
Industrial microbiologists are specially concerned with
the efficiency of substrate conversion into microbial
cells or cell products. Microbial ecologists have been

120

CHAPTER 6

less concerned with this, although it has important
implications for environmental processes. The two
most commonly used criteria of the efficiency of substrate conversion are the economic coefficient and the
Rubner coefficient:
Economic coefficient (expressed as a percentage) =
Dry weight of biomass produced
Dry weight of substrate consumed
Rubner coefficient (expressed as a proportion) =
Heat of combustion of biomass produced
Heat of combustion of substrate consumed
Typical values for the economic coefficient range
from 20 to 35 if a fungus is grown in a dilute medium,
but the values fall markedly if the medium is made
progressively richer – fungi seem to be “wasteful” if
supplied with excess substrate. Values for the Rubner
coefficient typically are higher than for the economic coefficient. For example Aspergillus niger had a
Rubner coefficient of 0.55–0.61 (equivalent to 55–61%)
over a range of cultural conditions, compared with
an economic coefficient of 35–46. The difference is
explained mainly by the synthesis of lipid storage
reserves during growth, because lipids have higher
calorific values than the carbohydrates used as substrates in culture media. However, the important point
revealed by all these values is that a considerable
proportion of the substrate supplied to a fungus is consumed in energy production rather than being converted
into biomass.
Substrate conversion efficiencies are difficult to obtain
in natural systems, but Adams & Ayers (1985) did this
in laboratory conditions by collecting all the spores produced by a mycoparasite (Sporidesmium sclerotivorum)
when it was grown on sclerotia of its main fungal host,
Sclerotinia minor. This experimental system mimics the
conditions in nature, because sclerotia are produced
as dormant survival structures on infected host plants
and then overwinter in the soil, where they can be
attacked by the mycoparasite. The reported substrate
conversion efficiency was exceptionally high: an economic coefficient of 51–60 and a Rubner coefficient of
0.65–0.75. This mycoparasite has a remarkable way
of parasitizing the host sclerotia: it penetrates some of
the sclerotial cells initially but then grows predominantly between the sclerotial cells, scavenging small
amounts of soluble nutrients that leak from them, and
thereby creating nutrient stress. The host cells respond
by converting energy storage reserves (principally
glycogen) to sugars, which leak from the cells to support further growth of the mycoparasite. This essentially
noninvasive mode of parasitism is also employed by
endophytic fungi in plants (Chapter 14). They grow

slowly and sparsely, between or within the plant cell
walls, exploiting nutrients that leak from the host cells.
In terms of substrate efficiency we should also note
that fungi can grow by oligotrophy, using extremely
low levels of nutrients (oligo = few) on silica gel or
glass. They seem to grow by scavenging trace amounts
of volatile organic compounds from the atmosphere
(Wainwright 1993).

Fungi that cannot be cultured
To close this chapter we should record that several fungi
still cannot be grown in laboratory culture. They have
been termed obligate parasites but now more commonly are termed biotrophic parasites (Chapter 14).
Many of them are extremely important in environmental and economic terms, including the ubiquitous
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (Glomeromycota), rust
fungi (Basidiomycota), powdery mildew fungi
(Ascomycota), and downy mildews (Oomycota). All of
these produce nutrient-absorbing haustoria or equivalent structures in host cells (Chapter 14).
It remains to be seen if some of these fungi will ever
be grown in axenic culture (i.e. separate from their
hosts). However, significant progress has been made in
culturing the rust fungi, starting with Puccinia graminis (black stem rust of wheat) and several other rust
species (Maclean 1982). P. graminis was found to grow
slowly, and only after a prolonged lag phase. Its linear
extension rate on agar ranged from 30 to 300 µm
day−1, compared with rates from 1 to 50 mm day−1
for fungi that are commonly grown in laboratory conditions. P. graminis tends to leak vital nutrients, such
as cysteine, into the growth medium, so a high spore
density is needed in the inoculum to minimize the
diffusion of nutrients away from individual sporelings. Also, P. graminis produces self-inhibitors which
can result in “staling” of the cultures. This is true of
several fungi if they are grown on sugar-rich media, and
it causes a progressive reduction and eventual halting
of growth. It can be overcome by using relatively
weak media. Some other rust fungi need relatively
high concentrations of CO2 – for example, Melampsora
lini which causes flax rust. If attention is paid to all these
points then several rust fungi can be maintained in
laboratory culture. However, in the process of being
cultured (or of becoming culturable) some of them
change irreversibly to a “saprotrophic” form that cannot reinfect plants.

General texts
Booth, C. (1971) Methods in Microbiology, vol. 4. Academic
Press, London.

FUNGAL NUTRITION

Garraway, M.O. & Evans, R.C. (1984) Fungal Nutrition and
Physiology. Wiley, New York.
Griffin, D. (1994) Fungal Physiology, 2nd edn. Wiley-Liss,
New York.

Cited references
Adams, P.B. & Ayers, W.A. (1985) Energy efficiency of the
mycoparasite Sporidesmium sclerotivorum in vitro and in
soil. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 17, 155–158.
Burton, R.J. & Coley-Smith, J.R. (1993) Production and leakage of antibiotics by Rhizoctonia cerealis, R. oryzae-sativae
and R. tuliparum. Mycological Research 97, 86–90.
Cho, C., Harold, F.M. & Scheurs, W.J.A. (1991) Electrical
and ionic dimensions of apical growth in Achlya
hyphae. Experimental Mycology 15, 34–43.
Garrill, A. (1995) Transport. In: The Growing Fungus (Gow,
N.A.R. & Gadd, G.M., eds), pp. 163–181. Chapman &
Hall, London.
Gow, N.A.R. (1984) Transhyphal electric currents in fungi.
Journal of General Microbiology 130, 3313–3318.
Jennings, D.H. (1989) Some perspectives on nitrogen
and phosphorus metabloism in fungi. In: Nitrogen,
Phosphorus and Sulphur Utilization by Fungi (eds Boddy,

121

L., Marchant, R. & Read, D.J.), pp. 1–31. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Kropf, D.L., Caldwell, J.H., Gow, N.A.R. & Harold, F.M.
(1984) Transhyphal ion currents in the water mould
Achlya. Amino acid proton symport as a mechanism of
current entry. Journal of Cell Biology 99, 486–496.
Maclean, D.J. (1982) Axenic culture and metabolism of rust
fungi. In: The Rust Fungi (Scott, K.J. & Chakravorty,
A.K., eds), pp. 37–120. Academic Press, London.
Penttila, M., Teeri, T.T., Nevalainen H. & Knowles, J.K.C.
(1991) The molecular biology of Trichoderma reesei and
its application in biotechnology. In: Applied Molecular
Genetics of Fungi (Peberdy, J.F., Caten, C.E., Ogden, J.E.
& Bennett, J.W., eds), pp. 85–102. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Renshaw, J.C., Robson, G.D., Trinci, A.P.J., et al. (2002)
Fungal siderophores: structures, functions and applications. Mycological Research 106, 1123–1142.
Taylor, E.E. & Marsh, P.B. (1963) Cellulose decomposition
by Pythium. Canadian Journal of Microbiology 9, 353–358.
Wainwright, M. (1993) Oligotrophic growth of fungi – stress
or natural state? In: Stress Tolerance of Fungi (Jennings,
D.H., ed.), pp. 127–144. Academic Press, London.
Wessels, J.G.H. (1990) Role of cell wall architecture in
fungal tip growth. In: Tip Growth in Plant and Fungal Cells
(Heath, I.B., ed.), pp. 1–29. Academic Press, New York.

Chapter 7

Fungal metabolism and
fungal products

This chapter is divided into the following major
sections:
• how fungi obtain energy in different conditions
• coordination of metabolism: how the pathways are
balanced
• mobilizable and storage compounds of fungi
• synthesis of chitin and lysine
• the pathways and products of secondary metabolism
In this chapter we discuss the basic metabolic pathways of fungi, as a basis for understanding how fungi
grow on different types of substrate and in different
environmental conditions. We also cover some of the
distinctive and unusual aspects of fungal metabolism,
including the production of a wide range of secondary metabolites of commercial and environmental
significance, such as the penicillin antibiotics, and
important mycotoxins like the highly carcinogenic
aflatoxins and the toxic ergot alkaloids. Some of
the material in this chapter will be familiar, basic biochemistry, but it is presented in the specific context
of fungal biology.

How do fungi obtain energy in different
conditions?
Figure 7.1 shows an overview of central metabolism
and how this provides the precursors for synthesis
of many other compounds. The spine of the diagram
represents the central energy-yielding pathway, in
which sugars are broken down via the Embden–

Meyerhof (EM) pathway (glycolysis) and the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Many of the intermediates
can be drawn off to produce other essential metabolites or for synthesis of a wide range of specialized
secondary metabolites.
Although fungi can obtain energy by oxidizing a
wide range of compounds, it is convenient to begin
by considering a fungus growing on a simple sugar
such as glucose. As shown in Fig. 7.2, in the series of
enzymic steps of the Embden–Meyerhof pathway,
glucose is converted to glucose-6-phosphate, then
to fructose-6-phosphate, and finally to fructose-1,6biphosphate. These phosphorylation reactions occur
at the expense of energy provided by two molecules
of the energy-rich compound, adenosine triphosphate
(ATP). Then fructose-1,6-biphosphate is split into two
3-carbon compounds, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and
dihydroxyacetone phosphate. These two compounds are
interconvertible, and in a further series of enzymic steps
they are converted to pyruvic acid.
Pyruvic acid is one of the key intermediates of central metabolism, because it represents a branch-point:
the reaction steps that follow will depend on whether
the fungus is growing in the presence or absence of
oxygen.
In the presence of oxygen, pyruvic acid (a 3-carbon
compound) is transported to the mitochondria,
where it is converted to the 2-carbon compound
acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) by associating with a
molecule of coenzyme-A and releasing a molecule of
CO2. Then acetyl-CoA combines with oxaloacetate (a
4-carbon compound) to produce citric acid (6-carbon).
Finally, in the reactions of the TCA cycle, citric acid is
converted back to oxaloacate, with the loss of two
molecules of CO2 (Fig. 7.2).

Fig. 7.1 Overview of the central metabolic pathways of fungi, showing how the main energy-yielding pathway (the
Embden–Meyerhof pathway and the tricarboxylic acid cycle) provide the precursors for biosynthesis of various
metabolic products (shaded boxes). Note that only some of the intermediates of the central metabolic pathway
are shown – see Fig. 7.2 for more details. Also, note that secondary metabolites (including penicillins and mycotoxins)
are produced from various precursors, but primarily from acetyl coenzyme A.

Fig. 7.2 Outline of the Embden–Meyerhof pathway and tricarboxylic acid cycle, which provide the major means of
generating energy from sugars. Also shown (top left) is the pentose phosphate pathway which can provide some energy,
but its major role is for biosynthesis, including synthesis of the 5-carbon sugars of nucleic acids.

FUNGAL METABOLISM AND FUNGAL PRODUCTS

125

Fig. 7.3 Outline of the respiratory electron transport chain. CoQ = coenzyme Q; Cyt = cytochrome.
The net result of this whole sequence is that one
molecule of glucose is completely oxidized to six
molecules of CO2 (and six molecules of water), according to the empirical equation for aerobic respiration:

stages along this gradient sufficient energy is released
to synthesize a molecule of ATP from the oxidation of
NADH/NAD(P)H. But only two molecules of ATP are
produced from the oxidation of flavin nucleotides
(e.g. FMN).

C6H12O6 + 6O2 → 6CO2 + 6H2O
remembering that every step after the cleavage of
fructose-1,6-biphosphate into two 3-carbon compounds occurs twice, as shown in Fig. 7.2.
The oxidation of any substance must always be
coupled with a corresponding reduction of another
substance, and this role is served by three nucleotides:
NAD+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), NADP+,
and FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide). As shown in
Fig. 7.2, these compounds accept electrons and are
correspondingly reduced to NADH, NADPH and
FADH2. These nucleotides then need to be reoxidized
for the whole process to continue, and this is achieved
by passing their electrons along an electron transport
chain, where oxygen is the terminal electron acceptor.
The electron transport chain is shown in simplified,
diagrammatic form in Fig. 7.3. It consists of a series
of electron carriers which are located in the mitochondrial membrane, and in several cases span this
membrane. They are aligned in a specific sequence.
Initially, NADH [or NAD(P)H] is reoxidized to NAD+
[or NAD(P)+] by transferring its electrons to the
carrier molecule, flavin mononucleotide (FMN), which
becomes reduced to FMNH. (Note that, for our purposes,
we can regard FMN/FMNH as equivalent to FAD/
FADH2; the essential point is that a flavin molecule acts
as a carrier in the electron-transport chain.) The flavin
nucleotide, in turn, transfers the electrons to coenzyme
Q, and so on down the chain, until the final step when
oxygen accepts the electrons and is, itself, reduced to
water. The carriers in the electron transport chain generate a proton motive force, because protons (H+
ions) are extruded to the outside of the mitochondrial
membrane while OH− ions accumulate inside. This
polarization of the membrane is used to drive the synthesis of ATP (from ADP + inorganic phosphate) when
protons re-enter through a membrane-located ATPase
(also termed ATP synthase).
As shown in Fig. 7.3, the electron transport chain is,
essentially, an electrochemical gradient, and at three

The energy yield from aerobic respiration
We can calculate the theoretical energy yield from
glucose during aerobic respiration by calculating the
number of ATP molecules that could be synthesized
(Fig. 7.2):
2 ATP from the EM pathway down to pyruvic acid
(4 ATP produced but 2 ATP used initially to
phosphorylate glucose)
2 ATP from the TCA cycle (one in each turn of
the cycle, but 2 molecules of pyruvate must be
processed through this cycle)
30 ATP from the reoxidation of 10 pyridine
nucleotides (NADH / NADPH)
4 ATP from the reoxidation of 2 flavin nucleotides
Total 38 ATP
However, the actual ATP yield will be much less than
this, for at least two reasons:
1 Intermediates are continuously drawn from the
pathways for biosynthetic reactions, so this represents
a loss of potential ATP.
2 The major role of NADP/NADPH (as opposed to
NAD+/NADH) is to provide reducing power for
biosynthetic reactions, rather than to generate ATP.
At this stage we should mention the special role of the
pentose-phosphate pathway (Fig. 7.2). It can be used
as an alternative to the EM pathway for generating
energy from sugars (giving 1 ATP instead of the 2 ATP
from the EM route). But its major role is in biosynthesis
– it generates some important intermediates, such as
ribose-5-phosphate for the synthesis of nucleic acids and
erythrose-4-phosphate for the synthesis of aromatic
amino acids.

126

CHAPTER 7

What happens when oxygen is limiting?

Alternative terminal electron acceptors

In the absence of a terminal electron acceptor (usually
oxygen), the electron transport chain cannot operate,
so the pool of reduced nucleotides (NADH, etc.) accumulates and metabolism would rapidly cease. But
fungi, and many other organisms, can still obtain
some energy in the absence of oxygen by one of the
following reactions:

At least some fungi (e.g. Neurospora crassa, Emericella
nidulans) have an alternative means of coping with
anaerobic conditions: they use nitrate in place of
oxygen as the terminal electron acceptor in the electron
transport chain, so that the full TCA cycle operates.
This provides a theoretical yield of 26 ATP from each
molecule of glucose metabolized. The yield is lower
than when oxygen is the terminal electron acceptor,
because the energy differential along the electrontransport chain from NADH/NADPH to nitrate is
sufficient to generate only 2 ATP (and only one ATP
from flavin nucleotides to nitrate).
All energy-yielding pathways which (i) involve an
electron-transport chain and (ii) use external inorganic
substances as the terminal electron acceptor are described
by the term respiration. However, a distinction is
made between aerobic respiration (when oxygen is the
terminal electron acceptor) and anaerobic respiration
(when nitrate is the terminal electron acceptor).

1 CH3.CO.COOH
(pyruvic acid)

pyruvic dehydrogenase
acetaldehyde + CO2

then:
CH3.CHO + NADH
(acetaldehyde)

alcohol dehydrogenase
CH3CH2OH + NAD+
(ethanol)

2 CH3.CO.COOH + NADH
(pyruvic acid)

lactic dehydrogenase
CH3.CHOH.COOH + NAD+
(lactic acid)

In both cases the end-product (ethanol or lactic acid)
is more reduced than pyruvic acid, so the reactions
are coupled with the reoxidation of NADH to NAD+.
This allows the Embden–Myerhof pathway to continue,
and the cells release either lactic acid or ethanol into
the surrounding medium. Most yeasts and mycelial
fungi produce ethanol – this is the basis of the alcoholic drinks industry. But several Chytridiomycota
produce lactic acid (e.g. Allomyces, Blastocladiella), as do
humans when our tissue oxygen level is depleted.
Energy-yielding reactions of this type – where an
internal inorganic compound is the terminal electron
acceptor – are defined by the biochemical term fermentation. In the first equation above the terminal electron
acceptor is acetaldehyde, because this accepts electrons from NADH and is, itself, reduced to ethanol.
Similarly, in the second equation, pyruvic acid accepts
electrons and is itself reduced to lactic acid.
In terms of energy yield, the conversion of pyruvic
acid to either ethanol or lactic acid is very inefficient
– only 2 moles of ATP are produced from every mole
of sugar metabolized (compared with the potential
38 ATP from aerobic respiration). Fungi therefore need
an abundant supply of sugars for growth in anaerobic
conditions. We noted in Chapter 6 that fungi also need
to be supplied with a wide range of other nutrients
in anaerobic conditions, because the TCA cycle and
several other reactions do not operate to provide the
precursors for biosynthesis.

Summary: the central role of the
energy-yielding pathways
From Fig. 7.2 it can be seen that many types of substrate
can be used as potential energy sources, provided
that they can be fed into one of the energy-yielding
pathways. For example, pentose sugars such as xylose
(a major component of hemicelluloses) can be fed
into the pentose-phosphate pathway and metabolized
to give energy. An amino acid like glutamic acid can
be deaminated to an organic acid (α-ketoglutaric acid
in this case) which will feed into the TCA cycle and
yield a theoretical 9 ATP during its conversion to
oxaloacetate. Similarly, if acetate is supplied as a substrate it can be linked to coenzyme A, and acetyl-CoA
can then combine with oxaloacetate (giving citrate)
and be processed through the TCA cycle. Fatty acids
can be degraded to acetyl-CoA by a process termed
β-oxidation (Fig. 7.4) and can then be metabolized in
the same way. The only limitation in all these cases is
that oxygen (or perhaps nitrate) is required as a terminal electron acceptor. The only substrates that can supply energy through fermentation are sugars and sugar
derivatives, through the Embden–Meyerhof pathway or
the pentose-phosphate pathway.

Coordination of metabolism: balancing the
pathways
We noted earlier that several intermediates of the
basic energy-yielding pathways serve as precursor
metabolites for biosynthesis. For example:

FUNGAL METABOLISM AND FUNGAL PRODUCTS

n-Alkane

127

Carboxylic acid

CH3(CH2)nCH2CH2CH3

CH3(CH2)nCH2CH2COOH
CoA.SH
(coenzyme)

CH3(CH2)nCH2CH2CO.S.CoA
Repeat
β-Oxidation
O
CH3(CH2)n–2CH2CH2CO.S.CoA + CH3CO.S.CoA
Acetyl-CoA

CH3(CH2)nC.CH2CO.S.CoA
CoA.SH

Fig. 7.4 Outline of the reactions in b-oxidation – a process that occurs in the mitochondria of fungi. Long-chain fatty
acids are activated by combining with coenzyme A and then enter a repeating cycle in which a molecule of acetylcoenzyme A is removed in each turn of the cycle. Since most fatty acids have an even number of carbon atoms, this
results in the complete conversion of fatty acids to acetyl-CoA. Long-chain hydrocarbons (n-alkanes; top left) such as
those in aviation kerosene (Chapter 6) can also be processed through this pathway, but first they need to be oxidized
by oxygenase enzymes, which catalyze the direct incorporation of molecular oxygen into the molecule.

• Dihydroxyacetone phosphate (in the Embden–
Meyerhof pathway) can be converted to glycerol for
lipid synthesis.
• Acetyl-CoA is used for synthesis of fatty acids and
sterols.
• α-ketoglutaric acid is used to produce amino acids
of the important glutamate “family” (glutamate,
proline, arginine).
• Oxaloacetate is used for the equally important
aspartate family (aspartate, lysine, methionine,
threonine, isoleucine).
Therefore, the question arises, how can the pathways
for energy production continue when intermediates
are removed?
The main problem would arise when intermediates
of the TCA cycle are removed, thereby breaking the
cycle. This problem is overcome by special anaplerotic
reactions (literally “filling-up” reactions) which
replenish the missing intermediates. One such reaction
sequence is the glyoxylate cycle, described later in a
different context. Another type of anaplerotic reaction
involves the coupling of CO2 to pyruvic acid, to give
oxaloacetate, as follows:
pyruvate + ATP + HCO3−

pyruvate carboxylase
oxaloacetate + ADP + Pi

The vitamin biotin serves a crucial role as the cofactor of pyruvate carboxylase, acting as a donor or
acceptor of CO2. Biotin also is the cofactor in other
carboxylation reactions. This explains why several
fungi need to be supplied with biotin in the growth
medium if a fungus cannot synthesize it (see Table 6.1).

How are sugars generated from nonsugar
substrates?
Sugars are always needed for the synthesis of fungal
walls, nucleic acids, and storage compounds, so how
are they produced when a fungus is growing on nonsugar substrates? This is done by a process termed
gluconeogenesis (the generation of sugars anew) and
is shown in Fig. 7.5. Many of the steps are simply a
reversal of the Embden–Myerhof pathway, but the
step between phosphoenolpyruvate and pyruvate in this
pathway is irreversible and so must be bypassed.
Consider the case of a fungus growing on acetate
(2-carbon) as the sole carbon source. After uptake,
acetate is converted to acetyl-CoA and is used to generate oxaloacetate by the glyoxylate cycle – a shortcircuited form of the TCA cycle. The first reaction step
is the cleavage of isocitrate (a 6-carbon intermediate
of the TCA cycle) to yield succinate (4-carbon) and
glyoxylate (2-carbon). Then glyoxylate is condensed with

128

CHAPTER 7

substrates like fatty acids, organic acids, amino acids,
ethanol, etc.

Secretion of organic acids as commercial
products
Fungi are important commercial sources of organic
acids (Chapter 1). For example, if Aspergillus niger is
grown at high glucose levels (15–20%) and low pH
(about 2.0) it will convert most of the sugar to citric
acid and release this into the culture medium. Large
amounts of oxaloacetate must be generated for this,
by the carboxylation of pyruvic acid discussed earlier.
Similarly Rhizopus nigricans (Zygomycota) produces
large amounts of fumaric acid, another TCA cycle
intermediate. In both cases the growth of the fungus
is severely (and purposefully) restricted by low pH or
some other factor, but the basic metabolic pathways
continue to operate. The fungus behaves like a car with
its engine ticking over: the fuel (substrate) is not used
for growth, so a convenient metabolic intermediate is
released as a kind of exhaust product. We shall see later
that secondary metabolites such as antibiotics are produced in a similar way. These types of process are termed
energy slippage; the fact that they occur at all indicates that they are necessary, perhaps because fungi need
to keep their normal metabolic processes operating
during periods when growth is temporarily halted.

Mobilizable and energy storage compounds
of fungi
Fig. 7.5 Role of the glyoxylate cycle in generating sugars
for biosynthesis when fungi are grown on nonsugar substrates such as acetate or organic acids.

acetyl-CoA to produce malate and thence oxaloacetate. From this point, oxaloacetate is decarboxylated
to yield phospoenolpyruvate (PEP), shown below, and
sugars are formed from PEP by reversal of the rest of
the Embden–Myerhof pathway:

oxaloacetate + ATP

Fungi have a characteristic range of mobilizable and
energy storage compounds, quite different from those
of plants, but strikingly similar to those of insects.
The main energy-storage compounds of fungi include
lipids, glycogen (an α-linked polymer of glucose),
and trehalose (a nonreducing disaccharide, Fig. 7.6).

phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase

phosphoenolpyruvate + CO2 + ADP + Pi
The important role played by the glyoxylate cycle is
evidenced by the fact that its enzyme levels increase
more than 20-fold when acetate is supplied as the sole
carbon source, and mutant strains of fungi that cannot grow on acetate often are disrupted in one of the
steps of this pathway. The same processes as described
above could be used to generate sugars from other

Fig. 7.6 The structure of mannitol and trehalose, two characteristic “fungal sugars.”

FUNGAL METABOLISM AND FUNGAL PRODUCTS

The main mobilizable carbohydrates are trehalose and
straight-chain sugar alcohols (polyols) such as mannitol
(Fig. 7.6) and arabitol, although ribitol is common
in the Zygomycota. The Oomycota have none of these
typical “fungal carbohydrates.” Instead their storage
compounds are lipids and soluble mycolaminarins
(β-linked polymers of glucose), and they translocate
glucose or similar sugars.
All these fungal carbohydrates can be derived from
the more familiar sugars. For example, trehalose is a
disaccharide of glucose, and mannitol is derived from
fructose by a one-step reaction involving the enzyme
polyol dehydrogenase. But a point of special interest
is that these compounds are interconvertible, and seem
to have different roles in different parts of a mycelial
network. Brownlee & Jennings (1981) investigated this
for the dry-rot fungus Serpula lacrymans (Basidiomycota). They devised a simple experimental system
(Fig. 7.7) in which small blocks of wood were colonized
by S. lacrymans and were then placed on a sheet of
Perspex, so that the fungus grew across the Perspex, supported by nutrients translocated from the wood blocks.
The fungus grew initially as a broad mycelial colony,
but then formed mycelial cords (Chapter 5) behind the
colony margin. Different regions of the colony could
then be sampled to determine the different proportions
of soluble carbohydrates that they contained.

Fig. 7.7 Diagram of the soluble carbohydrate contents in different regions of
a colony of Serpula lacrymans growing
across a sheet of Perspex from a precolonized wood block. Data are per cent
of dry weight of the sugars in different
zones. (Based on Brownlee & Jennings
1981.)

129

The mycelial cords contained high levels of trehalose, but low levels of other sugars or sugar alcohols.
The mid zone of the colonies (Fig. 7.7) contained high
levels of trehalose and arabitol (a sugar alcohol), and
these high levels were maintained in the submarginal
and marginal zones of the colonies. In further experiments, 14C-labeled glucose was added to the wood
blocks, and the label was followed through different
zones of the mycelial colonies. This again confirmed
that arabitol and especially trehalose were the main
forms in which sugars and sugar alcohols are translocated within the mycelial system, accumulating in
the mid zone and submarginal zone. The conversion
of trehalose (a disaccharide) to arabitol near the margin
of the colony is likely to increase the osmotic potential, helping to draw water towards the colony margin
so that the fungus can grow across nutrient-free
zones.
Serpula lacrymans is well known to colonize the structural timbers in buildings. It needs water to colonize
the timbers initially, but then its rapid rate of cellulose
breakdown and the subsequent breakdown of glucose
(to CO2 and H2O) generates “metabolic” water, which
is sometimes exuded as droplets on the hyphae. In
this way, the fungus can spread several meters across
brickwork or plaster, drawing the water and nutrients
forwards to colonize other timbers (Fig. 7.8).

Sucrose, fructose, glucose

0.11

0.59

1.66

2.74

Mannitol

0

1.54

2.52

1.23

Arabitol

0.35

20.04

13.90

7.95

Trehalose

10.89

10.00

16.70

17.90

TOTAL

11.35

32.17

34.78

29.82

130

CHAPTER 7

Fig. 7.8 Part of a wooden door post heavily rotted by
Serpula lacrymans. The surface of the timber is covered with
dense yellow/white mycelial fronds of the fungus. The wood
shows the characteristic block-like cracking (arrowheads)
typical of dry rot.
Similar mycelial cords and fans of hyphae are seen
in many ectomycorrhizal fungi of forest trees (Fig. 7.9),
where they are responsible both for the spread of mycorrhizal development and for capturing mineral nutrients and translocating them back to the root system.
The “fungal carbohydrates” are also implicated in
many plant-parasitic and symbiotic associations. The
initial studies on this were made by Harley with the
ectomycorrhizal fungi of beech trees. These fungi produce a substantial sheath of tissue around the root tips
(Fig. 7.10), and this sheath can be dissected away for
separate chemical analysis. When the leaves of tree
seedlings were exposed to 14CO2, the label was found
mainly as sucrose in the leaf, stem, and root tissues,

Fig. 7.9 Mycelial cords and fans of hyphae produced
by a mycorrhizal fungus, Lactarius pubescens, on an agar
plate.

Fig. 7.10 Mycorrhizas of Basidiomycota
on a tree root. The narrow roots are
enclosed in a dense fungal sheath.

FUNGAL METABOLISM AND FUNGAL PRODUCTS

131

Fig. 7.11 Structure of chitin and its deacetylated derivative, chitosan.

but was then found in the form of mannitol and
trehalose in the fungal sheaths. Similar findings have
been made for plants infected by rust or powdery
mildew fungi (the biotrophic plant pathogens discussed in Chapter 14). When leaves are exposed to
14
CO2, the label is found initially in the typical plant
sugars (sucrose, glucose) but spores produced by the
biotrophic fungi are found to contain the label in the
form of fungal carbohydrates. Most plants do not
metabolize these compounds (except in seeds and
fruits), so the conversion of plant sugars to the typical
fungal carbohydrates represents a “metabolic valve”
– a one-way flow of nutrients from the host to the
fungus. This may help to contribute to the success of
biotrophic plant pathogens.
The actual pathways of nutrient translocation in
fungi are unclear, but nutrients can move both forwards
and backwards in hyphae, from regions of relative
abundance to relative shortage. The tubular vacuolar
system of fungi, described in Chapter 3, may be
significant in this respect because it can transport
fluorescent dyes against the general flow of cytoplasm.
The typical fungal carbohydrates may have several
other important roles in fungal physiology. For example, mannitol is a common constituent of fungal
vacuoles, where it has a major role in regulating cellular
pH (Chapter 8).

Chitin synthesis
Chitin is a characteristic component of fungal walls.
The synthesis of this polysaccharide follows the pattern of synthesis of many polysaccharides and can be
represented by the following general equation:
[Donor-sugar unit] + Acceptor →
Donor + [Acceptor-sugar unit]

For example, in the synthesis of chitin (Fig. 7.11),
fructose-6-phosphate (from the Embden–Myerhof pathway) is initially converted to N-acetylglucosamine
(GlcNAc) by successive additions of an amino group
(from the amino acid glutamine) and an acetyl group
(from acetyl-CoA). Then GlcNAc reacts with uridine
triphosphate (UTP) to form UDP-GlcNAc plus inorganic
phosphate. The high energy (activated) sugar unit is
then added to the elongating chitin chain, by the
enzyme chitin synthase, discussed in Chapter 4.
UTP + Glc NAc → UDP-Glc NAc + Pi
then:
UDP-GlcNAc + n[GlcNAc] → UDP + n+1[GlcNAc]
A poorly or nonacetylated form of chitin, termed
chitosan, is found in Zygomycota such as Mucor spp.
It is synthesized in the same way as chitin but is then
deacetylated by the enzyme chitin deacetylase.

Lysine biosynthesis
Lysine is an essential amino acid that must be supplied
as a dietary supplement for humans and many farm
animals, because they are unable to synthesize it.
Lysine is produced commercially by large-scale fermentation using the bacterium Brevibacterium flavum.
The interesting feature of this amino acid is that it is
synthesized by two specific pathways that are completely
different from one another. These pathways are
termed DAP and AAA, after their characteristic intermediates, α-diaminopimelic acid and α-aminoadipic
acid (Fig. 7.12). The AAA pathway is found only in the
chitin-containing fungi and some euglenids. All other
organisms that synthesize lysine – the plants, bacteria
and Oomycota – use the DAP pathway. Such a major

132

CHAPTER 7

Fig. 7.12 Structure of the amino acid lysine, and
the characteristic intermediates of the two distinct
lysine biosynthesis pathways.

difference between fungi and other organisms indicates
a clear, and ancient, evolutionary divergence.

Secondary metabolism
The term secondary metabolism refers to a wide
range of metabolic reactions whose products are not
directly or obviously involved in normal growth. In this
respect, secondary metabolism differs from intermediary metabolism (the normal metabolic pathways discussed earlier in this chapter). Thousands of secondary
metabolites have been described from fungi (Turner
1971; Turner & Aldridge 1983), and the only features
that they have in common are:
• they tend to be produced at the end of the exponential growth phase in batch culture or when
growth is substrate-limited in continuous culture
(Chapter 4);
• they are produced from common metabolic intermediates but by special enzymatic pathways
encoded by specific genes;
• they are not essential for growth or normal
metabolism;
• their production tends to be genus-, species- or even
strain-specific.
Interest in this diverse range of compounds stems
mainly from their commercial or environmental significance. For example, the penicillins (from Penicillium
chrysogenum), the structurally similar cephalosporins
(from Cephalosporium or Acremonium species), and
griseofulvin (from P. griseofulvum) are antibiotics
produced commercially from fungi. The darkly
pigmented melanins in some fungal walls are also secondary metabolites, as are the carotenoid pigments in
the conidia of fungi such as Neurospora crassa. These
compounds help to protect cells from damage caused

by reactive oxygen species, such as hydrogen peroxide
and superoxide (Chapter 8). Some secondary metabolites are plant hormones, such as the gibberellins
used commercially in horticulture. The initial discovery
of gibberellins was made during studies of a plant disease
– the bakanae disease of rice, caused by the fungus
Gibberella fujikuroi. In this disease the shoots elongate
markedly owing to the production of gibberellins by
the parasitic fungus. Some secondary metabolites are
involved in differentiation, examples being the fungal
sex hormones discussed in Chapter 5. Others are marketed as pharmaceuticals, including ciclosporin A
which suppresses organ rejection in transplant surgery.
Further examples include the mycotoxins, such as the
aflatoxins produced by Aspergillus flavus and A. parasiticus (Fig. 7.19) and the ergot alkaloids produced by
Claviceps purpurea (Fig. 7.18) and related species.
This list of examples could go on, but many secondary
metabolites have no obvious role in the life of the
producer organism, and mutated strains that do not
produce these compounds often grow as well as the
wild-type strains in culture. This raises the question of
why secondary metabolites are produced in such
diversity and abundance, especially since they are
encoded by cassettes of genes that could be expected
to be lost if they confer no selective advantage.
One plausible suggestion is that the process of
secondary metabolism is necessary, regardless of
the end products. According to this view, secondary
metabolism acts as an overspill or escape valve, to
remove intermediates from the basic metabolic pathways when growth is temporarily restricted. This is
similar to the explanation we noted earlier for the
overproduction of organic acids: an organism needs to
maintain the basic metabolic pathways during periods
when growth is restricted, but the common metabolic
intermediates cannot be allowed to accumulate
because they would disrupt normal metabolism. So, it

FUNGAL METABOLISM AND FUNGAL PRODUCTS

is argued that these intermediates are shunted into secondary metabolic pathways, whose products are either
exported from the cell or accumulate as (predominantly) inactive compounds. Indeed, at one stage secondary metabolism was termed “shunt metabolism.”
It could then be argued that the genes encoding the
secondary metabolic pathways are free to mutate (certainly more so than those encoding basic metabolism)
and selection pressure would favor mutations that
lead to products that benefit a fungus.
For example, antibiotics could be useful in defense
of territory, mycotoxins as animal antifeedants,
melanin for protection against UV damage, sex hormones for attracting partners, and flavor or odor
components of toadstools for attracting insects for
spore dispersal. If this view of secondary metabolism
is correct, then it seems that many fungi have still to
find useful roles for their secondary metabolites, or we
have yet to find them!
In any case, secondary metabolism is under tight
regulatory control. As noted above, secondary metabolites typically are produced towards the end of the
exponential growth phase in batch cultures, when

133

growth is limited by a critical shortage of a particular
nutrient but when other nutrients are still available.
In continuous-culture systems, secondary metabolites
can be produced throughout the exponential growth
phase. The critical factor is that the genes encoding
secondary metabolism are repressed by high levels of
particular nutrients, but in chemostats the culture
medium can be designed so that these repressor substrates are the growth-limiting nutrients, always present
at low concentration because they are utilized as soon
as they enter the chemostat (Chapter 4).

The pathways and precursors of
secondary metabolism
If we return to Fig. 7.1 at the start of this chapter, we
see that a few key intermediates of the basic metabolic
pathways provide the starting points for the pathways
of secondary metabolism. Some of the more important
examples are shown in Table 7.1.
The single most important secondary metabolic
pathway is the polyketide pathway, which seems to

Table 7.1 Some secondary metabolites derived from different pathways and precursors.
Precursor

Pathway

Metabolites; representative organisms

Sugars

–

Few, e.g. muscarine (Amanita muscaria), kojic acid (Aspergillus spp.)

Aromatic amino acids

Shikimic acid

Some lichen acids

Aliphatic amino acids

Various, including
peptide synthesis

Penicillins (P. chrysogenum, P. notatum)
Fusaric acid (Fusarium spp.)
Ergot alkaloids (Claviceps, Neotyphodium)
Lysergic acid (Claviceps purpurea)
Sporidesmin (Pithomyces chartarum)
Beauvericin (Beauveria bassiana)
Destruxins (Metarhizium anisopliae)

Organic acids

TCA cycle

Rubratoxin (Penicillium rubrum)
Itaconic acid (Aspergillus spp.)

Fatty acids

Lipid metabolism

Polyacetylenes (Basidiomycota fruitbodies and hyphae)

Acetyl-CoA

Polyketide

Patulin (Penicillium patulum)
Usnic acid (many lichens)
Ochratoxins (Aspergillus ochraceus)
Griseofulvin (Penicillium griseofulvum)
Aflatoxins (A. parasiticus, A. flavus)

Acetyl Co-A

Isoprenoid

Trichothecenes (Fusarium spp.)
Fusicoccin (Fusicoccum amygdali )
Several sex hormones: sirenin, trisporic acids, oogoniol, antheridiol
Cephalosporins (Cephalosporium and related fungi)
Viridin (Trichoderma virens)

134

CHAPTER 7

Fig. 7.13 Outline of the polyketide pathway. Various intermediates (shown in brackets) can be formed during cyclization, leading to different end-products. Patulin is derived from 6-methylsalicylic acid. Longer ketide chains than the one
shown here can produce multiple ring systems, leading to products such as the aflatoxins (see Fig. 7.19).

have no other role except in secondary metabolism.
It is shown in outline in Fig. 7.13. In this case the
precursor is acetyl-CoA, which is carboxylated to
form malonyl-CoA (a normal event in the synthesis of
fatty acids), then three or more molecules of malonylCoA condense with acetyl-CoA to form a chain. This
chain undergoes cyclization, then the ring systems are
modified to give a wide range of products. These
include the antibiotic griseofulvin (from Penicillium
griseofulvum) used to treat dermatophyte infections
of humans (Chapter 17), the potent aflatoxins (from
Aspergillus flavus and A. parasiticus) discussed later, the

ochratoxins from various Penicillium and Aspergillus
spp., and the antibiotic or mycotoxin patulin from
Penicillium patulum.
Another important secondary metabolic pathway of
fungi is the isoprenoid pathway for the synthesis of
sterols. Again, acetyl-CoA is the precursor, but three
molecules of this condense to form mevalonic acid (a
6-carbon compound) which is converted to a 5-carbon
isoprene unit (Fig. 7.14). Then the isoprene units
condense head-to-tail to form chains of various
lengths, and the chains undergo cyclization and
further modifications (Fig. 7.15). The products of

CH2
3 CH3CO.CoA
HOOC.CH2
Condensation

C

H3C
CH2.COOH

OH
3 Acetyl-coenzyme A

Mevalonate (6-C)

C

C.CH2.CH2

PP

H2C
Isopentyl pyrophosphate
(isoprene unit)

Fig. 7.14 Pathway from acetyl-coA to the production of isoprene units.

Fig. 7.15 Outline of the isoprenoid pathway for synthesis of sterols, several fungal pheromones, several mycotoxins,
and the cephalosporin antibiotics.

136

CHAPTER 7

this pathway include the mycotoxins of Fusarium spp.
that grow on moist grain, such as T-2 toxin and the
trichothecenes.
The shikimic acid pathway, used normally for
the production of aromatic amino acids, provides the
precursors for the hallucinogenic secondary metabolites,
lysergic acid and psilocybin in toadstools of Psilocybe,
and the toxin muscarine in toadstools of Amanita
muscaria. Other pathways lead from aliphatic amino
acids to the penicillins (see below), amatoxins and
phallotoxins (in toadstools of the “death cap,”
Amanita phalloides), from fatty acids to the volatile
polyacetylenes produced by mycelia and fruitbodies
of several Basidiomycota, and from intermediates of the
TCA cycle to the rubratoxins of Penicillium rubrum.
Against this background, we now consider a few
examples of secondary metabolites of special interest.

Penicillins
Penicillin was discovered by Alexander Fleming in
1929 as a metabolite of Penicillium chrysogenum (originally misidentified as P. notatum) that inhibited the
growth of Staphylococcus. However, Fleming could not
purify the compound in stable form, and this was
only achieved in the early 1940s by two British scientists, Florey and Chain, working in the USA during the
Second World War. For this work, they shared with
Fleming the Nobel Prize for Medicine.
Penicillin is most active against Gram-positive bacteria. Its mode of action is to prevent the cross-linking
of peptides during the synthesis of peptidoglycan in
bacterial cell walls, so that the walls are weakened and
the cells are susceptible to osmotic lysis. Remarkably,
penicillin is still one of the front-line antibiotics
after more than 60 years of usage. Also of interest is

Fig. 7.16 Structure of penicillins.

the fact that the early fermentation systems that made
penicillin production possible were initially developed
for citric acid production, described in Chapter 1.
However, the modern-day penicillins, like the related
cephalosporins (peptide antibiotics), are semisynthetic
products (Schmidt 2002).
Fig. 7.16 shows the basic structure of penicillin. It is
a ring system derived from two amino acids, l-cysteine
and d-valine, but is synthesized from a tripeptide
precursor (α-aminoadipic acid–cysteine–valine) by the
replacement of α-aminoadipic acid with an acyl group
(shown as “R” in Fig. 7.16). This step is catalyzed
by the enzyme acyl transferase. In the early years
of commercial production, it was discovered that
modification of the culture medium would produce
penicillins with different acyl groups, conferring different properties on the penicillin molecule. So a
range of penicillins were produced commercially by
carefully controlling the supply of acyl precursors in
the culture vessels. However, it was then found that
several bacteria produce the enzyme penicillin acylase,
which can be used to remove the acyl side chain and
leave the basic molecule, 6-aminopenicillanic acid
(6-APA). Chemists could then attach any desired side
chain to this molecule, with a high degree of precision.
So the modern production method for semisynthetic
penicillins involves three stages:
1 Culture of the fungus to produce maximum
amounts of any type of penicillin, usually penicillin
G which was the type first discovered. This is done
by fed-batch culture (Chapter 4) in which glucose
is added in stages to prevent suppression of the secondary metabolic genes, while the precursor amino
acids are supplied in excess. Also, the pH and aeration are carefully controlled, because the penicillin
molecule dissociates above pH 7.5 – a problem that

FUNGAL METABOLISM AND FUNGAL PRODUCTS

137

Table 7.2 Some representative mycotoxins in foodstuffs.
Toxin

Representative fungi

Foodstuff

Effects

Aflatoxins
Ergot alkaloids
Fuminosins
Ochratoxin A
Patulin
Sporidesmin
Sterigmatocystin
Trichothecenes
Zearalenone

Aspergillus flavus, A. parasiticus
Claviceps purpurea
Fusarium moniliforme
Some Aspergillus and Penicillium spp.
Penicillium expansum, Aspergillus clavatus
Pithomyces chartarum
Aspergillus spp.
Fusarium spp., Stachybotrys chartarum
Fusarium

Peanuts, oilseeds
Cereals, grasses
Maize
Grain crops
Apples
Grass
Grain, oilseeds
Cereals
Cereals

Nephrotoxic, hepatocarcinomas
Neurotoxic
Human esophageal cancer in Africa?
Nephrotoxic, kidney carcinoma
Contact edema, hemorrhage
Facial eczema of sheep, cattle
Hepatocarcinogen
Abortive, blistering, estrogenic
Vulvovaginitis

prevented Fleming from producing penicillin consistently, but which Florey and Chain solved by
rigorously controlling the fermentation conditions.
2 Recovery of penicillin from the culture filtrate and
treatment with penicillin acylase to produce 6-APA.
3 Chemical addition of specific acyl groups (R in
Fig. 7.16) to produce a range of “semisynthetic”
penicillins with different properties. For example,
oxacillin and closely related compounds are resistant to some bacterial β-lactamases – the enzymes that
cleave the ring of penicillin G and thus inactivate
the antibiotic. Ampicillin has significant activity
against some Gram-negative bacteria, whereas the natural penicillins act mainly against Gram-positives.
Penicillin V has enhanced resistance to degradation
by stomach acid, so it is one of the best penicillins
for oral administration, whereas penicillin G is susceptible to acid.
Despite these advances, all penicillins are susceptible
to breakdown by the plasmid-encoded β-lactamases of
some enteric bacteria, and penicillins cause allergic
reactions in some patients. These problems have been
approached by developing a structurally related group
of antibiotics, the cephalosporins, originally discovered
as products of a fungus called “Cephalosporium
acremonium”, but now produced commercially from
strains of bacteria (Streptomyces spp).

Mycotoxins
Mycotoxins are a diverse range of compounds from
different precursors and pathways. They typically
cause toxicity when humans or higher animals ingest
them over a relatively long period of time, from low
concentrations in improperly stored food or animal
feedstuffs. But we cannot exclude the possibility that
even brief exposures to these toxins are hazardous.

The problem in establishing this lies in the fact that
many years may elapse before the effects of exposure
become evident. A few representative examples of
mycotoxins are shown in Table 7.2. Edwards et al. (2002)
review the molecular methods for detecting these
compounds.
Many of the mycotoxin problems result from the
improper storage of food and feed products, and
therefore can be avoided (Chapter 8). But some
Fusarium species grow on the grains of standing cereal
crops in wet field conditions and can produce mycotoxins before the grain is harvested. The Fusarium
toxins therefore pose particular problems. Several
examples are given in Table 7.2. Some toadstools also
contain deadly toxins, the classic examples being the
“death cap” Amanita phalloides, and the “destroying
angel” Amanita virosa. The toxicity of these is conferred
by the phallotoxins and amatoxins, but these are
acutely toxic compounds and are not normally classed
as mycotoxins.

The ergot alkaloids and related toxins
The ergot fungus, Claviceps purpurea (Fig. 7.17) produces
sclerotia that develop in place of the grain in infected
cereals and grasses, then the sclerotia (termed ergots)
fall to the ground and overwinter near the soil surface.
In the following summer they produce minute fruiting bodies, resembling drumsticks, which contain
many perithecia that release ascospores. The timing of
release of these ascospores coincides with the time
when the grass flowers open, so the fungus infects
the developing ovary and then develops into a new
sclerotium, to repeat the life cycle. The harvesting
and milling of ergot-contaminated cereals has caused
numerous deaths over the centuries. In one form of
the disease, termed convulsive ergotism, the nervous
system is affected and causes violent convulsions.

138

CHAPTER 7

>

>

p

p

(a)

(b)

Fig. 7.17 (a) Ergots (sclerotia) of Claviceps purpurea, produced in place of the grains of a ryegrass plant (Lolium sp.).
(b) Longitudinal section through the small, stalked fruiting body of Claviceps, which releases ascospores from perithecia (p) embedded in the surface of the fruiting body.

H

O
N
H

HN

O

N
H CH
3

CH3
OH
O
N

H
N

H

CH2.CH3
N

CH2

Ergotamine

CH2.CH3
N

HN
O

H

O

H
CH3
Lysergic acid dimethylamide (LSD)

Fig. 7.18 Structure of the ergot alkaloid ergotamine, and its derivative lysergic acid dimethylamide (LSD).

In another form, gangrenous ergotism, the blood capillaries contract, causing oxygen starvation and serious
damage in the tissues. The ergot alkaloids have some
important medical uses, to relieve some types of
migraine and to control hemorrhaging after childbirth
(Keller & Tudzynski 2002). They can also be abused
– the indole nucleus of one of the ergot alkaloids,
ergotamine, is lysergic acid, and this can be altered
chemically to produce the hallucinogenic drug, LSD
(lysergic acid diethylamide; Fig. 7.18). We return to this
subject in Chapter 13.

of canine hepatitis (associated with certain types of dog
food) and of liver cancer in farmed rainbow trout, associated with cottonseed meal in the fish food. In 1959,
100,000 young turkeys died in Britain after being fed
on fungus-contaminated cottonseed meal. The cause
was traced to a new type of toxin, termed aflatoxins,
some of which are among the most potent known
carcinogens.

In contrast to the ergot alkaloids, the health hazard
posed by the many fungi that grow inconspicuously
on stored food and feedstuffs was only recognized in
relatively recent times. In the 1950s there were outbreaks

Aflatoxins are produced mainly by Aspergillus flavus
(hence the name aflatoxin) and A. parasiticus, both
of which are common in tropical and subtropical
conditions. They grow on the root systems and crop

Aflatoxins

FUNGAL METABOLISM AND FUNGAL PRODUCTS

debris of groundnuts (peanuts), providing inoculum for
colonization of the subterranean groundnut fruits. A.
flavus can be isolated from the shells of almost any
peanuts bought from a grocery store – it is seen as gray
or black patches inside the shells. However, most strains
do not produce aflatoxin, and even the strains that do
produce these compounds require specific conditions
for this (Chapter 8). Oil-rich crops such as peanut fruits
and cottonseed are especially favorable for aflatoxin
production, consistent with the finding that aflatoxin
production in laboratory culture is stimulated by lipids.
After breakdown of the lipids by lipases, the fatty
acids are metabolized to acetyl-CoA by β-oxidation
(Fig. 7.4), then the aflatoxins can be synthesized from
acetyl-CoA by the polyketide pathway (Fig. 7.13). The
review by Hicks et al. (2002) provides details of the
genetics and biosynthesis of these compounds.
Aflatoxins can be detected in extracts of contaminated
foods by thin-layer chromatography, because they show
natural green or blue fluorescence under UV irradiation.
This colour difference is related to the ring structure
of the molecule (Fig. 7.19) and has led to the distinction between aflatoxins of the G (green-fluorescing) and
B (blue) types. This is also linked to toxicity, because
aflatoxin B1 is more toxic than aflatoxin G1.

139

The toxicity of all these compounds depends on the
presence of a double bond on the end furan ring
(marked * in Fig. 7.19). Aflatoxins B1 and G1 have this
double bond and they are carcinogens, whereas alfatoxins B2 and G2 lack the double bond and are only
weakly toxic. A similar difference is found in the milk
of cows that are fed on aflatoxin-contaminated feed.
Roughly 5% of the aflatoxin intake by a cow can be
found as aflatoxin M in the milk, and it occurs as either
aflatoxin M1 or M2 depending on whether the cows have
ingested aflatoxin B1 or B2.
When aflatoxins are absorbed from the gut they
are passed to the liver, where the aflatoxins with a
double bond (at position *) are metabolized to a
highly reactive but unstable form with an epoxide
bridge at the position of the double bond on the end
furan ring (Fig. 7.19, bottom left). This epoxide group
enables the toxin to bind to DNA and depurinate it,
causing damage to the genome which can lead to
hepatomas. Alternatively (Fig. 7.19, bottom right), the
epoxide can give rise to dihydrodihydroxyaflatoxin,
which is acutely toxic. All developed countries now
impose strict limits on the levels of aflatoxins and other
common mycotoxins in foods intended for human
consumption.

Fig. 7.19 Structures of some common aflatoxins. See text for details.

140

CHAPTER 7

Sporidesmin
The mitosporic fungus Pithomyces chartarum is a saprotroph that grows on the accumulated dead leaf
sheaths at the bases of pasture grasses. It is common
in parts of New Zealand, Australia, and South Africa,
where it causes a condition called facial eczema in
sheep and cattle. The conspicuous symptoms are seen
as blistering sores on parts of the body such as the face
and udders that are exposed to sunlight. However this
is a secondary symptom, and the primary cause is a
mycotoxin, sporidesmin, which is present only in the
spores of Pithomyces, not in the mycelium. The toxin is
ingested when the animals graze on pastures where the
fungus is sporulating, leading to necrosis of the liver, and
scarring and partial blockage of the bile duct, so that
the partial breakdown products of chlorophyll accumu-

late in the blood. They are photoactive compounds so
they cause photosensitization of the skin where it is
not protected by a covering of hair (Fig. 7.20).
P. chartarum requires quite specific conditions for
sporulation – a combination of relatively high temperature and high humidity over a period of days. So,
in countries where facial eczema is common there is
a forecasting system so that farmers can bring the
animals into enclosures when the risk of exposure
to spores is high. Fungicides can also been used to control this problem.

Endnotes: some further toxins
More than 300 mycotoxins have been identified to date
and, although many of them might not be a serious

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 7.20 (a) Spores of Pithomyces chartarum collected in a spore sampling device. The darkly pigmented spores are
multicellular and shaped like hand-grenades. They contain the toxin sporidesmin. (b) Comparison of a healthy liver
(lower) and two damaged livers of animals suffering from facial eczema. (c) Blistering lesions on the nose and snout of
a sheep suffering from facial eczema. (d) Photosensitization of the udder of a cow affected by the Pithomyces toxin.
(Courtesy of E. McKenzie.)

FUNGAL METABOLISM AND FUNGAL PRODUCTS

cause for concern, they could present a potential
hazard through long-term, low-dosage exposure. We
cannot consider all of these compounds, but to end this
chapter we will briefly consider three further examples
of toxins and potentially toxic conditions.

Patulin
Patulin (Fig. 7.13) was originally discovered as a widespectrum antibacterial antibiotic but its development
was abandoned because of its mammalian toxicity.
It is a small, simple metabolite produced by many
species of Penicillium and Aspergillus, including the
common apple-rot fungus Penicillium expansum which
causes a soft, watery rot when spores enter the apple
skin through wounds (Chapter 14). Patulin has been
detected in commercially produced apple juice and other
fruit juices, especially if these are made from partly
decaying apples. It can cause edema and hemorrhaging when ingested, and also seems to be carcinogenic
in experimental animals. It is unwise to eat any part
of a rotted apple.

Roquefort cheese
Roquefort cheese and other blue-veined cheeses are
produced from goats’ milk and inoculated with the
fungus Penicillium roqueforti. Roquefort cheese contains low levels of the mycotoxin roquefortine, but
these levels are not considered to be hazardous. You
make your choice!

Sick building syndrome
This is a condition associated with dampness and
condensation, which encourages the growth of mould
fungi. The symptoms include headaches, fatigue, and
general malaise, but the precise causes are not easy to

141

determine. Stachybotrys chartarum is one of the darkly
pigmented fungi that commonly occur in these environmental conditions. It is strongly cellulolytic and
grows on substrates like the paper backing of plasterboard. This fungus was implicated in the death of
thousands of horses in the Soviet Union, when the
animals were fed on Stachybotrys-contaminated hay in
the 1930s. Stachybotrys is one of several fungi (including Fusarium spp.) that produce the trichothecene
toxins. There has been speculation that Stachybotrys
is implicated in sick building syndrome, but careful
research has consistently failed to provide any evidence
that Stachybotrys or its toxins are involved in sick
building syndrome (Kuhn & Ghannoum 2003).

Cited references
Brownlee, C. & Jennings, D.H. (1981) The content of
carbohydrates and their translocation in mycelium of
Serpula lacrymans. Transactions of the British Mycological
Society 77, 615–619.
Edwards, S.G., O’Callaghan, J. & Dobson, A.D.W. (2002)
PCR-based detection and quantification of mycotoxigenic
fungi. Mycological Research 106, 1005–1025.
Hicks, J.K., Shimizu, K. & Keller, N.P. (2002) Genetics
and biosynthesis of aflatoxins and sterigmatocystin. In:
The Mycota XI. Agricultural Applications (Kempken, F., ed.),
pp. 55–69. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Keller, U. & Tudzynski, P. (2002) Ergot alkaloids. In:
The Mycota X. Industrial Applications (Osiewacz, H.D., ed.),
pp. 158–181. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Kuhn, D.M. & Ghannoum, M.A. (2003) Indoor mold,
toxigenic fungi, and Stachybotrys chartarum: infectious
disease perspective. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 16,
144–172.
Schmidt, F.R. (2002) Beta-lactam antibiotics: aspects of
manufacture and therapy. In: The Mycota X. Industrial
Applications (Osiewicz, H.D., ed.), pp. 69–91. SpringerVerlag, Berlin.
Turner, W.B. (1971) Fungal Metabolites. Academic Press,
London.
Turner, W.B. & Aldridge, D.C. (1983) Fungal Metabolites,
vol. II. Academic Press, London.

Chapter 8

Environmental conditions for
growth, and tolerance of extremes

This chapter is divided into the following major sections:
•
•
•
•
•
•

some introductory comments
temperature and fungal growth
pH and fungal growth
oxygen and fungal growth
water availability and fungal growth
effects of light on fungal growth

In common with all microorganisms, fungi are profoundly affected by physical and physicochemical
factors, such as temperature, aeration, pH, water
potential, and light. These factors not only affect
the growth rate of fungi but also can act as triggers
in developmental pathways. In this chapter we consider the effects of environmental factors on fungal
growth, including the extremes of adaptation to environmental conditions.

2 Fungi often can tolerate one suboptimal factor if
all others are near optimal, but a combination of
suboptimal factors can prevent fungal growth. For
example, several fungi can grow at low pH (less
than 4.0), and several can grow in anaerobic conditions, but few if any fungi can grow when low pH
is combined with anaerobiosis.
3 Competitive interactions can restrict the growth of
a fungus to a much narrower range than we find in
laboratory conditions. A classic early example of
this is shown in Fig. 8.1, where wheat plants were

Some introductory comments
A few introductory points must be made to put this
chapter into perspective.
1 We will be concerned primarily with the effects of
environmental factors on fungal growth, but we must
recognize that almost all organisms can grow over a
wider range of conditions than will support their
full life cycle. For this reason, pure culture studies
in laboratory conditions can be misleading – they do
not necessarily predict the ability of a fungus to maintain its population in nature.

Fig. 8.1 Effect of temperature on infection of wheat
seedlings by the take-all fungus of cereals, Gaeumannomyces graminis, in sterilized soil (top line) and unsterile
soil (bottom line). (From Henry 1932.)

ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS

grown in sterilized soil and inoculated with the takeall fungus (Gaeumannomyces graminis), an aggressive
root pathogen (see Fig. 9.11). The fungus caused
progressively more disease as the soil temperature
was raised from 13 to 23 or 27°C (its optimum for
growth in pure culture). But in natural, unsterile soil
the amount of disease declined as the temperature
was raised above 18°. The main reason is that
higher temperatures favor other microorganisms
more than they favor the take-all fungus. Several
antibiotic-producing fluorescent Pseudomonas spp.
antagonize the take-all fungus, and they provide the
basis for current attempts to develop an effective
biological control strategy against the take-all disease
(Chapter 12).
All these points caution against a simple approach to
interpreting the effects of individual environmental
factors on fungal activities.

Temperature and fungal growth
Microorganisms are often grouped into four broad
categories in terms of their temperature ranges for
growth: psychrophiles (cold-loving), mesophiles
(which grow at moderate temperatures), thermophiles
(heat-loving), and hyperthermophiles. A possible
fifth category consists of psychrotolerant organisms,
which can grow at low temperatures (at or below 5°C)
but prefer more moderate temperatures.
However, these categories mean different things
when applied to different types of microorganism. For
example, most fungi are mesophiles and relatively few
can grow at or above 37°C (human body temperature)
or even above 30°C, whereas many bacteria can grow
at this temperature. The upper limit for growth of any
fungus (or any eukaryote) is about 62°C. By contrast,
some bacteria thrive at 70–80°C, and some archaea can
grow at over 100°C, the current record being for the
archaeon Pyrolobus fumarii, which is found around
natural thermal vents and has a temperature optimum
of 106°C and a maximum of 113°C in culture.
The temperature ranges for growth of some representative fungi are shown in Fig. 8.2. By convention,
thermophilic fungi are defined as having a minimum
growth temperature of 20°C or above, a maximum
growth temperature of 50°C or above, and an optimum
in the range of about 40–50°C. Cooney & Emerson, in
1964, described all the thermophilic fungi that were
known at that time. Haheshwari et al. (2000) provide
updated information on the taxonomy and physiological features of the thermophilic fungi. The temperature ranges of three of these species – Thermomyces
lanuginosus, Chaetomium thermophile, and Thermomucor
pusillus. – are shown in Fig. 8.2. All three are very

143

common in self-heating composts (Chapter 11) and can
also be isolated from materials such as birds’ nests and
sun-heated tropical soils. The fungus with the highest
recorded growth temperature (62°C) is Thermomyces
lanuginosus (Fig. 8.3), which is very common in composts. However, far fewer than 100 thermophilic fungi
have been described – an astonishingly low number,
given the large number of habitats from which they
can be isolated across the globe. This raises the question of whether different sampling approaches than
those used to date might reveal new thermophilic
species of biotechnological significance.
Aspergillus fumigatus is an extremely common fungus,
found in a wide range of environments, but it is
regarded as thermotolerant rather than thermophilic,
because it can grow at temperatures as low as 12°C
and its temperature optimum is less than 40°C. This
fungus is remarkable for its very wide temperature
range, 12–52°C, and its equally wide range of habitats.
It grows commonly in composts, on mouldy grain, and
on other decaying organic matter. It can also grow on
the hydrocarbons in aviation kerosene. In addition to
this, it is an opportunistic invader of the respiratory
tract of birds and humans, where it can form persistent colonies termed aspergillomas in the lungs
(Fig. 8.4). In recent years A. fumigatus has become a
significant problem in surgical wards, especially in
transplant units because it can colonize wounds and
grow within the tissues of transplant patients. It is, however, an essentially saprotrophic species. We deal with
the medical significance of this important fungus in
Chapter 16, because it is unique in the sense that
it can readily colonize humans as an opportunistic
invader but it seems to lack any specific pathogenicity
factors.
Most fungi are mesophilic, commonly growing
within the range 10–40°C, though with different tolerances within this range. For routine purposes these fungi
can usually be grown at room temperature (22–25°C).
Two important examples shown in Fig. 8.2 are
Aspergillus flavus, which produces the potent aflatoxins
in stored grain products, such as peanuts and cottonseed meal (Chapter 7), and Penicillium chrysogenum,
used for the commercial production of penicillins
(Chapter 7).
Psychrophilic fungi are defined as having optimum
growth at no more than 16°C and maximum growth
of about 20°C. In many cases they would be expected
to grow down to 4°C or lower, whilst psychrotrophic
fungi would be those that can grow at low temperatures but also above 20°C. There are many environments
that could suit these organisms, including the polar
and alpine regions, and the great oceans which have
a stable temperature of about 5°C. Several yeasts have
been found in polar and subpolar regions, including
a basidiomycetous yeast isolated from clothing of the

144

CHAPTER 8

Temperature (°C)
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Thermomyces lanuginosus
Chaetomium thermophile
Humicola insolens
Thermomucor pusillus
Aspergillus fumigatus
Aspergillus flavus
Penicillium chrysogenum
Cladosporium herbarum
Botrytis cinerea
Rhizopus nigricans
Penicillium expansum
Penicillium brevicaulis
Sclerotinia borealis
Typhula idahoensis

Fig. 8.2 Approximate temperature ranges and optima (black circle) for growth of some representative fungi.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 8.3 Thermomyces lanuginosus, a mitosporic thermophilic fungus. (a) 10-day-old colony on malt-extract agar.
(b) Large conidia which are darkly pigmented at maturity and are borne singly on short hyphal branches.
prehistoric iceman recently discovered in Siberia
(Robinson 2001).
Several cold-tolerant fungi are found in more familiar environments. Penicillium species often grow on food
residues in domestic refrigerators, at a temperature of

around 4°C. Fungi with darkly pigmented hyphae,
such as Cladosporium herbarum, are reported to grow
on meat in cold storage at below 0°C, although this
fungus normally occurs as a ubiquitous saprotroph on
leaf surfaces. Another species, Thamnidium elegans (see

ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS

(a)

(b)

145

(c)

Fig. 8.4 Aspergillus fumigatus, a thermotolerant mitosporic fungus. (a,b) Flask-shaped phialides (p) produce conidia (c) on
the inflated, club-shaped heads of conidiophores. (c) Clinical specimen, stained to show the hyphae of A. fumigatus in
an aspergilloma of the lungs.

Fig. 2.9), normally grows on soil or dung, but also grows
on cold-stored meat, which it degrades by producing
proteases. Perhaps the best examples of psychrophilic
fungi are the “snow moulds” such as Sclerotinia borealis and Typhula idahoensis which are found in the cold,
northern states of the USA, where they cause serious
damage to cereal crops or grass turf if there is prolonged
snow cover. When the snow melts in spring, the
cereal or grass leaves have rotted and are covered with
sclerotia, which persist until the next snow cover,
when they rot the plant tissues again. Up to 50%
of the winter-sown cereal crops can be destroyed
by these fungi each year. Psychrophilic Pythium spp.
cause similar problems in Japan, whilst in Britain it
is more common to see cereals or turf damaged by
Monographella nivalis. This fungus is only weakly parasitic, but it invades and rots the plant tissues when their
resistance is lowered by prolonged low temperature
and low light. Late-season applications of nitrogenous
fertilizer can predispose turf to attack because nitrogen
promotes lush growth, rendering the plants susceptible
to winter damage.

The physiological basis of temperature
tolerance
There is no single feature that determines the different
temperature ranges of fungi. Instead, there are a range
of factors that contribute to temperature tolerance in
different organisms. The one common theme is that

the ability to grow in the more extreme environments
involves adaptation of the whole organism, and the
temperature limits will be set by the first cellular
component or process that breaks down. Probably for
this reason, the cellular complexity of all eukaryotes,
including fungi, limits their upper temperature to
about 60–65°C, whereas the simpler cellular organization of bacteria and archaea enables some to grow
at 80°C or higher. The lower temperature limits
for microbial growth are set by factors such as the
reduced rates of chemical reactions at low temperatures,
the increased viscosity of cellular water at subzero
temperatures, and excessive concentrations of cellular
ions leading to protein inactivation. As Robinson
(2001) stated: “the lower growth temperature limit of
psychrophiles is fixed, not by the cellular properties of
cellular macromolecules, but instead by the physical
properties of aqueous solvent systems inside and outside the cell.” There are no substantiated reports of any
microorganism growing below −12°C.
Studies on bacteria, yeasts, and filamentous fungi
have revealed a general phenomenon – that changes
in temperature lead to changes in the fatty acid composition of the membrane lipids. These changes help
to ensure that membrane fluidity is optimal for the
functioning of membrane transporters and enzymes.
This phenomenon is termed homeoviscous adaptation.
In some psychrophilic yeasts and filamentous fungi
the fatty acids and membrane phospholipids are
more unsaturated than in mesophiles, and the degree
of unsaturation increases at lower temperatures.

146

CHAPTER 8

Saturated fatty acids are less fluid than unsaturated fatty
acids at any given temperature (compare the fluidity
of margarine, which has a high content of unsaturated
fatty acids, and butter which has a high content of
saturated lipids). Consistent with this, an abundance
of polyunsaturated fatty acids has been reported
in the snow mould, Monographella nivalis. And, the
thermophilic fungus Thermomyces lanuginosus has
been found to have a twofold higher concentration of
linoleic acid (unsaturated) when grown at 30°C than
at 50°C.
Compounds such as the disaccharide trehalose
(see Fig. 7.6) often occur in high concentrations in
psychrophilic or psychrotrophic organisms, and fungi
are reported to accumulate this sugar in response to
low temperatures. Trehalose is thought to act as a general stress protectant in the cytosol, and is known
to stabilize membranes during dehydration. Polyols
(polyhydric alcohols) such as glycerol and mannitol (see
Fig. 7.6) also tend to accumulate in response to stress
conditions, and mannitol can act as a cryoprotectant.
The enzymes and ribosomal components of thermophiles are reported to be more heat-stable than those
of mesophiles when extracted and tested in cell-free
systems. This has been shown for thermophilic yeasts
as well as for bacteria. The heat stability of enzymes is
conferred by increased bonding between the amino acids
near the enzyme active site, including bonds other than
the heat-labile hydrogen bonds. Heat-stabilizing factors
in the cytosol can also contribute to the thermostability
of enzymes. In recent years, attention has focused
on heat shock proteins, which can be synthesized at
elevated levels in response to a brief (e.g. 1 hour)
exposure to high temperatures, such as 45–55°C. They
function as stress proteins, like the equivalent cold shock
proteins or proteins produced in response to oxygen
starvation. In fact, they are ubiquitous, being found

in organisms of all types, and they are also present in
normal conditions. They act like chaperones, helping
to ensure that the cell’s proteins are correctly folded
and that damaged proteins are destroyed. However, it
is not clear that they have any specific relevance to the
normal temperature ranges of fungi.
Finally, it may be asked whether thermophilic fungi
have a particularly high rate of metabolism and a correspondingly high rate of substrate conversion into
fungal biomass. In other words, do thermophilic
fungi benefit specifically from being able to grow at
high temperatures? The relevant growth parameter is
the specific growth rate, “µ ”, defined in Chapter 4.
Comparisons of thermophiles (e.g. Thermomyces lanuginosus) and mesophiles (e.g. Aspergillus niger) show
no difference in the specific growth rate. So, it seems
that thermophilic fungi occupy their high-temperature
environments because they are specifically adapted
to do so, but they are no more efficient in substrate
utilization than are the mesophiles.

Hydrogen ion concentration and
fungal growth
The responses of fungi to culture pH need to be
assessed in strongly buffered media, because otherwise
fungi can rapidly change the pH by selective uptake or
exchange of ions. Mixtures of KH2PO4 and K2HPO4 are
commonly used for this purpose. It is then found that
many fungi will grow over the pH range 4.0–8.5, or
sometimes 3.0–9.0, and they show relatively broad pH
optima of about 5.0–7.0. However individual species
vary within this “normal” range, as shown by the
three representative examples in Fig. 8.5.
Several fungi are acid-tolerant, including some
yeasts which grow in the stomachs of animals and some

Fig. 8.5 (a–c) pH growth response curves of three representative fungi in laboratory culture (Pythium oligandrum is a
member of the cellulose-walled Oomycota).

ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS

mycelial fungi (Aspergillus, Penicillium, and Fusarium spp.)
which will grow at pH 2.0. But their pH optimum in
culture is usually 5.5–6.0. Truly acidophilic fungi,
able to grow down to pH 1 or 2, are found in a few
environments such as coal refuse tips and acidic mine
wastes; many of these species are yeasts. Among
filamentous fungi, the most cited example of an
acidophile is Acontium velatum which was isolated on
laboratory media containing 2.5 N sulfuric acid. This
fungus can initiate growth at pH 7.0 but it rapidly
lowers the pH of culture media to about 3.0 which is
probably close to its optimum.
Strongly alkaline environments, with a pH of about
10, are found in soda lakes and alkaline springs.
The fungi that colonize these environments include
specialized species of filamentous fungi, such as Cladosporium, Fusarium, and Penicillium, and some yeasts, but
they are alkali-tolerant rather than alkalophilic. Some
truly alkalophilic Chrysosporium species that grow up
to pH 11 have been isolated from birds’ nests. These
fungi are specialized degraders of keratin – the protein
found in skin, nails, feathers, and hair (Chapter 16).

The physiological basis of pH tolerance
In all cases that have been investigated, the fungi that
grow at extremes of pH are found to have an internal,
cytosolic pH of about 7. This intracellular pH can be
assessed crudely in extracts of disrupted cells. But, the
most accurate modern methods involve the insertion
of pH-sensitive electrodes into hyphae, or loading
hyphae with pH-sensitive fluorescent dyes that are
permeabilized through the plasma membrane. These
dyes show peaks of fluorescence at two wavelengths,
and the relative size of the two peaks changes with pH,
enabling changes of less than 0.1 pH unit to be measured accurately. The findings suggest that the fungal
cytosol has strong buffering capacity. Even when the
external pH is changed by several units, the cytosolic
pH changes by, at most, 0.2–0.3 units. Fungal cells
could achieve this homeostasis in several ways – for
example, by pumping H+ ions out through the cell
membrane to counteract the inflow of H+ in acidic
environments, by exchange of materials between the
cytosol and the vacuoles (which normally have acidic
contents), and by the interconversion of sugars and
polyols such as mannitol (Chapter 7) which involves
the sequestering or release of H+.
Because the cytosolic pH is so tightly regulated,
any perturbation of cytosolic pH can act as an intracellular signal leading to differentiation or change of
growth polarity, etc. There are several examples of this
in plant and animal cells. One example relating to fungi
(although, strictly, it relates to the Oomycota) stems
from the fact that the cleavage of zoospores in the

147

sporangia of Phytophthora (Chapter 5) can be induced
experimentally by a cold shock. By using a fluorescent
pH-indicator dye, Suzaki et al. (1996) found that the
cytosolic pH was raised transiently from 6.84 to 7.04
by this treatment, but no zoospore cleavage occurred
if the sporangia had been microinjected with a buffer
of pH 7.0, to prevent any change in cytosolic pH.

Ecological implications of pH
The effects of pH are much easier to investigate in
laboratory conditions than in nature, because pH is
not a unitary factor. In other words, a change of pH
can affect many different factors and processes. For
example, pH affects the net charge on membrane
proteins, with potential consequences for nutrient
uptake. It also affects the degree of dissociation of
mineral salts, and the balance between dissolved carbon dioxide and bicarbonate ions. Soils of low pH can
have potentially toxic levels of trace elements such
as Al3+, Mn2+, Cu2+, or Mo3+ ions. Conversely, soils of
high pH can have poorly available levels of essential
nutrients such as Fe3+, Ca2+, and Mg2+. Nevertheless, in
general the pH–growth response curves in laboratory
culture seem to be relevant to natural situations. For
example, Pythium spp. are generally intolerant of very
low pH but occur in soils above pH 4–5, consistent with
the data for Pythium oligandrum in Fig. 8.5. Similarly,
Stachybotrys chartarum is found predominantly in
near-neutral and basic soils, again consistent with the
data in Fig. 8.5.
Fungi can alter the pH around them and thus to some
degree create their own environment. The form in
which nitrogen is made available can be a key factor
in this respect. If nitrogen is supplied in the form of
NH4+ ions, which almost all fungi can use in laboratory culture or in nature, then H+ ions are released in
exchange for NH4+ and the external pH can be lowered
to a value of 4 or less, leading to growth inhibition
of the more pH-sensitive fungi such as Pythium spp.
Conversely, the uptake of NO3− can cause the external
pH to rise by about 1 unit. Fungi also release organic
acids (Chapter 7) which can lower the external pH. Some
aggressive tissue-rotting pathogens of plants, such as
Athelia rolfsii and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, release large
amounts of oxalic acid in culture or in plant tissues,
lowering the pH to about 4.0. This seems to contribute
significantly to pathogenicity, because these fungi
also secrete pectic enzymes with acidic pH optima.
Oxalic acid can combine with Ca2+ in the plant tissues,
removing Ca2+ from the pectin in plant cell walls,
so the walls are more easily degraded by the pectic
enzymes (Chapter 14).
Relatively small pH gradients can help to orientate
fungal growth, as Edwards & Bowling (1986) found by

148

CHAPTER 8

Fig. 8.6 pH of the leaf surface on individual cells around the stomata of Commelina communis, measured with a pH
microelectrode. (a) When stomata were closed – either by incubation in darkness or (in brackets) by treatment with
abscisic acid (ABA) in the light. (b) When stomata were open – either by incubation in the light or (in brackets) by
treatment with fusicoccin (FC) in darkness. (Based on Edwards & Bowling 1986.)

mapping the pH around stomata on leaf surfaces with
microelectrodes. A pH gradient of more than 1 unit was
found around closed stomata, but little or no gradient
was detected around open stomata (Fig. 8.6). This was
true when the opening of stomata was controlled naturally by light/darkness and also when it was controlled
experimentally by chemicals: the plant hormone abscisic
acid causes stomata to close in the light, whereas the
fungal metabolite fusicoccin (produced by the plant
pathogen Fusicoccum amygdali) causes stomata to open
in darkness.
As we saw in Chapter 5, several plant pathogens
infect through stomata and they can be guided by topographical signals. Edwards & Bowling found that pH
gradients might also be involved, because germ-tubes
of the rust fungus, Uromyces viciae-fabae, frequently
terminated over open stomata but not over closed
stomata. To test the relevance of this, they made nailvarnish replicas of leaf surfaces with open stomata and
placed these replicas (of surface pH 6.5) on agar of
either pH 6.0 or pH 7.0 so that this was the pH of the
(artificial) stomatal pore. When rust spores germinated
on the leaf replicas, a significantly higher proportion
of the germ-tubes were found to locate the artificial
“stomatal pores” of pH 6 than of pH 7, suggesting that
the germ-tubes grow down a pH gradient that acts as
a cue for locating the stomatal pores.

Oxygen and fungal growth
Most fungi are strict aerobes, in the sense that they
require oxygen in at least some stages of their life cycle.
Even Saccharomyces cerevisiae, which can grow continuously by fermenting sugars in anaerobic conditions
(Chapter 7), needs to be supplied with several preformed vitamins, sterols and fatty acids for growth in

the absence of oxygen. Saccharomyces also requires
oxygen for sexual reproduction. Having established
these points, we can group fungi into four categories
in terms of their oxygen relationships.
1 Many fungi are obligate aerobes. Their growth is
reduced if the partial pressure of oxygen is lowered
much below that of air (0.21). For example, growth
of the take-all fungus of cereals is reduced even at an
oxygen partial pressure (Po2) of 0.18. The thickness
of water films around the hyphae can be significant
in such cases, because oxygen diffuses very slowly
through water, as we saw for the rhizomorphs of
Armillaria mellea in Chapter 5. Aerobic fungi typically
use oxygen as their terminal electron acceptor in
respiration. This gives the highest energy yield
from the oxidation of organic compounds.
2 Many yeasts and several mycelial fungi (e.g.
Fusarium oxysporum, Mucor hiemalis, Aspergillus fumigatus) are facultative aerobes. They grow in aerobic
conditions but also can grow in the absence of
oxygen by fermenting sugars. The energy yield from
fermentation is much lower than from aerobic
respiration (Chapter 7), and the biomass production
is often less than 10% of that in aerobic culture.
However, a few mycelial fungi can use nitrate instead
of oxygen as their terminal electron acceptor. This
anaerobic respiration can give an energy yield at
least 50% of that from aerobic respiration.
3 A few aquatic fungi are obligately fermentative,
because they lack mitochondria or cytochromes (e.g.
Aqualinderella fermentans, Oomycota) or they have
rudimentary mitochondria and low cytochrome
content (e.g. Blastocladiella ramosa, Chytridiomycota).
They grow in the presence or absence of oxygen,
but their energy always comes from fermentation. In
this respect they resemble the lactic acid bacteria

ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS

which always ferment. Fungi of this type are found
in nutrient-enriched waters, where fermentable substrates are abundant.
4 A few obligately anaerobic Chytridiomycota occur
in the rumen and are discussed below.

The microbial consortium of the rumen
and other gut environments
A specialized group of Chytridiomycota, protozoa,
and bacteria grow in the rumen of animals such as
cows, sheep, goats, and camels. These rumen microbes
(Fig. 8.7) are obligate anaerobes which are killed by
exposure to oxygen. They live as part of an intimate
and complex microbial community, or consortium, in
the animal’s foregut, which has been modified to form
a series of fermentation chambers. Here the intake of
food is repeatedly regurgitated, rechewed, and reswallowed, so that it is broken up to expose a maximum
surface area for digestion by the community of rumen
organisms. After a residence time of 1–2 days, the
rumen contents are passed along the digestive tract
where many of the microbes are destroyed, providing
amino acids for the animal host. The breakdown products from plant constituents such as cellulose and
hemicelluloses are similarly absorbed. However, the end
products of digestion in the rumen are not simple
sugars but instead are a range of short-chain volatile
fatty acids (VFAs), principally acetic acid, propionic acid,
and butyric acid, together with CO2, methane, ammonia,
and occasionally lactic acid.
Bacteria dominate the rumen community in terms
of both their numbers and types. Methanogenic
(methane-producing) archaea also are prevalent and
generate large amounts of methane as a metabolic
end-product. In addition, there are many protozoa

Fig. 8.7 Part of a rumen consortium,
comprising protozoa, chytrids, and
bacteria. (Reproduced by courtesy of
M. Yokayama & M.A. Cobos; Michigan
State University.)

149

which ingest bacteria and other small particles. The final
components are the rumen fungi, all of which are obligately anaerobic members of the Chytridiomycota and
currently are classified in five genera: Neocallimastix,
Caecomyces, Piromyces, Orpinomyces, and Ruminomyces.
These fungi have a major role in degrading the plant
structural carbohydrates, such as cellulose and hemicelluloses. Their zoospores show chemotaxis to plant
sugars in culture, and rapidly accumulate on chewed
herbage in the rumen. Then they encyst and germinate
to produce rhizoids that penetrate the plant tissue and
release enzymes to degrade the plant cell walls.

Mixed acid fermentation
The rumen chytrids are unusual among fungi because
they have a mixed acid fermentation, similar to
that of the lactic acid bacteria (Theodorou et al. 1996).
The main products of this fermentation are formic acid
(HCOO−), acetic acid, lactic acid, ethanol, CO2, and
H2, shown in the shaded boxes in Fig. 8.9. The initial
fermentation of plant sugars such as glucose is carried
out by the Embden–Myerhof pathway, leading to
the production of ethanol and lactic acid (derived
from pyruvate). This occurs in the cytosol of the
chytrid cells. But some of the pyruvate is converted
to malate (malic acid) which then enters a special type
of organelle, termed the hydrogenosome because it
produces molecular hydrogen. Hydrogenosomes are
characteristic of rumen chytrids and anaerobic protozoa.
They are functionally equivalent to the mitochondria
of aerobic organisms, and are involved in the generation of ATP by electron transfer (Fig. 8.8). The main
end-products released from the hydrogenosome are
acetate, formate, CO2, and H2. The molecular hydrogen can then be used as an energy source for the

150

CHAPTER 8

Fig. 8.8 Diagram of the mixed-acid fermentation of the rumen chytrid Neocallimastix. The end-products of this fermentation are shown in the small shaded boxes. Part of the fermentation occurs in the cytosol, part in the hydrogenosome.
Some of the details are known (Orpin 1993; Marvin-Sikkema et al. 1994); others details are assumed, based on knowledge of the mixed-acid fermentation of some enteric bacteria. (After Trinci et al. 1994.)

rumen archaea, which generate methane, according to
the equation:
4H2 + HCO3− + H+ → CH4 + 3H2O
This methane is repeatedly belched from the animal’s
gut. Although we have accounted for all the main products of the mixed acid fermentation, it should be recognized that the balance of these products is variable and
depends on the types of organism present and other
conditions in the rumen.

Comparison of hydrogenosomes and
mitochondria
It is now almost universally accepted that eukaryotic
(nucleate) cells originated from prokaryotic cells by the
process of endosymbiosis – when one cell engulfed
another, and the engulfed cell progressively lost all or

part of its genome and independent existence, to
become a cellular organelle. There are likely to have
been repeated instances of endosymbiosis, leading
to the major organelles that are found in present-day
eukaryotes, and resulting in the rapid expansion of
unicellular eukaryotes which began about 2 billion
years ago. The evidence for this is still retained in
eukaryotic cells today. For example:
• Organelles such as mitochondria and chloroplasts
are surrounded by double membranes, the outer
membrane almost certainly being an enclosing
membrane to “contain” the engulfed cell (as happens
in more recent endosymbioses such as Rhizobium cells
in the root nodules of legumes).
• Mitochondria and chloroplasts of present-day eukaryotes contain a residual genome. It is not sufficient
for an independent existence, but codes for elements
of the electron-transport chain in mitochondria and
some of the photosynthetic functions of chloroplasts.

ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS

151

Fig. 8.9 Electron micrograph section
of a cell of the anaerobic ciliate,
Nyctotherus ovalis, showing: macronucleus (N), micronucleus (n), vacuoles
(V), and hydrogenosomes (H). The
small black dots within the hydrogenosomes are immunogold particles
that were tagged to bind to DNA.
(Reproduced from Akhmanova et al.
1998, with permission; © Macmillan
Publishing.)

• Mitochondria and chloroplasts contain ribosomes,
which closely resemble the ribosomes of prokaryotes
in their sensitivity to antibacterial antibiotics and
in the DNA sequence homology of the ribosomal
RNA genes.
The origin of hydrogenosomes has remained an
unsolved problem until recently. They are bounded
by double membranes, have an inner membrane with
cristae-like projections, and contain ribosome-like
particles resembling those of methanogenic archaea.
Some of these features indicate a similarity with
mitochondria, but until recently no hydrogenosomal
genes had ever been found. However, in 1998 the first
evidence of hydrogenosomal genes was found in an
anaerobic ciliate, Nyctotherus ovalis, which occurs in
the hindgut of cockroaches. In electron micrograph
sections of this organism the hydrogenosomes showed
immunogold labeling when treated with a commercial
antiserum against DNA (Fig. 8.9). This evidence was
reinforced by using the polymerase chain reaction,
with primers directed against conserved regions of
the genes coding for mitochondrial small subunit
(SSU) ribosomal RNA. A homologous SSU rRNA gene
was obtained from the anaerobic ciliate, N. ovalis,
indicating commonality between hydrogenosomes
and mitochondria.

Physiology of oxygen tolerance
The existence of strictly anaerobic organisms such
as rumen chytrids and ciliated protozoa indicates that
oxygen can be toxic – it kills these organisms when they
are exposed to even low levels of oxygen. The reason

for this is well known: several highly reactive forms of
oxygen such as O2− (superoxide anion), H2O2 (hydrogen peroxide), and OH· (hydroxyl radical) are produced inadvertently when oxygen reacts with some
of the common cellular constituents such as flavoproteins and quinones. These reactive oxygen species
would, ordinarily, damage cellular components such
as macromolecules, in the same way as the peroxides
of common disinfectants are used to kill microorganisms. So, all organisms that grow in the presence
of oxygen need mechanisms for coping with the
toxic effects of oxygen, and this is achieved in ways
described below.
Superoxide is converted to hydrogen peroxide by
the enzyme superoxide dismutase, according to the
following equation:
O2− + O2− + 2H+ → 2H2O2 + O2
Hydrogen peroxide is then converted to water and
oxygen by the enzyme catalase, according to the following equation:
H2O2 + H2O2 → 2H2O + O2
The combined effect of superoxide and catalase is,
therefore, to convert the reactive oxygen species to
water. All obligate anaerobes lack one or both of
these enzymes. For example, Neocallimastix has superoxide dismutase but not catalase, so its inability to
deal with peroxides probably accounts for its failure to
tolerate the presence of oxygen.
The hydroxyl radical is the most toxic of all, but
occurs only transiently – mainly as a consequence of
ionizing radiation. The small amounts that are produced

152

CHAPTER 8

from H2O2 in normal conditions pose little threat if
catalase is active.

Carbon dioxide
All fungi need carbon dioxide in at least small
amounts for carboxylation reactions that generate
fatty acids, oxaloacetate, etc. (Chapter 6). Fungi that
grow in anaerobic conditions often have a high CO2
requirement, whereas several aerobic fungi can be
inhibited by high concentrations of CO2.
In normal aerobic respiration, glucose is converted
to CO2 and water according to the familiar empirical
equation:
C6H12O6 + 6O2 → 6CO2 + 6H2O
However, oxygen and carbon dioxide behave differently from one another in solution, and this can
have significant effects on fungal growth. CO2 dissolves
in water to form carbonic acid, which dissociates to
bicarbonate ions in a pH-dependent manner. At pH 8,
the equilibrium is approximately 3% CO2 (equivalent
to carbonic acid) with 97% HCO3− (bicarbonate ion).
But at pH 5.5 the equilibrium is approximately 90%
CO2 and 10% HCO3−. Studies of fungi in laboratory
culture at different pH levels suggest that fungi are more
sensitive to the bicarbonate ion than to CO2 as such.
Even so, it can be questioned whether CO2 (or bicarbonate) is a major growth inhibitor in nature. CO2 is
much more soluble than is oxygen in water, and
when the different diffusion coefficients of oxygen and
CO2 are taken into account (the coefficient for CO2 is
actually lower) it can be calculated that CO2 diffuses
about 23 times more rapidly than O2 in water. Thus,
in normal aerobic respiration, when a fungus generates
one mole of CO2 for every mole of O2 consumed, the
oxygen will be depleted in a water film before the CO2
level reaches a level of even 1%. In short, fungi that
grow in undisturbed water, or even 1 millimeter below
the surface of an agar plate, are likely to experience
significant oxygen depletion. This is one of the major
reasons why liquid culture media – and many industrial
fermenter-based systems like those for the production of
Quorn™ mycoprotein – need to be vigorously aerated
(Chapter 4).

Water availability and fungal growth
General principles
All fungi need the physical presence of water for
uptake of nutrients through the wall and cell membrane,
and often for the release of extracellular enzymes.

Fungi also need intracellular water as a milieu for
metabolic reactions. However, water can be present in
an environment and still be unavailable because it is
bound by external forces. So, in order to understand
how the availability of water affects the growth of fungi,
we need to establish some basic principles.
The sum of all the forces that act on water and tend
to restrict its availability to cells is termed the water
potential, denoted by ϕ and defined in terms of energy
(negative MegaPascals), where one MPa is equivalent
to 9.87 atmospheres, or 10 bar pressure. As familiar
reference points, ultra-pure water has a potential of
0 MPa, normal sea water has a potential of about
−2.8 MPa, and most plants reach “permanent wilting
point” in soils of about −1.5 MPa. The units are negative because the environment exerts a pull on water.
The total water potential consists of the sum of
several different potentials: osmotic potential (solute
binding forces, denoted by ϕπ ), matric potential
(physical binding forces, denoted by ϕm ), turgor
potential (ϕp ), and gravimetric potential (ϕg ). So, by
summing all these forces:

ϕ (water potential) = ϕπ + ϕm + ϕp + ϕg
It follows that, in order for a fungus to retain its existing water, it must generate a potential equal to the
external water potential ϕ, and in order to gain water
from the environment a fungus must generate a (negative) potential greater than ϕ (Papendick & Mulla
1986).

How fungi respond to water potential
Most fungi are highly adept at obtaining water,
even in environments that exert a significant water
stress. However, the water moulds (Oomycota such
as Saprolegnia and Achlya spp.) are exceptions to
this. They have little ability to maintain their turgor
against external forces, probably because they grow only
or predominantly in freshwater habitats. It used to be
thought that fungi needed to remain turgid in order
to grow, but hyphae of the water moulds can continue
to grow even when they have lost turgor. This is probably because the extension of hyphal tips is achieved
by continuous extension of the cytoskeletal components, similar to the extension of pseudopodia in
amoeboid organisms. Nevertheless, even the water
moulds need to be turgid in order to penetrate solid
surfaces (Harold et al. 1996; Money 2001). Since the
penetrating ability of hyphal tips is one of the key features of mycelial fungi, a fungus that lacks turgor is
essentially crippled.
Almost all fungi of soil and other terrestrial habitats
can grow readily in media of −2 MPa. If the water stress

ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS

is increased beyond this then the aseptate fungi
(Zygomycota) and Oomycota are the first to stop
growing (their lowest limit is about − 4 MPa). But
many septate fungi will grow at between − 4 MPa and
−14 MPa, and are not considered to be particularly stresstolerant. In fact, the most stress-tolerant fungi will grow
at near-maximum rates at −20 MPa and will make at
least some growth at −50 MPa. These fungi with high
stress tolerances include the yeast Zygosaccharomyces
rouxii, used in the traditional production of soy sauce;
its lower limit for growth is −69 MPa in sugar solutions.
From these comments it is clear that fungi as a
whole can grow in environments where few other
organisms can grow. This ability to tolerate water
stress is one of the special features of fungi. But, there
is an important qualification because the response of
a fungus to water stress depends on how this stress is
generated. Most fungi tolerate sugar-imposed osmotic
stress better than salt-imposed stress – they are inhibited by salt toxicity long before they are inhibited by
osmotic potential as such.

Ecological and commercial aspects of
water-stress tolerance
Water-stress-tolerant fungi have major economic
significance in the spoilage of stored food products,
including cereal grains. No fungus can grow on stored
grain that has been dried to 14% (w/v) moisture content, but even a slight rise to 15–16% water content
will enable the stress-tolerant Aspergillus spp. (sexual
stage, Eurotium) to grow. For example, Aspergillus
amstelodami will initiate spoilage at −30 MPa in a
slightly moist pocket of a grain store. This can set off

153

a chain reaction, when the spoilage fungi degrade
starch to glucose, and thence to CO2 and water. The
metabolic heat generated in this process can cause
the water to evaporate and condense elsewhere in
the grain mass, so that moulding spreads progressively
and eventually paves the way for the growth of lessstress-tolerant fungi.
Figure 8.10 shows how predictive models of postharvest grain spoilage can be developed in laboratory
studies, by combining different environmental factors
– in this case, temperature and water potential. The lines
on these graph are growth rate isopleths (the combinations of temperature and water potential at which
different growth rates are seen). The broken white
lines represent “minimal” growth rates of 0.1 mm per
day on agar plates, the broken black lines represent
2.0 mm per day, and the solid black areas represent
4.0 mm or more per day. Areas that lie outside all of
these zones represent potentially safe storage conditions.
The data accord with the known biology of the grainstorage fungi. Aspergillus amstelodami is very tolerant of
water stress and, together with another stress-tolerant
fungus, A. restrictus, often initiates moulding in grain
stores. Aspergillus fumigatus is less water-stress-tolerant
but the isopleths are skewed, indicating its preference
for higher temperatures (maximum 52°C). Fusarium
culmorum, like many Fusarium species, is regarded as a
“field fungus”. It causes rotting of grains in field conditions if there is a wet harvest season and the grain
cannot be dried quickly enough to a safe level.
Similar models can predict the conditions for mycotoxin production (Fig. 8.11). For example, Aspergillus
flavus produces aflatoxin over most of the range of
temperature/water potential that supports growth of this
fungus. Penicillium verrucosum produces ochratoxin A

Fig. 8.10 Growth rate isopleths for three fungi that cause spoilage of cereal grains. (Data from Ayerst 1969, for Aspergillus
spp., and from Magan & Lacey 1984, for F. culmorum.)

154

CHAPTER 8

Fig. 8.11 Combinations of temperature and water potential that support mycotoxin production by Aspergillus flavus,
Penicillium expansum, and P. verrucosum. (From Northolt & Bullerman 1982.)

(a nephrotoxin) over a narrower part of its growth
range. Penicillium expansum, which causes soft rot of
apples, produces patulin (which causes hemorrhage of
the lungs and brains of experimental animals) over a
much narrower range.

Physiological adaptations to water stress
Fungi typically respond to low (negative) external
water potentials by generating an even lower internal
osmotic potential, so that the cells remain turgid.
Sometimes this is achieved by selective uptake and
accumulation of ions from the environment, an
example being the common accumulation of K+ by
marine fungi. However, high ionic levels are potentially
damaging to cells, and even the marine fungi seem to
take up K+ primarily as a means of preventing the more
toxic Na+ ion from entering the cell. A more common
method of balancing a high external osmotic environment is to accumulate sugars or sugar derivatives
that do not interfere with the central metabolic pathways. These osmotically active compounds are termed
compatible solutes. Glycerol is the most common
compatible solute in the highly xerophilic (droughtloving) yeasts and filamentous fungi (Hocking 1993).
Comparisons between water-stress-tolerant fungi
and stress-intolerant fungi have shown that both
types produce compatible solutes in response to water
stress, but differ in their ability to retain the solutes.
For example, glycerol is the compatible solute of
both Saccharomyces cerevisiae (stress-intolerant) and
Zygosaccharomyces rouxii (stress-tolerant), and both
fungi produce it to the same degree when subjected to
water stress. But glycerol leaks from S. cerevisiae into
the culture medium whereas Z. rouxii retains glycerol.

This has also been found in a comparison of the stresstolerant fungus Penicillium janczewskii and the stressintolerant species P. digitatum. Membrane fluidity
thus seems to be implicated, and there is evidence of
a higher content of saturated lipids in the membranes
of water-stress-tolerant yeasts.
In recent years, increasing attention has focused on
the compatible solutes in fungal spores, and particularly the spores of insect-pathogenic fungi. These fungi
have the potential to be developed as commercial
biological control agents of insects, in place of some
of the toxic insecticides currently used (Chapter 15).
One of the main limitations at present is that the spores
need a sustained high humidity in order to germinate
and penetrate an insect cuticle. There is evidence that
spores with a high solute content can germinate faster
and at somewhat lower humidities than do spores with
low solute contents.
With this in mind, attempts are being made to
increase the levels of compatible solutes in spores of
insect-pathogenic fungi. These solutes can either be
derived from nutrient-storage reserves or from nutrients
taken up by the cells. Fig. 8.12 illustrates this for
two insect-pathogenic fungi, Beauveria bassiana and
Metarhizium anisopliae, grown on media adjusted to
different levels of osmotic stress with either glucose
or trehalose. The data are difficult to interpret, because
many of these solutes are interconvertible, as we
saw earlier for the mycelia of the dry-rot fungus
(see Fig. 7.7). In the case of Beauveria, the compatible
solute content in the fungal spores increased markedly
as the solute concentration of the medium was
increased, but mannitol was the main compatible
solute in the spores when the fungus was grown on
glucose, whereas trehalose accumulated in the spores
when the fungus was grown on trehalose. A different

ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS

155

Fig. 8.12 Changes in the compatible solutes
of the conidia of two insect-pathogenic
fungi (Beauveria bassiana and Metarhizium
anisopliae). Conidia were harvested from
agar plates that contained increasing levels
of glucose or trehalose. The compatible
solutes found in the conidia were: mannitol
(white squares), erythritol or arabitol (black
circles), and trehalose (black squares).
(Adapted from Hallsworth & Magan 1994.)

and more variable pattern was found in Metarhizium,
but mannitol was again one of the main compatible
solutes in the spores, supplemented by erythritol and
arabitol as the solute concentration of the medium
increased.
A different type of adaptation to water stress is
found among the fungi that commonly grow as saprotrophs on the surfaces of living or senescing plant leaves
– the environment termed the phyllosphere (Fig. 8.13).
These fungi (Cladosporium, Alternaria, Sydowia, etc.) have
darkly pigmented (melanized) hyphae and spores.
They do not grow at low (negative) water potentials but
they have a remarkable ability to withstand periodic
wetting and drying, which few other fungi can tolerate.
Park (1982) investigated this by growing these fungi
on sheets of transparent cellulose film (Cellophane)
placed on top of malt extract agar plates. Then he
removed the pieces of film bearing the fungal colonies
and suspended them over saturated solutions of
NaNO2 or KNO3 in closed containers. These solutions
generate equilibrium relative humidities of 66% and
45%, respectively, equivalent to about −70 MPa and
−95 MPa. Even after 2 or 3 weeks in these severe
drought conditions, the fungi started to regrow within
an hour when the Cellophane films were returned to
the agar plates, and they did so from the original
hyphal tips. By contrast, a range of common soil fungi
(e.g. Fusarium, Trichoderma, Gliocladium) or typical

food-spoilage fungi (Penicillium spp.) never regrew
from their original hyphal tips, although many of
them could regrow after 24 hours, from spores or surviving hyphal compartments behind the tips. Clearly,
the phyllosphere fungi are naturally and specially
adapted to the fluctuating moisture conditions in
their normal habitat. They are, of course, the same fungi
that grow as sooty moulds on kitchen and bathroom
walls, where they experience the same wide fluctuations
in moisture levels.

Light
Light in the near-ultraviolet (NUV) and visible parts of
the spectrum (from about 380 to 720 nm) has relatively
little effect on vegetative growth of fungi, although
it can stimulate pigmentation. In particular, blue
light induces the production of carotenoid pigments
in hyphae and spores of several fungi, including
Neurospora crassa. These carotenoids, which also occur
in algae and bacteria, are known to quench reactive
oxygen species, discussed earlier. The pigments serve
to minimize photo-induced damage. Melanins similarly
protect cells against reactive oxygen species and ultraviolet radiation.
Light has a much more profound effect on fungal
differentiation, acting as a trigger for the production

156

CHAPTER 8

(a)

(b)

of asexual sporing structures or sexual reproductive
structures in several (but not all) fungi. For example,
the toadstools and similar fruitbodies of many
Basidiomycota are formed in response to light, but
often with an additional requirement for a low level
of CO2. Often these photoresponses are elicited by
NUV or blue light (about 450 nm), implicating a
flavin-type photoreceptor. But there is considerable
variation in the photoresponses of different fungi,
almost certainly related to habitat requirements. For
example, Alternaria spp. are induced to sporulate by UV
irradiation (280–290 nm), and in Botrytis cinerea the
triggering by NUV is reversed by subsequent exposure
to blue light (Chapter 5). The sporulation of some other
fungi is regulated by exposure to red/far red light, but
this is less common than the blue light responses. Light
also has other effects on fungal reproductive structures,
notably in eliciting phototropism of the sporangiophores
of some Zygomycota and of the ascus tips of some
Ascomycota (Chapter 10).

Genetic dissection of blue light
perception in Neurospora crassa
Neurospora crassa has always been an important model
eukaryote, owing to its relatively small genome (about
40 megabases), its rapid growth and manipulability,
its ease of genetic manipulation by random and stable
integration of foreign DNA, and an abundance of

Fig. 8.13 Examples of darkly pigmented
spores of fungi that commonly grow on
senescing leaves and stems of plants,
but also grow on bathroom and kitchen
walls. These fungi are often termed
dematiaceous hyphomycetes (with
darkly pigmented hyphae and spores).
(a) Several spores of Alternaria spp.
(30–40 µm) viewed by phase-contrast
or bright-field microscopy. (b) Spores
of Cladosporium spp. and related fungi
(about 10–15 mm).

well-characterized mutants. It is also a preferred model
organism for investigating light perception, for two
reasons. First, it perceives light only in the blue/UV
range, and relatively few genes (which are wellcharacterized) seem to be involved in this response.
Second, it shows a pronounced circadian rhythm –
a molecular clock that has an innate period length
close to 24 hours and that is compensated against
temperature and nutrition, but can be reset by environmental (light) cues. In fact, there is a strong
interaction between the circadian clock of Neurospora
and the perception of light and subsequent signal
transduction pathways. The recent publication of a highquality draft genome sequence of N. crassa (Galagan
et al. 2003) should provide further insights into light
perception.
Turning specifically to the light response, a recent
series of papers have characterized the first fungal blue
light photoreceptor. It is a regulatory protein termed
White Collar 1 (WC-1) linked to a chromophore – the
yellow-pigmented flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD).
The WC-1 protein interacts with DNA to initiate gene
transcription. Another protein (WC-2) also acts as a
transcription factor and forms a complex with WC-1.
This WC-1/WC-2 complex is localized in the nucleus
and targets the light signal to the promoters of the
blue-light-regulated genes. The wild-type genes for
both of these proteins had been known for some time,
and strains carrying mutant WC genes were known
to be “blind” – they were unable to induce carotenoid

ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS

synthesis in response to blue light. The remarkable
feature of this blue light response in N. crassa is that
it involves only two protein components and a very
short signaling cascade.
Ordinarily, the blue-light-regulated genes that
induce carotenoid synthesis in N. crassa are downregulated after about 2 hours – a phenomenon termed photoadaptation. But another mutant gene, termed vivid,
causes a sustained expression of carotenoid genes in the
light (hence its name, “vivid”). Analysis of the VIVID
protein, which is located in the cytoplasm rather than
the nucleus, showed that it also binds to a flavin-type
chromophore and that it represents a second blue
light photoreceptor (Linden 2002). The VIVID protein
seems to be involved particularly in responses to different light intensities, and in modulating the circadian
clock. Thus, there seems to be a dual light-perception
system, with at least two photoreceptors that serve
different roles. Initial light perception, involving
WC-1/WC-2, is responsible for dark-to-light transitions.
A second system involving VIVID enables Neurospora to
detect changes in light intensity, and thereby regulate
the production of carotenoids for protection against
photodamage (Schwerdtfeger & Linden 2003).

Cited references
Akhmanova, A., Voncken, F., Van Alen, T., et al. (1998)
A hydrogenosome with a genome. Nature 396, 527–
528.
Ayerst, G. (1969) The effects of moisture and temperature
on growth and spore germination in some fungi.
Journal of Stored Products Research 5, 127–141.
Cooney, D.G. & Emerson, R. (1964) Thermophilic Fungi.
Freeman, San Francisco.
Edwards, M.C. & Bowling, D.J.F. (1986) The growth of rust
germ tubes towards stomata in relation to pH gradients.
Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology 29, 185–196.
Galagan, J.E. and 76 other authors (2003) The genome
sequence of the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa.
Nature 42, 859–868.
Haheshwari, R., Bharadwaj, G. & Bhat, M.K. (2000)
Thermophilic fungi: their physiology and enzymes.
Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 64, 461–488.
Hallsworth, J.E. & Magan, N. (1994) Effect of carbohydrate
type and concentration on polyhydric alcohol and trehalose content of conidia of three entomopathogenic
fungi. Microbiology 140, 2705–2713.
Harold, R.L., Money, N.P. & Harold, F.M. (1996) Growth and
morphogenesis in Saprolegnia ferax: is turgor required?
Protoplasma 191, 105–114.

157

Henry, A.W. (1932) Influence of soil temperature and soil
sterilization on the reaction of wheat seedlings to
Ophiobolus graminis Sacc. Canadian Journal of Research 7,
198–203.
Hocking, A.D. (1993) Responses of xerophilic fungi to
changes in water activity. In: Stress Tolerance of Fungi
( Jennings, D.H., ed.), pp. 233–256. Academic Press,
London.
Linden, H. (2002) Blue light perception and signal transduction in Neurospora crassa. In: Molecular Biology of
Fungal Development (Osiewacz, H.D., ed.), pp. 165–183.
Marcel Decker, New York.
Magan, N. & Lacey, J. (1984) Effect of temperature and
pH on water relations of field and storage fungi. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 82, 71–81.
Marvin-Sikkema, F.D., Driessen, A.J.M., Gottschal, J.C.
& Prins, R.A. (1994) Metabolic energy generation
in hydrogenosomes of the anaerobic fungus Neocallimastix: evidence for a functional relationship with
mitochondria. Mycological Research 98, 205–212.
Money, N.P. (2001) Biomechanics of invasive hyphal
growth. In: The Mycota VIII. Biology of the Fungal Cell
(Howard, R.J. & Gow, N.A.R., eds), pp. 3–17. SpringerVerlag, Berlin.
Northolt, M.D. & Bullerman, L.B. (1982) Prevention of
mould growth and toxin production through control of
environmental conditions. Journal of Food Production 45,
519–526.
Orpin, C.G. (1993) Anaerobic fungi. In: Stress Tolerance
of Fungi (Jennings, D.H., ed.), pp. 257–273. Academic
Press, London.
Papendick, R.I. & Mulla, D.J. (1986) Basic principles of cell
and tissue water relations. In: Water, Fungi and Plants
(Ayres, P.G. & Boddy, L., eds), pp. 1–25. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Park, D. (1982) Phylloplane fungi: tolerance of hyphal tips
to drying. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 79,
174–178.
Robinson, C.H. (2001) Cold adaptation in Arctic and
Antarctic fungi. New Phytologist 151, 341–353.
Schwerdtfeger, C. & Linden, H. (2003) VIVID is a flavoprotein and serves as a fungal blue light photoreceptor
for photoadaptation. EMBO Journal, 22, 4846 –4855.
Suzaki, E., Suzaki, T., Jackson, S.L. & Hardham, A.R.
(1996) Changes in intracellular pH during zoosporogenesis in Phytophthora cinnamomi. Protoplasma 191, 79–
83.
Theodorou, M.K., Zhu, W-Y., Rickers, A., Nielsen, B.B., Gull,
K. & Trinci, A.P.J. (1996) Biochemistry and ecology of
anaerobic fungi. In: The Mycota VI. Human and Animal
Relationships (Howard, D.H. & Miller, J.D. eds), pp. 265–
295. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Trinci, A.P.J., Davies, D.R., Gull, K., et al. (1994) Anaerobic
fungi in herbivorous animals. Mycological Research 98,
129–152.

Chapter 9

Fungal genetics, molecular
genetics, and genomics

This chapter is divided into the following major
sections:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

overview: the place of fungi in genetical research
Neurospora and classical (Mendelian) genetics
structure and organization of the fungal genome
genetic variation in fungi
applied molecular genetics of fungi
returning to the genome
expressed sequence tags and microarray technology

In this chapter we cover the basic and applied genetics of fungi, including the features that continue to
make fungi important model organisms for genetical
research. The chapter includes recent molecular
approaches in a range of fields such as the analysis of
fungal pathogenicity determinants and the development
of fungi as “factories” for foreign gene products. It also
covers the roles of extrachromosomal genes in agingrelated senescence and the effects of fungal viruses
(hypoviruses) in suppressing pathogenic virulence.

Overview: the place of fungi in genetical
research
For more than 60 years fungi have been major tools
for classical genetical research because they have a combination of features unmatched by other eukaryotes:
• They are easy to grow in laboratory conditions and
they complete the life cycle in a short time.

• Most fungi are haploid so they are easy to mutate
and to select for mutants.
• They have a sexual stage for analysis of the segregation and recombination of genes, and all the
products of meiosis can be retrieved in the haploid
sexual spores.
• They produce asexual spores so that genetically uniform populations can be bulked up and maintained.
In addition to these points, fungi are eminently suitable
for biochemical studies because of their simple nutrient
requirements, and because “classical genetics” has
provided excellent physical maps of the chromosomal
genes. Studies on one fungus in particular – Neurospora
crassa – led to the classical concept of “one gene,
one enzyme”, for which Beadle & Tatum received the
Nobel Prize in 1945. However, it is more accurate to
say that “one gene can encode one enzyme” – the situation is complicated because gene splicing occurs to
remove noncoding introns in the pre-messenger RNA.
At the time of writing, the genomes of nearly 200
organisms have been sequenced – mainly bacteria and
archaea, but also the genomes of “mouse and man.”
The “high-quality draft“ genome sequences of ten
fungi have been published, including Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Neurospora crassa, Emericella nidulans, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, the rice blast pathogen Magnaporthe
grisea, and a wood-rotting fungus, Phanerochaete
chrysosporium. The first four of these are Ascomycota
with well-mapped chromosomes, providing a basis for
combining classical and molecular genetics.

* See Online resources for websites that publish updated
genome sequences.

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

Neurospora and classical (mendelian)
genetics
Neurospora crassa is one of the most intensively studied
fungi for genetical research. It is one of four (possibly
five) Neurospora species that are heterothallic, requiring haploid strains of two different mating types,
termed A and a, for sexual reproduction. An outline
of this process was shown in Chapter 2 (see Fig. 2.15).
Essentially, it begins when a female receptive hypha
termed a trichogyne is fertilized by a “male” spore,
the spermatium, of opposite mating type. The cells that
will eventually become the asci are separated by septa.
These ascus mother cells contain two haploid nuclei,
one of each mating type. The nuclei fuse to form a
diploid, and the ascus elongates. Meiosis within each
ascus results in the production of four haploid nuclei,
and each of these undergoes one round of mitosis to
produce eight nuclei, which are packaged into eight
ascospores, linearly arranged within each ascus (Fig. 9.1).
The pattern of gene segregation in an ascus can be
followed by making crosses between strains that differ
(a)

Meiosis I

Meiosis II

Mitosis

Ascus

B
B
B

B

B

B

B
b

b
b

b

(b)

B

Meiosis I

b

b

b

b

Meiosis II

Mitosis

Ascus

B
B
b

B
b

B

b

B
b

B
B

b
B

b

b

b

Fig. 9.1 Illustration of the segregation of spore color genes
during the first division (a) or second division (b) of
meiosis in Ascomycota. See text for details.

159

in biochemical features or spore coat color. For example, Fig. 9.1a shows the pattern of meiosis in a fungus
heterozygous at a locus that determines spore coat
color. The allele B codes for dark spores and the allele
b codes for pale spores. (Note that each chromosome
consists of two chromatids, attached to a centromere,
but only one arm of each chromosome is shown.)
During the first meiotic division the chromosomes
separate. The chromatids then separate in the second
meiotic division, and this is followed by mitosis, leading to an ascus containing a linear arrangement of four
black ascospores and four pale ascospores.
Figure 9.1b shows a different pattern of segregation
of spore color, resulting from crossing over, in which
two homologous chromatids break and rejoin, with
reciprocal exchange of DNA. The subsequent pattern
of spore coat color is different in the final ascus.
Normally, there would be several crossover events
(chiasmata, singular chiasma) on any one arm of a chromosome, but this would best be detected by crossing
strains that differ at three different loci – for example,
loci X, Y, and Z – on one arm of the chromosome.
Broadly, the chance of a crossover event occurring
between any two gene loci on a chromosome depends
on the physical distance between these loci. Similarly,
the chance of crossing-over between a gene locus and
a centromere depends on the distance between these.
So it is possible to construct physical maps of the
relative positions of different gene loci on any one arm
of a chromosome (chromosome mapping) by making
repeated crosses involving different gene loci. (This is
not exactly true because the frequency of crossing-over
tends to be lower near the centromere and higher near
the ends of the chromosomes – the telomeres – but it
does allow the order of genes to be determined.)
To provide a “real” example of the patterns of gene
segregation and recombination in an ascus, Fig. 9.2
shows the results of a cross between two parental
strains of Sordaria brevicollis, a fungus closely related to
Neurospora crassa. One strain has the wild-type alleles
for buff-colored (b) and yellow-colored ( y) ascospores
on one arm of the chromosome. The other strain has
mutations at both of these gene loci, indicated as bm
and ym, where the subscript m denotes a mutation (see
label 1 in Fig. 9.2).
In this particular example, the outcome of such a cross
would normally produce either buff spores (with the
alleles b and ym ) or yellow spores (with the alleles bm
and y). But the b and y loci are sufficiently far apart
that there is about 20% probability of a crossover
occurring between these loci (see label 2) so that after
meiosis and a subsequent round of mitosis, the eight
mature ascospores will display four different colors
(see label 3). Spores with the b and y alleles are white,
those with b and ym are buff-colored; those with bm
and ym are black, and those with bm and y are yellow-

160

CHAPTER 9

wild type
buff
yellow

1
b
2

cross

y

b
bm

y
ym

bm

ym

3>

double mutant
buffm
yellowm
b

y

b

ym

bm

ym

bm

y

white
buff
black
yellow

Fig. 9.2 Part of a crushed perithecium of
Sordaria, showing several asci containing eight
ascospores. In the normal, intact perithecium the
ascospores would be released through small
pores (arrowheads) at the ascus tips. (Courtesy
of C. Charier & D.J. Bond.)
colored. Three of the asci in Fig. 9.2 are labeled
“mature” – the spores are labeled w (white), b (buff),
bl (black), and y (yellow). Each of these asci shows a
different pattern of spore segregation, depending on
which chromatids were involved in chiasma formation.

Structure and organization of the fungal
genome
The genome of an organism includes all the genetic
information, not just the genes encoded by the
nucleus. In fungi the genome often includes four
separate components: the chromosomal genes, the
mitochondrial genes, plasmids (and mobile genetic
elements), and fungal virus genes, which are truly
resident genetic elements. Each of these can contribute
significantly to the phenotype of fungi.

Chromosomes and chromosomal genes
The main features of fungal nuclei were described in
Chapter 3. To recap briefly, most fungi are haploid, but
the Oomycota are diploid, a few fungi can alternate
between haploid and diploid somatic phases, and
some yeasts (e.g. Candida albicans) are permanently
diploid. Some fungi and fungus-like organisms have
polyploid series (e.g. Allomyces spp. and Phytophthora
spp., including P. infestans). This can be shown by staining the hyphae with a fluorochrome such as DAPI,
which intercalates in the A-T-rich regions of DNA, and
then measuring the fluorescence of individual nuclei

under a microscope. Fluorescence increases in a stepwise manner with each increase in the number of
chromosome sets (e.g. Tooley & Therrien 1991).
The chromosomes of nearly all fungi are small
and highly condensed. They are difficult to count by
conventional microscopy of stained cells because the
nuclear membrane persists during most of the mitotic
cycle. However counts have now been obtained for
several fungi by a combination of cytology, linkage
analysis (which enables genes to be assigned to particular chromosomes), and pulse-field electrophoresis of
extracted chromosomes (Oliver 1987; Sansome 1987).
As shown in Table 9.1, the haploid chromosome
count of most fungi and fungus-like organisms seems
to lie between 6 and 16, but can be as low as 3 or as
high as 40.
The nuclear genome size of fungi is small in comparison with many other eukaryotes. For example, the
genome size of Saccharomyces cerevisiae is just over
12 Mb (12 megabase pairs, or 12 million base pairs),
and that of Schizophyllum commune (Basidiomycota) is
about 37 Mb. Some reported genome sizes of other fungi
are given in Table 9.2. The values for S. cerevisiae and
Schizophyllum commune are only about three and eight
times larger than the genome of Escherichia coli (4 Mb)
and much smaller than the genome of the fruit fly
Drosophila (165 Mb) or humans (about 3000 Mb).
Part of the reason for the small genome size of
fungi is that they have little multicopy (reiterated)
DNA. It represents only about 2–3% of the genome
in Emericella nidulans and about 7% in S. commune.
The reiterated DNA codes mainly for cell components
that are needed in large amounts – ribosomal RNA,

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

transfer RNA and chromosomal proteins. However, an
abnormally large amount of the genome of the downy
mildew pathogen Bremia lactucae (Oomycota) is repetitive (65% of the total genome of about 50 Mb); the
reason for this is unknown.

Table 9.1 Reported chromosome counts in some
representative fungi.
Fungi
Oomycota
Phytophthora spp. (many)
Achlya spp.
Saprolegnia spp.
Pythium
Chytridiomycota
Allomyces arbuscula
A. javanicus

Ascomycota
Schizosaccharomyces pombe
Neurospora crassa
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Emericella (Aspergillus) nidulans
Coccidioides posadasii
Trichophyton rubrum
Magnaporthe grisea
Basidiomycota
Filobasidiella neoformans
Schizophyllum commune
Coprinus cinereus
Puccinia kraussianna

Chromosome count

9–10
3, 6, 8
8–12
commonly 10 or 20
16
14 (variable in
hybrids and
polyploids)
3
7
16
8
4
4
7
11
11
13
30– 40

161

Fungi transcribe a substantial amount of the nuclear
DNA into messenger RNA – an estimated 33% in S.
commune and 50–60% in S. cerevisiae. Compared with
other eukaryotes, therefore, they have relatively little
noncoding (redundant) DNA. Fungi resemble other
eukaryotes in that their protein-encoding genes contain noncoding DNA sequences termed introns. The
introns are transcribed into mRNA but are excised
before the mRNA is translated into proteins. However, the introns of fungi are very short (often about
50–200 base pairs) compared with those of higher
eukaryotes (often 10,000 base pairs or more), and S.
cerevisiae is unusual because it has very few introns.

Mitochondrial genes: normal functions
and involvement in aging
Mitochondria contain a small circular molecule of
DNA. The size of the mitochondrial genome varies, from
as little as 6.6 kb (kilobase pairs) in humans to more
than 1 Mb in plants. Fungal mitochondrial genomes are
often in the range of 19–121 kb; for example 70 kb in
S. cerevisiae, and 50 kb in Schizophyllum commune. Any
variations are due mainly to the amount of noncoding material, because all mitochondrial DNAs code for
the same things: some components of the electrontransport chain (including cytochrome c and ATPase
subunits), some structural RNAs of the mitochondrial
ribosomes, and a range of mitochondrial transfer-RNAs.
Both the nuclear and the mitochondrial genes are
needed to produce complete, functional mitochondria.
The mitochondrial DNA of fungi has received special
attention in relation to aging, because in several
filamentous fungi (Podospora, Neurospora, Aspergillus) a
single mutation in a single mitochondrion can lead to
senescence of the whole colony, when the mutant

Table 9.2 Some reported (approximate) genome sizes of fungi and fungus-like organisms.
Fungi/fungus-like organisms

Genome size (Mb)

Aspergillus fumigatus (potential human pathogen)
A. niger (industrially important: citric acid, enzyme production)
Candida albicans (human commensal and potential pathogen)
Filobasidiella (Cryptococcus) neoformans (human pathogen)
Emericella (Aspergillus) nidulans (experimental model fungus)
Neurospora crassa (experimental model fungus)
Phanerochaete chrysosporium (wood-decay basidiomycota)
Phytophthora infestans (plant pathogen; Oomycota)
Phytophthora sojae (pathogen of soybean; Oomycota)
Pneumocystis jiroveci (pathogen of immunocompromised humans)
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (brewing and breadmaking yeast)
Schizosaccharomyces pombe (experimental model; fission yeast)

30
30
16
21
28
40
40
240
62
7.7
12
14

162

CHAPTER 9

gene causes the gradual displacement of wild-type
mitochondrial DNA (reviewed by Esser 1990; Bertrand
1995). The strains of Podospora that exhibit the senescence phenotype can be maintained indefinitely as
repeatedly subcultured young colonies, but they stop
growing, become senescent and die after they have
been grown continuously for about 25 days. It has long
been known that a non-nuclear “infective factor” is
involved, because nonsenescent strains (which never
undergo senescence) acquire the ability to senesce when
their hyphae anastomose with senescence-prone strains.
Moreover, mitochondria were implicated because the
onset of senescence could be postponed indefinitely
by growing strains in the presence of sublethal doses
of inhibitors of mitochondrial DNA synthesis or mitochondrial protein synthesis, but senescence occurred
when the inhibitors were removed. More recent
studies showed that DNA from strains that were
undergoing senescence could be transformed into protoplasts of healthy strains, and the protoplast progeny
senesced immediately. The cause of this seems to be a
95 kb plasmid which normally exists as an integral part
of the mitochondrial DNA of healthy strains or of
juvenile (pre-senescent) cultures of senescent strains. But
as the senescent strains age this DNA is excised from
the mitochondrial genome, becomes a closed circular
molecule, and self-replicates, causing senescence.
Precisely how it does this is still in doubt, but the
plasmid shows DNA homology with an intron in
one of the mitochondrion genes – the gene that codes
for a subunit of cytochrome-c-oxidase, an enzyme
essential for normal function of the respiratory electron
transport chain. Senescent strains of Podospora lack
cytochrome-c-oxidase activity, perhaps because the
plasmid inserts in the mitochondrial DNA, leading to
disruption of gene function or causing mitochondrial
gene rearrangements. Dysfunction of cytochrome-coxidase or other components of electron transport
would be lethal for Podospora because this fungus seems
unable to grow anaerobically by fermenting sugars.

past it was used to construct “vectors” for gene
cloning in yeast.
Most other plasmids of fungi are found in the
mitochondria. The best characterized are the linear
DNA plasmids of Neurospora crassa and N. intermedia.
They show a degree of base sequence homology to
the mitochondrial genome, suggesting that they are
defective, excised segments of the mitochondrial
genes. However, some other mitochondrial plasmids
of Neurospora are closed circular molecules with little
or no homology to the mitochondrial genome. They
have a variable “unit” length of about 3–5 kb (in different cases) and the units can join head-to-tail to form
larger repeats. None of these fungal plasmids has any
known function, so they are not like bacterial plasmids
that code for antibiotic resistance, pathogenicity, or the
ability to degrade pesticides, etc.
Transposons (transposable elements) are short
regions of DNA that remain in the chromosome but
encode enzymes for their own replication. They produce RNA copies of themselves, and they encode the
enzyme, reverse transcriptase, which synthesizes
new copies of DNA from this RNA template, similar to
the action of retroviruses such as HIV. The new copies
of DNA can then insert at various points in the same
or other chromosomes, leading to alterations in gene
expression. Transposons seem to be rare in filamentous
fungi, but there are several types in S. cerevisiae. The
best studied of these are the chromosomal Ty elements,
present in about 30 copies in yeast cells. Oliver (1987)
described the known and possible roles of Ty elements
(Fig. 9.3). In addition to a role in altering gene expression, they could have significant effects on chromosomal rearrangements when the “delta sequences” on
the ends of these elements combine with one another.
These transposable elements seem to have no function,
except for self-perpetuation.
The mating-type genes of S. cerevisiae are transposable
casettes, causing mating-type switching as discussed
in Chapter 5. However, mating-type switching cannot
occur in Neurospora crassa, because individual haploid
strains consist of only one mating type.

Plasmids and transposable elements
Plasmids usually are closed-circular molecules of DNA
with the ability to replicate autonomously in a cell.
However, they can also be linear DNA molecules if
the ends are “capped” (like chromosomes) to prevent
their degradation by nucleases. Plasmids or plasmid-like
DNAs have been found in several fungi. The most
notable example is the “two-micron” plasmid of S.
cerevisiae, so-called because of its 2 µm length as seen
in electron micrographs. This plasmid is a closed
circular molecule of 6.3 kb, and it is unusual because
it is found in the nucleus, where it can be present in
up to 100 copies. It has no known function, but in the

Viruses and viral genes
Fungal viruses were first discovered in the 1960s,
associated with “La France” disease of the cultivated
mushroom Agaricus bisporus. (The name was coined by
British mushroom growers, reflecting the entente cordiale
that has long characterized Anglo-French relations!)
In this disease the fruitbodies are distorted and the
fruitbody yield is poor. Electron micrographs of both
the hyphae and the fruitbodies showed the presence
of many isometric virus-like particles (VLPs), assumed
to be the cause of the problem. VLPs were then

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

163

Fig. 9.3 Ty elements of yeast. (a) The Ty element consists of an epsilon region which encodes its own replication, flanked
by delta sequences. Copies of the transposon are then inserted elsewhere in the same or in other chromosomes.
(b) The delta regions of one Ty element can undergo homologous recombination, leading to a “solo delta” in the
chromosome. (c) Homologous recombination between two Ty elements on a chromosome could lead to excision of
part of the chromosome. (d) Homologous recombination between Ty elements on different chromosomes could create
hybrid chromosomes. (Based on Oliver 1987.)

discovered in other fungi, and by the 1980s they were
known in over 150 species, including representatives
of all the major fungal groups (Buck 1986). With a few
notable exceptions, however, the presence of VLPs is not
associated with any obvious disorder, so most fungal
viruses seem to be symptomless.
Studies on a range of fungi have shown that fungal
viruses (or VLPs) have similar basic features (Fig. 9.4).

• They are isometric particles, 25–50 nm diameter,
with a genome of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), a
capsid composed of one major polypeptide, and
they code for a dsRNA-dependent RNA polymerase
for replication of the viral genome.
• The genome size is variable. Even within a single
fungus it ranges from about 3.5 to 10 kb. In some
cases this variation is due to internal deletions of a

164

CHAPTER 9

strains that can potentially be used to control the serious chestnut blight disease.
In recognition of the unique properties of viral
dsRNA and its role in reducing pathogenic virulence,
a new name has been approved for this group of
viruses – the hypovirus group (Hypoviridae).

Genetic variation in fungi
Nonsexual variation: the significance of
haploidy
Fig. 9.4 Isometric virus-like particles extracted from
hyphae of Colletotrichum sp. The particles aggregate in
crystalline arrays in vitro. (Courtesy of Rawlinson et al. 1975.)

full-length molecule, but in other cases the genome
is divided between different capsid particles.
• In most fungi the VLPs are found infrequently in
hyphal tips, but they can occur as crystalline arrays in
the cytoplasm of older hyphal regions, often closely
associated with sheets of endoplasmic reticulum
that enclose the aggregates.
• The natural means of transmission of VLPs is via
the cytoplasm during hyphal anastomosis (hyphal
fusions) or by passage into the asexual spores. VLPs
can also enter the sexual spores of some Basidiomycota and in Saccharomyces, but this seems to be
rare in the sexual spores of mycelial Ascomycota.
VLPs are resident genetic elements of fungi because
they have no natural mechanism for crossing species
barriers. For several years this created a problem in
determining their functions, because the association
between VLPs and phenotypic characters was only
correlative. However, two major developments have
changed this and opened the field to critical investigation. First was the discovery that virus-like dsRNA
can be present in fungi even when VLPs are absent.
In these cases it can be assumed that the virus has
lost the ability – and the need – to produce a capsid.
Second, protoplasting techniques and transformation
systems have now been developed for several fungi, so
that dsRNA can be extracted, purified and introduced
into protoplasts, or complementary DNA (cDNA) can
be derived from dsRNA in vitro and then transformed
into protoplasts. These approaches, discussed later
in this chapter, have shown that the viral dsRNA of
Saccharomyces and several other yeasts can cause the cells
to produce killer toxins which act on other strains of
the same species.
In the chestnut blight fungus Cryphonectria parasitica,
also discussed later, the dsRNA causes a marked reduction in pathogenic virulence, creating hypovirulent

Mutation is the basis of all variation, but mutations are
expressed and recombined in different ways depending on the biology of an organism. One of the most
significant features of fungi is that they have a haploid
genome, whereas all other major groups of eukaryotes
are diploid.
Haploid organisms typically expose all their genes
to selection pressure. Any mutation will either cause a
loss of fitness, or an increase in fitness (e.g. antibiotic
or fungicide resistance). This can be beneficial in
the short term but the disadvantage is that haploid
organisms cannot accumulate mutations that are not
of immediate selective value. Diploid organisms have
exactly the opposite features. Mutations often are
recessive to the wild type, so they are not immediately
expressed; instead they accumulate and can be recombined in various ways during sexual crossing.
However, mycelial fungi typically have several
haploid nuclei in a common cytoplasm (Chapter 3),
and so recessive mutations can be shielded from selection pressure, being complemented by the wild-type
nuclei. Mycelial fungi can also expose their genes to
selection pressure periodically – whenever they produce
uninucleate spores or when hyphal branches develop
from only one “founder” nucleus. In other words,
mycelial fungi have many of the advantages of
both haploidy and diploidy. This is not true for
the Oomycota, which are diploid. The situation is
different again for yeasts because these grow as uninucleate cells. Several yeasts (e.g. Candida spp.) are
permanently diploid, and even Saccharomyces grows
as a diploid yeast in nature, owing to mating-type
switching (Chapter 5).

Nonsexual variation: heterokaryosis
Heterokaryosis is defined as the presence of two or
more genetically different nuclei in a common cytoplasm (hetero = different; karyos = kernel, or nucleus).
Fungi that exhibit this are termed heterokaryons,
in contrast to homokaryons which have only one
nuclear type.

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

165

Table 9.3 Effects of composition of the growth medium on the ratio of nuclear types in a heterokaryon of Penicillium
cyclopium. (Data from Jinks 1952.)
% of nuclei in
the heterokaryon

Composition of medium (%)
Minimal nutrients

Apple pulp

Type A

Type B

0
20
40
60
80
100

100
80
60
40
20
0

8.6
7.8
11.1
12.7
13.5
51.8

91.4
92.2
88.9
87.3
86.5
48.2

Heterokaryons can arise in two ways. First, when
a mutation occurs in any of the nuclei of a hypha
and the mutated nucleus proliferates along with the
wild-type nuclei. This must happen very often, but
a stable, functional heterokaryon will develop only
if the genetically different nuclei proliferate in the
apical cells so that all the newly formed hyphae contain both types. A second way in which heterokaryons
arise is by tip-to-tip fusion (anastomosis) of the hyphae
of two strains (see Fig. 3.6). Again, the nuclei would
need to proliferate in the apical cells to form a stable
heterokaryon.
Most experimental studies on heterokaryosis have
involved the pairing of strains with defined mutations,
such as amino acid auxotrophs. The heterokaryon
will then behave as a prototroph, capable of growing
on minimal medium. The most interesting feature
in these cases is that the ratio of nuclear genotypes
can vary within wide limits and is influenced by environmental conditions. So, at least in theory, a single
heterokaryotic strain can change the frequency distribution of its nuclear types in response to selection
pressure. This has been demonstrated experimentally
in classic experiments by Jinks (1952), as shown in
Table 9.3. A heterokaryon of the apple-rot fungus,
Penicillium cyclopium was constructed by allowing two
different homokaryons to fuse. Then the heterokaryon
was grown on agar containing different proportions
of apple pulp or minimal nutrient medium. The ratio
of nuclear types (which we will call A and B) in the
heterokaryon was assessed by testing random samples
of uninucleate (homokaryotic) spores from the colony.
When the heterokaryon was grown on apple-pulp
medium the proportion of B-type nuclei was very
high, but as the amount of apple pulp was lowered
so the proportion of A-type nuclei increased, and
dramatically so when the heterokaryon was grown on
minimal medium. Other experiments of this type

Relative growth rates of
homokaryons A and B
A:B
0.47 : 1
0.53 : 1
0.54 : 1
0.67 : 1
1:1
1.56 : 1

have shown that the nuclear ratio in a heterokaryon
can vary by up to 1000 : 1 in either direction. If
this happens at all commonly in nature it would
contribute significantly to continuous variation and
selection of the best adapted nuclear ratio.
How do heterokaryons break down?
Heterokaryons can break down in two ways (Fig. 9.5)
– either during the production of uninucleate spores,
or when branches arise that contain only one nuclear
type. Many common fungi produce uninucleate spores,
often by repeated mitotic division of a “mother” nucleus
in a phialide – Aspergillus, Penicillium, Trichoderma,
Gliocladium, etc. (Fig. 9.5a(i)). Multinucleate spores can
also be produced from phialides, if a single nucleus
enters the developing spore and then divides to produce several nuclei. For example, this is seen in many
Fusarium species (Fig. 9.5b). But some other fungi (e.g.
Neurospora, Fig. 9.5c) produce conidia directly from
multinucleate hyphal tips or buds, and these spores will
be either homokaryotic or heterokaryotic, depending
on whether the cells that produced them were homokaryotic or heterokaryotic.
Heterokaryons also break down if a branch arises that,
by chance, contains only one nuclear genotype. This
branch can produce further branches and eventually
give rise to a homokaryotic sector of the colony
(Fig. 9.5a(ii)). If the homokaryon is favored more than
the heterokaryon in the prevailing environment then
it will expand to occupy progressively more of the
colony margin; if not favored it will be suppressed.
Figure 9.5d shows an example of this, where a fungal
colony was initially darkly pigmented (with daily zones
of white aerial hyphae). Two light-colored sectors
soon developed and because of their faster growth
they progressively expanded. This type of sectoring
is quite often seen in fungal colonies – either as

166

CHAPTER 9

Fig. 9.5 (a–d) Heterokaryosis and the reversion to homokaryons. See text for details.

differences in pigmentation or sporulation. But sectors
can also differ in pathogenicity or biochemical properties, and these often go undetected.
The significance of heterokaryosis
Heterokaryosis is a potentially powerful phenomenon, but caution is required because the extent of
heterokaryosis in natural environments is largely
unknown. Many laboratory studies have involved paired
auxotrophic mutants, and these can be regarded as
“forced heterokaryons” – there is a strong selection
pressure to maintain the heterokaryotic condition.
Also, there are significant barriers to the creation of

heterokaryons in nature, because many fungi have
nuclear-encoded “heterokaryon incompatibility” (het )
gene loci. For example, Neurospora crassa has at least
10 such loci, with two alleles at each locus, so there
are potentially 210 (1024) different “vegetative” compatibility groups (VCGs). Pairings of strains of different VCGs lead to hyphal fusion at the points of
contact, followed by different degrees of cytoplasmic
incompatibility, depending at least partly on the
number of het loci that any two strains have in
common. Typically, the cytoplasm of the fused cells
dies (Fig. 9.6) resulting in a clear demarcation zone
between opposing colonies (Fig. 9.7). Further details can
be found in Glass & Kaneko (2003).

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

167

Fig. 9.6 Anastomosis reactions of Rhizoctonia solani. (a) No reaction, when strains of different anastomosis groups show
no hyphal attraction. (b) Compatible reaction, when strains of the same anastomosis group orientate towards one another
and fuse to form a continuous hyphal network. (c) Incompatible reaction, when strains of the same anastomosis group
but with different vegetative compatibility genes undergo hyphal fusion, followed by cell death of the fused hyphal
compartments. The fused hyphae between the three arrows are dead. (Courtesy of H.L. Robinson.)

(a)

(b)

Fig. 9.7 (a) Part of Fig. 9.6c at higher magnification, showing regrowth of a hyphal tip into the dead hyphal compartment. (b) Vegetative incompatibility between two strains (T1 and T2) of Rhizoctonia solani (Basidiomycota) opposed
on an agar plate. The clear demarcation zone between the colonies resulted from post-fusion death of the hyphae
where the colony tips fused (Courtesy of P.M. McCabe.)

Nonsexual variation: parasexuality
Many common mitosporic fungi, such as Aspergillus,
Penicillium, Fusarium, and Trichoderma, seem largely to
have abandoned sexual reproduction, because their

sexual stages are not seen in laboratory conditions and
are found only infrequently, if at all, in nature. For
example, the common fungi, Aspergillus fumigatus and
A. niger have never been found to produce a sexual stage.
This leads us to ask whether they have alternative
mechanisms of genetic recombination, and the answer

168

CHAPTER 9

seems to be that they do have this potential through
a mechanism termed parasexuality (or the parasexual
cycle).
Parasexuality was discovered by Pontecorvo
(Pontecorvo 1956), during studies on heterokaryosis in
Emericella (Aspergillus) nidulans. He constructed a heterokaryon from two parental strains that had markers at
two gene loci (we will call the strains Ab and aB) and
was analyzing the homokaryotic spores produced by the
heterokaryon. As expected, most of the spores had
nuclei of the “parental” types, either Ab or aB, but a
significant number were found to be recombinants
(AB or ab) and their frequencies were too high to
be explained by mutation. Evidently, the genes had
recombined in the heterokaryon, although this cannot
occur by heterokaryosis alone because the nuclei
remain as distinct entities regardless of how they are
mixed in the cytoplasm. Further investigation led
Pontecorvo to propose a parasexual cycle, involving
three stages:
1 Diploidization. Occasionally, two haploid nuclei
fuse to form a diploid nucleus. The mechanism is
largely unknown, and this seems to be a relatively
rare event, but once a diploid nucleus has been
formed it can be very stable and divide to form further diploid nuclei, along with the normal haploid
nuclei. Thus the heterokaryon consists of a mixture
of the two original haploid nuclear types as well as
diploid fusion nuclei.
2 Mitotic chiasma formation. Chiasma formation
is common in meiosis, where two homologous
chromosomes break and rejoin, leading to chromosomes that are hybrids of the parental types. It can
also occur during mitosis but at a much lower
frequency because the chromosomes do not pair
in a regular arrangement. Nevertheless, the result will
be the same when it does occur – the recombination
of genes.
3 Haploidization. Occasionally, nondisjunction of
chromosomes occurs during division of a diploid
nucleus, such that one of the daughter nuclei
has 2n + 1 chromosomes and the other has 2n – 1
chromosomes. Such nuclei with incomplete multiples of the haploid number are termed aneuploid
(as opposed to euploid nuclei, with n or complete
multiples of n). They tend to be unstable and to lose
further chromosomes during subsequent divisions.
So the 2n + 1 nucleus would revert to 2n, whereas
the 2n − 1 nucleus would progressively revert to n.
Consistent with this, in E. nidulans (n = 8) nuclei have
been found with 17 (2n + 1), 16 (2n), 15 (2n − 1), 12,
11, 10, and 9 chromosomes.
It must be emphasized that each of these events is
relatively rare, and they do not constitute a regular cycle

like the sexual cycle. But the outcome would be similar. Once a diploid nucleus has formed by fusion of
two haploid nuclei from different parents, the parental
genes can potentially recombine. And, the chromosomes
that are lost from an aneuploid nucleus during its
reversion to a euploid could be a mixture of those in
the parental strains.

Significance of parasexuality
Parasexuality has become a valuable tool for industrial
mycologists to produce strains with desired combinations of properties. However its significance in nature
is largely unknown and will depend on the frequency
of heterokaryosis, determined by cytoplasmic incompatibility barriers. Assuming that heterokaryosis does
occur, we can ask why several (obviously successful)
fungi have abandoned an efficient sexual mechanism
of genetic recombination in favor of a more random
and seemingly less efficient process. The answer might
be that the parasexual events can occur at any time during normal, somatic growth and with no preconditions
like those for sexual reproduction. Although each stage
of the parasexual process is relatively rare, there are
many millions of nuclei in a single colony, so the
chances of the parasexual cycle occurring within the
colony as a whole may be quite high.

Sexual variation
Sex is the major mechanism for producing genetic
recombinants, through crossing-over (chiasma formation)
and independent assortment of homologous chromosomes during meiosis. A fungus such as Emericella
(Aspergillus) nidulans, with eight chromosomes, could
generate 28 (i.e. 256) different chromosome combinations by independent assortment alone. This would
depend on an efficient outcrossing mechanism. As
noted in Chapter 5, many fungi are heterothallic
(outcrossing), requiring the fusion of cells of two
different mating types. But some are homothallic (e.g.
most Pythium spp., about 10% of Ascomycota, and
a few Basidiomycota) and some exhibit secondary
homothallism – the sexual spores are binucleate
with one nucleus of each mating type (e.g. Neurospora
tetrasperma and Agaricus bisporus). Another variation
is seen in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and the distantly
related fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Both
of these undergo mating-type switching (Chapter 5).
These variations on the normal mechanisms of outcrossing have probably evolved because the sexual
spores of fungi function as dormant spores to survive
adverse conditions. At least in the short term, survival
is more important than sex!

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

Molecular approaches to population structure
Fungal species are dynamic entities. Their populations
fragment by geographical isolation or the development of somatic incompatibility barriers, then the
fragments diverge by genetic drift or in response to local
selection pressure. This is particularly true for the
clonal mitosporic fungi, because strains of different
vegetative compatibility groups (VCGs) are isolated
permanently from one another. Many sexual species
also have VCGs but the mating-type genes override the
somatic incompatibility genes so that strains of different VCGs can mate.
In general, fungi have too few morphological features
for identification of population subunits, so biochemical and molecular tools must be used for this. One
approach is to compare the electrophoretic banding
patterns of proteins on gels, using either total protein
extracts or different forms (isozymes) of particular

169

enzymes such as pectic enzymes, visualized on the gels
by color reactions with the enzyme substrate. These
zymograms (e.g. Fig. 9.8) reflect random mutations in
the DNA encoding the enzyme, although not at the
enzyme active site which is highly conserved. About
30% of the amino acid changes resulting from mutations will affect the net charge on the protein and thus
alter its electrophoretic mobility. Since these changes
are random, they tend to accumulate over time and thus
reflect the history of a population. As one practical
example, MacNish et al. (1993) used a combination of
pectic zymogram and VCG typing to identify different
subgroups of the soil-borne fungus Rhizoctonia solani
that causes bare patch (stunting) disease of wheat in
Australia (Chapter 14). All fungal isolates from within
each disease patch were of identical VCG + zymogram
group, but different patches often represented different VCG + zymogram groups.
Figure 9.9 shows how this approach can be used
to understand the population biology of the fungus.

Fig. 9.8 Five distinctive zymogram groups (ZGs) of Rhizoctonia strains that cause bare patch disease of wheat in Australia
(similar to crater disease, shown in Fig. 14.3). Protein extracts were run on acrylamide gels containing pectin then stained
to develop the bands of pectic enzymes. (Courtesy of M. Sweetingham; from MacNish & Sweetingham 1993.)

Fig. 9.9 Mapped positions of patches of stunted wheat plants caused by Rhizoctonia in a field trial site in Australia.
Two adjacent patches were caused by different pectic zymogram groups (ZG1.1 and ZG1.5) which never invaded the
territory of the other. The patches expanded and contracted in successive years. The central dot is a fixed reference
point. (After MacNish et al. 1993.)

170

CHAPTER 9

The patches can merge, but never overlap because the
subgroups seem unable to invade one another”s territory. The patches (and therefore the fungal populations)
are also dynamic – they can expand, contract or even
disappear in different cropping seasons. When the disease patch disappears the fungus can no longer be found
in the soil.
Fungal population structure can also be analyzed
by the use of restriction enzymes (endonucleases)
on DNA extracted from cells. Any one restriction
enzyme (e.g. BamH1) will cut the DNA at specific
“target” points. For example, BamH1 cuts DNA at
sites where the nucleotide sequence GGATCC occurs
(with CCTAGG on the complementary strand of
DNA), giving fragments of different lengths that band
on gels according to their size. The banding patterns
are termed restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs). They are like fingerprints, reflecting
accumulations of point mutations that change single
nucleotides within the sequence recognized by the
restriction enzyme, or chromosomal rearrangements
that change the relative positions of these sequences.
Different enzymes give different RFLP patterns
because they cut the DNA at different sites. They also
give different numbers of fragments, because some
recognize four-base sequences which are more common
than, say, six-base sequences. Also, these enzymes
can be used on mitochondrial DNA, which is more
highly conserved than the total DNA, so different levels
of sensitivity can be selected to analyze both minor
and major changes within a fungal population. Kohn
(1995) described a good example of this approach for
comparing the intercontinental and intracontinental
clonal subgroups of the plant pathogen Sclerotinia
sclerotiorum in both wild and agricultural plant
communities.
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can be used
to develop diagnostic probes for specific fungi. The
simplest and most common approach involves the
random amplification of DNA from a crude DNA
extract by adding a random primer composed of, for
example, 10 nucleotides. This anneals to a complementary nucleotide sequence on the extracted DNA.
Then a DNA polymerase extends along the DNA,
reading the sequence of bases along from the primer.
This DNA is then amplified during 25–40 successive
rounds of PCR. The technique is known as RAPD,
pronounced “rapids” (random amplified polymorphic
DNA). Alternatively, the DNA that codes for particular
proteins can be targeted with primers based on knowledge of the partial amino acid sequence of the protein.
In any case, selected fragments of the amplified DNA
(in single-stranded form) can be suitably tagged and
used as diagnostic probes that will bind to equivalent
single-stranded DNA sequences in extracts of a
sample.

Probes of this type are available commercially for
detecting several individual plant pathogens (Fox
1994). For analysis of population structure, both RFLP
and RAPD have been used to distinguish the different pathogenic strains of Ophiostoma spp. that cause
Dutch elm disease, helping to trace the origin and
progress of the recent Dutch elm disease epidemics (Pipe
et al. 1995; Chapter 10). As a further example, PCR-based
methods have been developed to detect, and quantify,
the levels of several important mycotoxins in food products (Edwards et al. 2002). Molecular tools are being
developed rapidly in hospital research laboratories, for
the molecular typing of fungi that cause human diseases. One of the main drivers for this is to be able to
distinguish between individual strains or subgroups
within a fungal species, and thereby to aid epidemiological studies. Many examples of these techniques are
described in Domer & Kobayashi (2004).
The genes encoding ribosomal RNA are widely
used for identifying fungi and for constructing phylogenetic trees (see Fig. 1.1). Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) is
needed in such large amounts to produce the cellular
ribosomes that there are multiple copies of the rRNA
genes, often arranged in tandem but separated from one
another by untranscribed spacers (Fig. 9.10a). Each
single rRNA gene (Fig. 9.10b) has coding information
for the three types of rRNA found in eukaryotic
ribosomes (18S, 5.8S and 28S), but also contains other
valuable information, especially in the internally
transcribed spacers (ITS) and externally transcribed
spacer (ETS). The rRNA gene initially produces a prerRNA (Fig. 9.10c), which then undergoes processing,
including the excision of the spacer regions, to produce
the three “mature” rRNAs (Fig. 9.10d). The 18S rRNA
has changed sufficiently over evolutionary time to
be used as a kind of “molecular clock.” But the ITS
regions are even more variable, and can often be used
to distinguish different species. This is done through
PCR, using primers that bind to the 5′ end of each
DNA strand and progress towards the 3′ end. The
nucleotide sequences in the ITS regions of the bulked
DNA can then be compared with the known sequences
of different fungi.
In Chapter 11, we consider some further techniques
in the “biochemical and molecular toolbox” for
fungi.

Applied molecular genetics of fungi
In this section we consider some examples of molecular
approaches for understanding fungal behavior or for
direct, practical applications. The examples can only
be illustrative but many of them represent groundbreaking work and cover some inherently interesting
issues.

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

171

Untranscribed
spacers
(a)

(b)

ETS

ITS
18S

(c)

ITS

ITS
5.8S

28S

ITS

Pre-rRNA

Processing
(d)
Fig. 9.10 (a–d) Organization and processing
of the eukaryotic rRNA genes.

Production of heterologous proteins in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
The availability of efficient vectors has enabled S.
cerevisiae to be used as a “factory” for the products of
many foreign (heterologous) genes. One of the most
significant products to have emerged from this is a vaccine against hepatitis B. It consists of one of the viral
coat proteins, Hepatitis B surface Antigen (HBsAg),
and was produced by transforming yeast cells with
the viral gene encoding this protein. Hepatitis B
vaccine was the first genetically engineered vaccine to
be approved for use in humans (it contains no genes).
Professor Sir Ken Murray was knighted for his work in
developing this vaccine.
Many other proteins have been produced experimentally from yeast, including cellulases, amylases, interferon, epidermal growth factor, and β-endomorphin.
However, there have also been problems in using
Saccharomyces for heterologous protein production. In
particular, yeast has a relatively poor ability to remove
introns from foreign genes (its own introns are few and
small), so it is most efficient when transformed with
complementary DNA (cDNA) derived in vitro from the
messenger RNA of a protein (the introns are spliced out
during the processing of mRNA). Yeast also fails to
recognize the promotor regions of the genes of other
fungi, and it does not always faithfully glycosylate foreign proteins. This can be important because several
bioactive proteins are glycoproteins that depend on the
sugar chains for their activity.
These difficulties have served to demonstrate that
S. cerevisiae is genetically quite different from the
mycelial fungi. For example, E. nidulans can recognize

18S rRNA

+
+
5.8S rRNA

Mature rRNA
28S rRNA

the promoter sequences of the genes of other fungi
and also can excise their introns. It may be possible to
use E. nidulans or the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces
as an alternative to Saccharomyces for heterologous
protein production. But, in general, it is now thought
that the best approach is to use cell lines related to the
natural producer organism – mammalian cell lines for
mammalian gene products, and so on.

Identification of genes for plant
pathogenicity and differentiation
We saw in Chapter 4 how differentiation-specific
mRNAs were identified in Schizophyllum commune by
comparing the mRNA profiles of cultures grown in conditions where fruitbodies were or were not produced.
The specific mRNAs can then be used as templates to
produce cDNA in vitro. This cDNA, produced from
labeled nucleotides, becomes a probe for binding to
complementary sequences of extracted chromosomal
DNA. In this way a specific gene can be identified
even if nothing is known about the basic genetics of
a fungus. By using such techniques, Wessels and his
co-workers were able to characterize a unique group of
proteins, the hydrophobins, which have major roles in
fungal biology and differentiation. These techniques of
“reverse genetics” have also made it possible to perform
targeted gene disruption. For the fungal gene of
interest, a cDNA is produced in vitro and disrupted to
make it nonfunctional. Then it is transformed into the
fungus, to replace the original gene by homologous
recombination. The following example shows the
power of this technique.

172

CHAPTER 9

Fig. 9.11 A wheat root at different magnifications, infected by the take-all fungus, Gaeumannomyces graminis. The
fungus grows on the root surface as dark “runner hyphae” (rh) then invades the root cortex by infection hyphae (ih),
destroying the phloem (phl) and causing intense discoloration and blockage of the xylem.

Roles of pre-formed inhibitors in plant resistance
to pathogens
The take-all fungus of cereals, Gaeumannomyces graminis
(Fig. 9.11), grows on the surface of cereal roots by
dark “runner hyphae” then penetrates the root cortex
and enters the vascular system, causing disruption of
the sugar-conducting phloem cells, and blockage of the
water-conducting xylem vessels. If enough roots are
killed in this way during the growing season then the
plants die prematurely, with serious loss of grain yield.
G. graminis has two main pathogenic forms – variety
tritici (GGT) which attacks wheat roots but not oat roots,
and variety avenae (GGA) which attacks both wheat and
oats. This difference was explained in the 1960s when
oat roots were found to contain pre-formed inhibitors.
The most potent of these inhibitors is avenacin A
(Fig. 9.12), a saponin (soap-like compound) which
combines with sterols in the fungal membrane, creating ion-permeable pores. In laboratory culture both
GGT and GGA grow readily in aqueous extracts of
wheat roots, but GGT is totally suppressed by aqueous
extracts of oat roots whereas GGA is unaffected by them.
The reason was suggested to be that GGA detoxifies
avenacin, cleaving the terminal sugars from the molecule (Fig. 9.12), by producing a glycosidase enzyme
termed avenacinase. This enzyme would thus be a key

pathogenicity determinant, allowing GGA to extend
its host range to oats.
This was shown to be the case by targeted disruption of the avenacinase gene (Osbourne et al. 1994).
GGA was transformed with a marked, disrupted cDNA
of the gene, which inserted at the gene site by homologous recombination and caused the fungus to lose
its pathogenicity to oats, while retaining its normal
pathogenicity to wheat. But when the marked cDNA
had inserted elsewhere in the genome (nonhomologous
recombination) the fungus was still fully pathogenic to
oats. Extending from this work, Osbourne et al. examined other host–pathogen systems where saponins
have been implicated as plant resistance factors. In particular, tomatoes are known to contain the saponin
α-tomatine (Fig. 9.12), and a pathogen of tomatoes,
Septoria lycopersici, is known to detoxify this by cleaving a single sugar from the molecule. The enzyme
responsible (tomatinase) was found to be very similar to
avenacinase: it was recognized by an anti-avenacinase
antibody, and cDNA of avenacinase hybridized with
DNA components of S. lycopersici, presumably by
recognizing the gene for tomatinase. This might be
explained by the fact that all the saponin-detoxifying
enzymes are β-glycosidases, with perhaps some common
structure, reflected in the DNA sequences. However,
avenacinase (from GGA) had very little ability to

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

173

Fig. 9.12 Structures of two saponins that are pre-formed resistance compounds in plants: avenacin in roots of oats,
and α-tomatine in tomato. Pathogens with the appropriate enzymes can detoxify these compounds by cleaving some
of the terminal sugar residues.

detoxify tomatine, and tomatinase (from S. lycopersici)
had negligible ability to detoxify avenacin. So it seems
that these pathogenic fungi have evolved saponindetoxifying enzymes with quite specific activity
against the saponins of their hosts.

Yeast killer systems
With this topic we return to the role of viral dsRNA.
Individual species of at least eight genera of yeasts
(Saccharomyces, Candida, Kluyveromyces, etc.) have
been found to contain killer strains. These strains
secrete a protein that kills other strains of the same
species but not of unrelated species. The toxin binds
to a receptor on the wall of susceptible cells, then passes
to the membrane where it causes leakage of H+, and
the cells die owing to loss of transmembrane potential and disruption of amino acid uptake, K+ balance,
etc. The toxins are stable only at low pH and are
thought to give a significant advantage to killer strains
over nonkiller strains of the same species in acidic
environments.
In Kluyveromyces lactis the toxin is encoded by a
linear DNA plasmid, but in all other cases it is encoded
by dsRNA. Both the killer and nonkiller strains can

contain virus-like particles (VLPs) so this feature alone
does not correlate with killer activity. However, these
particles are found to be of two types: the dsRNA in
the “L type” encodes the virus coat protein, whereas
the dsRNA in the “M type” codes for the toxin. The M
dsRNA depends on the L dsRNA for the coat protein,
but the L dsRNA can occur alone with no effect on
the cells.
The molecular biology of the killer system in S. cerevisiae has been studied intensively and has shown
why the toxin producers are not affected by their own
toxin. They produce the toxin as a large precursor protein which undergoes changes during passage through
the secretory system to produce a protoxin. This
protoxin is finally cleaved at the cell membrane, to
release the active toxin but leave part of the molecule
in the membrane. This residual part seems to interact
with a toxin receptor, making the cell resistant to
active toxin in the external environment.
Similar dsRNA killer systems are found in the yeast
phase of Ustilago maydis (Basidiomycota) which causes
smut disease of maize. A killer system might also
occur in the take-all fungus Gaeumannomyces graminis,
because some dsRNA-containing strains can markedly
inhibit the growth of other strains at low pH. However
the mechanism in this case remains unknown.

174

CHAPTER 9

Fig. 9.13 Recorded spread of chestnut blight
caused by Cryphonectria parasitica after it was first
recorded in New York in 1904.

Hypovirulence of plant pathogens:
the control of chestnut blight
Chestnut blight, caused by the fungus Cryphonectria
parasitica (Ascomycota), has destroyed many millions
of trees in North America, following the first report
of its occurrence in the New York Zoological Garden
in 1904 (Fig. 9.13). Its progressive spread across the
eastern half of the USA reduced the native American
chestnut (Castanea dentata) almost to the status of an
understorey shrub, whereas it was once a magnificent
“high forest” tree. However, recent studies raise the
prospect that chestnut blight might be controlled by
genetic manipulation of hypovirus-associated dsRNA,
discussed below.
Cryphonectria infects through wounds in the bark
of chestnut trees, and then spreads in the cambium,
progressively girdling the stem and killing the plant
above the infection point (Fig. 9.14). This disease was
also a significant problem in European sweet chestnut
trees (Castanea sativa) in the 1940s, but in Italy in
the early 1950s some heavily infested sweet chestnut
plantations began to recover spontaneously. The
lesions in these trees stopped spreading round the
trunks, and strains of C. parasitica isolated from them
showed abnormal features. They grew slowly and
erratically on agar, were white rather than the normal

Fig. 9.14 Diagram of a cross-section of a trunk with a
spreading canker caused by Cryphonectria parasitica. This
fungus produces airborne spores that infect through
wounds, then progressively girdles the trunk by growing
in the cambium.

orange color, produced significantly fewer conidia, and
showed only low virulence when wound-inoculated
into trees. This low virulence (hypovirulence) could
be transmitted to other strains during hyphal anastomosis on agar, so it was coined transmissible
hypovirulence. None of the hypovirulent strains

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

175

Fig. 9.15 Double-stranded RNA of hypovirulent strains of C. parasitica. Large (L) dsRNA is the full-length molecule comprising two conserved end regions and a central coding region of two open reading frames (ORFA and ORFB) which
confer hypovirulence. Medium (M) and small (S) dsRNAs are also commonly found in hyphae. They are internally deleted
copies of the L-dsRNA.

contained “conventional” virus-like particles, but all
the hypovirulent strains contained dsRNA whereas
virulent strains had no dsRNA. Electron micrographs
show that this dsRNA is contained in rounded or clubshaped, membrane-bound vesicles in the cytoplasm
(Newhouse et al. 1983) and that, unlike many VLPs,
these can occur in significant amounts in the hyphal
apices of C. parasitica.
The spontaneous disease decline in Italy led French
workers to develop a highly successful biological
control program. Hypovirulent strains of C. parasitica
were cultured in the laboratory and inoculated at the
expanding margins of cankers in the field. Within a
short time the cankers stopped growing, and only
hypovirulent strains could be recovered where once the
virulent strain had been. This transmissible change of
phenotype was always accompanied by the transmission of dsRNA.
Following the success of this program in Europe,
attempts were made to introduce hypovirulent strains
of Cryphonectria into the USA. But they gave only
partial and localized disease control, because the
pathogen population in the USA consists of numerous
vegetative compatibility groups (VCGs) that limit the
natural transfer of dsRNA, owing to cytoplasmic death
when the strains anastomose. In one early study about
0.5 hectare of natural chestnut forest in the USA was
found to contain at least 35 VCGs. More recently the
VCGs have been shown to be in a continuous state of
flux: samplings of identical trees over several years
showed that some of the predominant VCGs declined,
while new ones arose (Anagnostakis 1992). The European population of C. parasitica is much more uniform
in terms of VCGs, and this probably accounts for the
success of the biocontrol program in Europe.
Progress in understanding the role of dsRNA in
Cryphonectria was significantly delayed by the lack of
a suitable transformation system for this fungus.

However, when a system was eventually developed
it led to rapid progress (Nuss 1992). The dsRNA of
C. parasitica was found to be highly variable, with
lengths falling into three broad size ranges – S (small),
M (medium), and large (L, about 12.7 kb). As shown
in Fig. 9.15, all these types have the same terminal
regions – a poly-A tail at the 3′ end and a 28-nucleotide
conserved sequence at the 5′ end. They differ mainly
in the degree of internal deletion. The L-form seems to
be the full-length molecule, and the smaller forms are
defective (presumably functionless) derivatives which
accumulate in the hyphae. This high degree of variability
of RNA genomes is not unusual because there is no
effective proofreading system for RNA, to ensure that
it is copied faithfully.
With the development of a transformation system,
Nuss and his colleagues were able to produce a cDNA
from the full-length dsRNA and transform it into virulent strains. It caused the virulent strains to become
hypovirulent and to exhibit all the features typical of
hypovirulent strains – slow growth, pale coloration,
and reduced sporulation (the hypovirulence-associated
traits). Thus, dsRNA was shown unequivocally to be
the cause of hypovirulence. The cDNA could also be
used for molecular analysis of the dsRNA, which was
shown to consist of two open reading frames (ORFs) –
ORF A of 622 codons (nucleotide triplets) and ORF B
of 3165 codons. When a cDNA copy of ORF A was introduced into Cryphonectria, it caused a loss of pigmentation, a reduction of sporulation and a reduction
of laccase activity. But the transformed strain
remained virulent. By contrast, ORF B codes for a
polyprotein that was found to contain motifs characteristic of RNA-dependent RNA polymerases and RNA
helicases. So, the primary function of ORF B could be
the replication and maintenance of the dsRNA, causing the loss of pathogenic virulence, whereas ORF A
encodes many of the hypovirulence-associated traits

176

CHAPTER 9

(reduced sporulation, etc.) that are potentially disadvantageous in a biocontrol strain, reducing its environmental fitness. It may be possible, therefore, to
manipulate the cDNA in vitro so that it has only the
most desirable traits for biocontrol.
It is notable that the cDNA, when transformed into
Cryphonectria (causing the fungus to be hypovirulent),
became stably integrated in the chromosomal genome
so that it was replicated along with the other chromosomal genes. This cDNA was maintained throughout
the life cycle, even entering the sexual spores, whereas
dsRNA seldom enters the sexual spores of Cryphonectria
or other Ascomycota. This would mean that biocontrol
strains could be produced with permanent, stable hypovirulence, subject to proofreading like the rest of the
chromosomal genes.

Recent developments
The question arising from the stable integration of
“hypovirulence” cDNA is: can there still be cytoplasmically transmitted hypovirulence? The answer
seems to be “yes” because the chromosomally integrated
cDNA is transcribed into dsRNA rather than into
single-stranded mRNA (as in the rest of the genome)
and this dsRNA accumulates in the cytoplasm, where
it can be transmitted between strains during hyphal
anastomosis. This still leaves unanswered the question
of how dsRNA suppresses virulence. Preliminary evidence suggests that it does so by downregulating some
of the normal chromosomal genes, including the gene
for production of laccase, an enzyme involved in
lignin breakdown (Chapter 11) and which is likely to
be significant for a fungus that colonizes wood.
When the hypovirulence cDNA (derived from dsRNA
of C. parasitica) was transformed into other cankerforming Cryphonectria species, and into a less closely
related Endothia species, it failed to convert these to
hypovirulence. However, when the same cDNA was used
as a template to produce RNA and this was transfected
into the other fungi, it gave rise to full-length dsRNA
in the cytoplasm and caused both a marked reduction
of virulence and an alteration of the growth rate and
pigmentation (Chen et al. 1994). The success achieved
with RNA but not cDNA seems to be explained by the
fact that C. parasitica produces RNA from the cDNA but
then splices this RNA to delete a 73-base sequence before
the RNA can act as a template for dsRNA production.
In summary, this work on the hypovirus system of
Cryphonectria has raised many issues of fundamental
interest in fungal genetics as well as holding the
prospect of developing new approaches to plant disease control. However, recent studies in Switzerland
(Hoegger et al. 2003) suggest the need for a cautious
approach, because the only way of transmitting the

hypovirus is by anastomosis, and both the nuclear DNA
and the mitochondrial DNA of the donor (biocontrol)
strain are introduced into the environment during
this process. The mitochondrial DNA of the donor
strain was found to be transmitted in nearly one-half
of the treated cankers. The nuclear DNA also persisted
in the treated cankers but it did not spread beyond
them. The major issue that remains to be resolved is
the long-term safety of introducing genetically modified
strains of pathogenic fungi into the environment,
especially if the nuclear DNA is transferred and increases
the genetic diversity of the pathogen.

And back to the genome
The term genomics was coined in 1986 to describe
the mapping, sequencing and analysis of genomes, the
ultimate goal being to understand the structure, function, organization, relationships, and evolution of
genes. While many sequenced genomes of bacteria
and archaea have been published, there are relatively
few published genome sequences of fungi, although
several draft sequences are available. All the genome
sequences generated by governmental or public funding bodies are made available on the internet (see
Online resources for a list of sequenced genomes) so
that researchers can compare different genomes and
search for similarities and differences.
The basic techniques of genome sequencing are
relatively simple, and many of the procedures are
automated. Essentially, the DNA to be sequenced
(termed the template) is denatured by heat or alkali
to produce single-stranded DNA, and DNA polymerase
is used to synthesize DNA based on the nucleotide
sequence in the template. DNA polymerases require a
region of double-stranded DNA to initiate synthesis. This
is provided by adding a short single-stranded DNA
molecule – a primer, with a DNA sequence complementary to the template DNA. The primer binds to the
template to form a short region of double-stranded
DNA, from which the rest of the template DNA is
synthesized.
For sequencing projects, relatively long template
DNA sequences are prepared by cutting the DNA
randomly with restriction enzymes and inserting
them into plasmids or other vectors such as cosmids
(cloning vectors that resemble plasmids but are packaged into λ phage capsids which can carry inserts up
to 40 kb). The many lengths of sequenced DNA from
different regions of the genome are then searched
for overlapping regions. In this way the DNA can be
assembled into contigs, representing continuous coverage of the nucleotide sequence of whole chromosomes
or regions of chromosomes. The genome sequence
is then searched for characteristic features such as

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

promoters, transcription initiation sites, and “stop”
codons, to deduce the positions of protein-encoding
genes. In practice, much of the generation of genome
sequences relies heavily on computer programs.
Most genome sequencing projects involve the whole
genome shotgun approach, in which short sequences
are generated randomly rather than systematically
and are then assembled into contigs. Typically, every
part of the sequence is covered at least five times and
often ten times (by overlapping of the sequenced
regions). The result is a “high quality draft” of the whole
genome, but often about 2% of the genome cannot be
mapped accurately – where there are frequent repeat
sequences and DNA regions of high G + C (Guanine +
Cytosine) content.

What do we gain from whole genome
sequences?
Many benefits accrue from comparing the genomes of
different fungi, or from comparing fungal genomes with
those of other organisms. To give just a few examples:
• The nucleotide sequences of genes can be used to
predict the protein sequences, so automated searches
such as BLAST (basic local alignment search tool) can
identify homologous genes in different organisms (and
any evolutionary changes in those genes over different
periods of time).
• Nucleotide sequences that do not appear in current
databases may represent genes with undiscovered
functions – the basis of “gene mining” for potential
new proteins of commercial interest.
• Many aspects of human, animal and plant disease are
still unresolved, so the elucidation of genes controlling these processes could provide new directions for
tackling these problems.
Above all, as more and more gene functions are discovered they add to the sum of knowledge, and since
most of this information is freely available the discovery
of a newly characterized gene in one organism can
help to “fill the gaps” in the genomes of other organisms. The sequencing of the first eukaryotic genome
(Saccharomyces cerevisiae) released in 1996, showed
that about half of the open reading frames (ORFs) had
no clear homologs in published databases. This pattern
has been repeated time and again in the genomes
sequenced since that time.
Genomics is “Big Science.” The sequencing of
S. cerevisiae involved 90 research laboratories, and the
paper describing the genome sequence of Neurospora
crassa had 77 authors. Given the scale of these projects,
and the thousands of fungal genomes that could
potentially be sequenced, it is important to prioritize

177

and coordinate sequencing efforts. As one example, the
fungal research community of the USA has, since the
year 2000, undertaken broad consultation and published
a series of “White Papers” on the Fungal Genome Initiative. Of 15 candidate fungi initially proposed, seven
are currently being sequenced. In 2003 the second
White Paper included a list of 44 additional fungi with
emphasis on clusters of related species to promote comparative genome analysis: [http://www.broad.mit.edu/
annotation/fungi/fgi]
In a field that is moving so rapidly, and where funding decisions have still to be made, the FGI website
(address above) is the most reliable source of information. But Table 9.4 gives brief details of the original
15 submissions to illustrate the rationale behind such
sequencing efforts. It included representatives of all the
major fungal phyla (Chytridiomycota, Zygomycota,
Ascomycota, and Basidiomycota) and organisms in
three categories – those of medical significance, those
of commercial significance, and those that would
contribute to understanding of evolution and fungal
diversity.

Significant findings from the Neurospora
crassa genome sequence
The high quality draft sequence of the N. crassa
genome was completed in 2003 (Galagan et al. 2003)
and represents a milestone – the culmination of more
than 60 years of research on one of the most genetically well characterized fungi. The sequence still needs
further detailed work, to check potential discrepancies
and to join the existing contigs, but already it has
revealed new information, including the identification
of genes potentially associated with light signalling and
secondary metabolism.
The main features of the sequenced N. crassa
genome are shown in Table 9.5 (from Galagan et al.
2003). Among the more notable points is the predicted
presence of over 10,000 protein-encoding genes, most
of which code for proteins of more than 100 amino
acids. But 41% of the Neurospora proteins lack significant matches to any of the known proteins in
public databases, and 57% of Neurospora proteins lack
significant matches to genes in either Saccharomyces
cerevisiae or Schizosaccharomyces pombe.
Another interesting feature of Neurospora is that it
has the widest range of genome defense mechanisms
known for any eukayotic organism. One of these is a
process apparently unique to fungi, termed repeatinduced point mutation (RIP).
RIP was discovered in Neurospora several years ago,
as a process that effectively prevents genome evolution.
The duplication of genes is widely recognized to be
responsible for evolutionary development, because the

Table 9.4 Fungi initially proposed to form the basis of a coordinated genome sequencing effort in the USA.
Organisms by category
Medicine
Filobasidiella (Cryprococcus)
neoformans serotype A
Coccidioides posadasii
Pneumocystis carinii
(human and mouse forms)
Trichophyton rubrum
Rhizopus oryzae
Commerce
Magnaporthe grisea
Aspergillus flavus
Emericella (Aspergillus)
nidulans
Aspergillus terreus
Fusarium graminearum

Evolution/fungal diversity
Neurospora discreta
Coprinus cinereus
Batrachochytrium
dendrobatidis
Ustilago maydis
Paxillus involutus

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Significance (and chapter reference)1–11

Estimated genome (Mb)

Basidiomycota. Encapsulated yeast; causes fatal meningitis in
humans (Chapter 16)
Ascomycota. Soil fungus endemic to southwestern USA; causes
fatal human infection; also a bioterrorism threat (Chapter 16)
The leading opportunistic pathogen of AIDS patients; drug
resistance is emerging (Chapter 16)
Ascomycota. The most common fungal infection in the world;
adapted for growth on human skin (Chapter 16)
Zygomycota. Can cause infection of humans (zygomycosis)

24 Mb on 11
chromosomes
29 Mb on 4
chromosomes
7.5, 6.5 Mb

Causes rice blast disease. A model fungal plant pathogen
(Chapter 5)
Ascomycota/mitosporic fungus. Source of aflatoxin and one
cause of human aspergillosis (Chapter 7)
Ascomycota. Key model system for genetics and cell biology.
(Already part-sequenced)
Mitosporic fungus. Major source of the cholesterol-lowering
drug, lovastatin
Mitosporic fungus. Causes head blight on wheat and barley;
produces mycotoxins. (Chapter 7)

40 Mb on 7
chromosomes
40 Mb on 8
chromosomes
31 Mb on 8
chromosomes
30 Mb

Ascomycota. Fungal model for population genetics and
comparison with N. crassa (already sequenced)
Basidiomycota. Model for fungal differentiation – produces
toadstools (Chapter 5)
Chytridiomycota. Recently described fungus that causes
widespread population decline of amphibians (Chapter 2)
Basidiomycota. Model for plant–pathogen interactions
(Chapter 14)
Basidiomycota. Symbiotic mycorrhizal fungus of many trees,
easily manipulated in laboratory conditions (Chapter 14)

40 Mb on 7
chromosomes
37.5 Mb on 13
chromosomes
30 Mb on 20 (?)
chromosomes
20 Mb

12 Mb on 4
chromosomes
36 Mb

40 Mb on 9
chromosomes

40 Mb

Filobasidiella neoformans (asexual yeast phase: Cryptococcus neoformans). Serotype D is being sequenced because of its advanced
genetic tools, but serotype A is more divergent and represents 90% of all clinical strains and 99% of strains from AIDS patients.
Two virulence factors are of interest – the thick polysaccharide capsule that prevents phagocytosis, and melanin, which serves
as an antioxidant.
Coccidioides posadasii. One of two soil fungi endemic to desert regions of the Americas, infecting about 100,000 people each
year in the USA, but only a small number of infections are fatal. Funding was already allocated to sequencing of the other
species, C. immitis, so C. posadusii can provide comparative genomics.
Pneumocystis carinii. An unusual fungus with cholesterol instead of ergosterol in the cell membrane. Consists of several strains
adapted to specific hosts. Comparison of two species of the fungus (human and mouse) should allow comparative genomics
relating to infection.
Trichophyton rubrum. One of 42 known species of dermatophytes (of which 31 can infect humans). Understanding of this and
similar dermatophytes is very limited.
Rhizopus oryzae. A representative of Zygomycota and the fungus responsible for relatively rare cases of damaging human disease, especially in diabetics.
Magnaporthe grisea. A serious plant pathogen of rice, estimated to cause yield losses sufficient to feed 60 million people per
year. Also, a model for study of plant–fungal pathogenic interactions.
Aspergillus flavus. An important fungus in its own right, and valuable for comparisons with other Aspergillus spp., including
A. nidulans, which has a well-characterized genetic system, and A. terreus, which is one of the producers of “statins” that can
lower blood cholesterol levels.

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

Table 9.5 Neurospora crassa genome features. (From
Galagan et al. 2003.)
Feature

Measurement

Size (base pairs)
Chromosomes
Protein-coding genes
Transfer RNA genes
5S rRNA genes
Per cent coding
Per cent introns
Average gene size (base pairs)

38,639,769
7
10,082
424
74
44
6
1673 (481
amino acids)
1953

Average intergenic distance (base pairs)
Predicted protein-coding sequences:
Identified by similarity to known
sequences
Conserved hypothetical proteins
Predicted proteins (no similarity
to known sequences)

13%
46%
41%

gene copy is free to mutate and can eventually assume
a new function while the original gene retains its
function. But this process is blocked in Neurospora
during the haploid dikaryotic phase of the sexual
cycle (Chapter 2). The RIP process detects and mutates
both copies of a duplicated gene by causing numerous
mutations from G-C to A-T pairs, and often leads to
DNA methylation which causes gene silencing in
Neurospora (as DNA methylation also does in mammals).
The effects of this can extend to adjacent genes
beyond the duplicated sequences. Consistent with this
role of RIP, N. crassa has an unusually low proportion
of genes in mutigene families, in relation to its
genome size, and it has almost no highly similar gene
pairs. Several other lines of evidence support the view
that genome evolution in N. crassa has been largely

179

mRNA
A

C

U

G

A

C

U

G

T

G

A

C

RNA
Reverse
transcriptase
cDNA
Ribonuclease digestion of RNA
Synthesis of second strand of DNA
A

C

T

G

T

G

A

C

Double
stranded
DNA
Reverse sequencing primer

5′ EST
Forward sequencing primer

3′ EST

Fig. 9.16 Procedure for generating cDNA from messenger RNA, then producing expressed sequence tags (ESTs)
from either the 5′ or 3′ end of cDNA.

arrested since the acquisition of RIP at some point in
its evolutionary history.
It is suggested that RIP acts as a defense against
“selfish DNA,” thereby protecting the genome. Consistent with this is the fact that no intact mobile
elements were detected in the genome sequence,
and 46% of repetitive nucleotides can be identified
as relics of mobile elements. Sequence comparisons
with other Neurospora spp. would help to address the
broader significance of these findings.
Even though N. crassa has an impressive array of
genome defense mechanisms, it is not unique in
having defense systems. For example, the many anastomosis groups and vegetative compatibility loci in
Rhizoctonia solani and Cryphonectria parasitica probably
serve similar functions in impeding the spread of
potentially damaging mobile viruses or other genetic
elements.

Table 9.4 (cont’)
8
9

10

11

Fusarium graminearum. Produces several mycotoxins and represents a major genus of food-spoilage organisms.
Neurospora discreta. Would enable comparisons with N. crassa (a fungus that used to be a serious contaminant of bread, but
nowadays is rare outside of the laboratory). An extensive collection of naturally occurring populations of N. discreta in North
America would enable studies on population dynamics.
Batrachochytrium dendrobatitis. A representative of Chytridiomycota – the earliest fungal lineage – and of aquatic fungi that
degrade polymers. B. dendrobatidis is a recently described fungus thought to be the primary agent of the global amphibian
decline. It invades the top layers of amphibian skin cells, causing thickening of the keratinized tissues and thereby limiting
gas exchange.
Paxillus involutus. A common mycorrhizal fungus of trees. Mycorrhizal fungi of various types form intimate mutualistic relationships with about 90% of plants worldwide.

180

CHAPTER 9

Gene/protein expression
Metabolism

7

Cell/organism defense

3

Cell structure

3

Cell signaling/cell communication
1

Cell fate

0.3
1

Cell division

0.4

Pisolithus mycelium

8

5
5
4

2

Transport mechanisms

Laccaria mycelium

13

7

2

2

Unknown function

5

6
60

No homology
0

5

10

15

(a)
Gene/protein expression

Cell/organism defense

5
2
2
2

Transport mechanisms
Cell fate

0.3
1

Cell division

0.4

Pisolithus mycelium

5

Cell structure
Cell signaling/cell communication

80

60

Pisolithus mycorrhizas

11

7
3

40

15

7

Metabolism

20
% ESTs

66

9

4

2

Unknown function

14

5

39

No homology
0

5

(b)

10

15

20
% ESTs

40

66

60

80

Fig. 9.17 Functional classification of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) from (a) mycelial cultures of two mycorrhizal fungi
or from (b) symbiotic tissue of Pisolithus mycorrhizas compared with mycelial cultures of Pisolithus. (From Peter et al.
2003, with permission from the New Phytologist Trust.)

Expressed sequence tags and microarray
technology
Expressed sequence tags (ESTs) provide an alternative
to whole genome sequencing and are particularly useful for finding genes that are expressed in specific conditions (in other words, the genes that are “switched
on” at different times or in different circumstances).
This technology can also be used as a quick and
inexpensive approach to finding new genes and for
constructing genome maps.
ESTs are small lengths of DNA (about 200–500
nucleotides) produced by sequencing one or both
ends of an expressed gene. The technique involves
sampling the pool of messenger RNA (the product of
gene expression) and using this mRNA as a template

to synthesize a complementary DNA (cDNA), using the
enzyme reverse transcriptase. cDNA is much more
stable than mRNA, and it has the additional advantage
of containing only the coding regions, because introns
have been removed by splicing during the natural processing of messenger RNA.
Once a single strand of cDNA has been formed
from the RNA template, this RNA is digested by a
ribonuclease. Then a complementary strand of DNA
is synthesized, to produce double-stranded DNA, as
shown in Fig. 9.16.
Large numbers of ESTs can be generated easily and
can subsequently be assembled into contigs or compared
with the many ESTs of various organisms now available on electronic databases, providing a means of
identifying different types of gene. As an illustration
of the power of such techniques, Martina et al. (2003)

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

used ESTs to compare the types of genes expressed by
mycelial cultures of two mycorrhizal fungi (Laccaria
bicolor and Pisolithus microcarpus) and also to compare
the genes expressed in symbiotic tissues of Pisolithus
mycorrhizas (Fig. 9.17). By comparison with EST
databases, several of the ESTs could be assigned to functional groups such as genes involved in metabolism,
cell defense, or cell structure. But the majority of ESTs
showed no homology to known genes (as is also true
for whole genome sequences).
A similar EST analysis was reported by Freimoser
et al. (2003), comparing two subspecies of the common
insect-pathogenic fungus Metarhizium anisopliae – one
subspecies (M. anisopliae anisopliae) has a broad host
range and the other (M. anisopliae acridum) is a specific
grasshopper pathogen. Both strains were grown under
conditions that maximize the secretion of insect
cuticle-degrading enzymes, and a surprisingly high
proportion of ESTs could be assigned to functional
categories (Fig. 9.18). Both subspecies had ESTs for
virtually all the pathogenicity-related genes cloned to
date from M. anisopliae.

DNA microarray technology
Essentially, a DNA microarray is a small solid support
such as a microscope slide or a nylon membrane
onto which DNA is spotted (or printed by robotic
techniques) to produce hundreds or thousands of tiny
spots representing different types of DNA, arranged
in a specific order. Messenger RNAs from a sample to
be analyzed are then used to generate cDNAs, which
are fluorescently labeled so that any binding of the
cDNA to the immobilized spots on the microarray
(through complementary base-pairing) can be scanned
automatically by laser technology. There are several
types of microarray, designed for different purposes, but
the main ones usually measure one of the following:
• Changes in the level of gene expression, monitored
automatically by mixing samples of a test DNA
(tagged with red fluorescence) and control DNA
(tagged with green fluorescence) so that the laser
differentiates between the levels of expression of the
test and control DNA.
• Changes in genomic gains and losses, again detected
by different levels of red or green fluorescence depending on the number of copies of a particular gene.
• Mutations in DNA, often involving only one or a few
nucleotides.
Most of these applications are used in medicine,
including disease diagnosis, drug development and
tracking disease development, but they are equally
applicable to many aspects of basic biology and they

181

are becoming ever more widely used because the same
basic techniques can be done cheaply by manual spotting of DNA onto solid supports. They can reveal patterns of differential or coordinated expression of genes
in almost any biological system.

Online resources
Genome News Network – a quick guide to sequenced
genomes.
http://w.w.w.genomesnetwork.org/
sequenced_genomes/genome_guide_p1.shtml
Microarrays: National Center for Biotechnology Information. http://w.w.w.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/About/primer/
microarrays.html
The Whitehead Institute, Fungal Genome Initiative.
http://www.broad.mit.edu/annotation/fungi/fgi

General texts
Bennett, J.W. & Arnold, J. (2001) Genomics for fungi. In:
The Mycota VIII. Biology of the Fungal Cell (Howard, R.J.
& Gow, N.A.R., eds), pp. 267–297. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin Heidelberg.
Bennett, J.W. & Lasure, L.L. (1991) More Gene Manipulations in Fungi. Academic Press, San Diego.
Fincham, J.R.S., Day, P.R. & Radford, A. (1979) Fungal
Genetics, 4th edn. Blackwell Scientific Publishers, Oxford.
Peberdy, J.F., Caten, C.E., Ogden, J.E. & Bennett, J.W.
(1991) Applied Molecular Genetics of Fungi. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Turner, G. (1991) Strategies for cloning genes from
filamentous fungi. In: Applied Molecular Genetics of
Fungi (Peberdy, J.F., Caten, C.E., Ogden, J.E. & Bennett,
J.W., eds), pp. 29–43. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.

Cited references
Anagnostakis, S.L. (1992) Diversity within populations
of fungal pathogens on perennial parts of perennial
plants. In: The Fungal Community: its organization and
role in the ecosystem (Carroll, G.C. & Wicklow, D.T., eds),
pp. 183–192. Marcel Dekker, New York.
Bertrand, H. (1995) Senescence is coupled to induction
of an oxidative phosphorylation stress response by
mitochondrial DNA mutations in Neurospora. Canadian
Journal of Botany 73, S198–S204.
Buck, K.W. (1986) Fungal Virology. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
Chen, B., Choi, G.H. & Nuss, D.L. (1994) Attenuation of
fungal virulence by synthetic hypovirus transcripts.
Science 264, 1762–1764.
Domer, J.E. & Kobayashi, G.S., eds (2004) The Mycota,
vol. XII. Human Fungal Pathogens. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
Edwards, S.G., O’Callaghan, J. & Dobson, A.D.W. (2002)
PCR-based detection and quantification of mycotoxigenic
fungi. Mycological Research 106, 1005–1025.

Cell metabolism

Amino acid metabolism
Carbohydrate metabolism
Lipid metabolism
Nucleotide metabolism
N-, P-, S- metabolism
Cofactors and vitamins
Protein metabolism

Energy metabolism
Ribosomal proteins
Translation
tRNA sysnthesis
Proteolysis

RNA
metabolism

Protein modification, targeting
RNA synthesis
RNA modification
Transcription
Cell wall: structure, synthesis

Cell structure
and function

Cell wall proteins
Cytoskeleton
Transport proteins
Cellular transport
Signalling
Cell cycle control
Cell cycle and growth

Chromosome structure
DNA synthesis
Cell polarity, budding, septation
Sexual cycle
Clock control, light response

Stress
response

Cell death
Stress response
Detoxification
Toxic secondary metabolites
Transposable elements
Hypothetical or unknown proteins
0.0

0.0

0.1
0.1
Proportion of ESTs

0.2

0.3

Fig. 9.18 Proportion of EST sequences of Metarhizium anisopliae (broad host range; white bars) and M. anisopliae
(caterpillar-specific; black bars) with significant matches to genes of known functional categories. (From Freimoser
et al. 2003.)

FUNGAL GENETICS, MOLECULAR GENETICS, AND GENOMICS

Esser, K. (1990) Molecular aspects of ageing: facts and perspectives. In: Frontiers in Mycology (Hawksworth, D.L., ed.),
pp. 3–25. CAB International, Wallingford, Oxon.
Fox, R.T.V. (1994) Principles of Diagnostic Techniques in
Plant Pathology. CAB International, Wallingford.
Freimoser, F.M., Screen, S., Bagga, S., Hu, G. & St Leger,
R.J. (2003) Expressed sequence tag (EST) analysis of two
subspecies of Metarhizium anisopliae reveals a plethora of
secreted proteins with potential activity in insect hosts.
Microbiology 149, 239–247.
Galagan, J.E. and 76 other authors (2003) The genome
sequence of the filamentous fungus Neurospora crassa.
Nature 42, 859–868.
Glass, N.L. & Kaneko, I. (2003) Fatal attraction: nonself
recognition and heterokaryon incompatibility in filamentous fungi. Eukaryotic Cell 2, 1–8.
Hoegger, P.J., Heiniger, U., Holdenrieder, O. & Rigling, D.
(2003) Differential transfer and dissemination of
hypovirus and nuclear and mitochondrial genomes of a
hypovirus-infected Cryphonectria parasitica strain after
introduction into a natural population. Applied and
Environmental Microbiology 69, 3767–3771.
Jinks, J.L. (1952) Heterokaryosis: a system of adaptation in
wild fungi. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, Series
B 140, 83–99.
Kohn, L.M. (1995) The clonal dynamic in wild and agricultural plant-pathogen populations. Canadian Journal of
Botany 73, S1231–S1240.
MacNish, G.C., McLernon, C.K. & Wood, D.A. (1993)
The use of zymogram and anastomosis techniques to follow the expansion and demise of two coalescing bare
patches caused by Rhizoctonia solani AG8. Australian
Journal of Agricultural Research 44, 1161–1173.
MacNish, G.C. & Sweetingham, M.W. (1993). Evidence of
stability of pectic zymogram groups within Rhizoctonia
solani AG-8. Mycological Research 97, 1056–1058.
Martina, P. and 10 others (2003) Analysis of expressed
sequence tags from the ectomycorrhizal basidiomycetes
Laccaria bicolor and Pisolithus microcarpus. New Phytologist
159, 117–129.

183

Newhouse, J.R., Hoch, H.C. & MacDonald, W.L. (1983) The
ultrastructure of Endothia parasitica. Comparison of a
virulent with a hypovirulent isolate. Canadian Journal of
Botany 61, 389–399.
Nuss, D.L. (1992) Biological control of chestnut blight:
an example of virus-mediated attenuation of fungal
pathogenesis. Microbiological Reviews 56, 561–576.
Oliver, S.G. (1987) Chromosome organization and
genome evolution in yeast. In: Evolutionary Biology of the
Fungi (Rayner, A.D.M., Brasier, C.M. & Moore, D., eds),
pp. 33–52. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Osbourne, A., Bowyer, P., Bryan, G., Lunness, P.,
Clarke, B. & Daniels, M. (1994) Detoxification of plant
saponins by fungi. In: Advances in Molecular Genetics of
Plant-Microbe Interactions (Daniels, M.J., Downie, J.A. &
Osbourn, A.E., eds), pp. 215–221. Kluwer Academic,
Dordrecht.
Peter, M., Courty, P.-E., Kobler, A., et al. (2003) Analysis
of expressed sequence tags from the ectomycorrhizal
basidiomycetes Laccaria bicolor and Pisolithus microcarpus.
New Phytologist 159, 117–129.
Pipe, N.D., Buck, K.W. & Brasier, C.M. (1995) Molecular
relationships between Ophiostoma ulmi and the NAN
and EAN races of O. novo-ulmi determined by RAPD
markers. Mycological Research 99, 653 –658.
Pontecorvo, G. (1956) The parasexual cycle in fungi.
Annual Review of Microbiology 10, 393–400.
Rawlinson, C.J., Carpenter, J.M. & Muthyalu, G. (1975)
Double-stranded RNA virus in Colletotrichum lindemuthianum. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 65,
305–308.
Sansome, E. (1987) Fungal chromosomes as observed with
the light microscope. In: Evolutionary Biology of the
Fungi (Rayner, A.D.M., Brasier, C.M. & Moore, D., eds).
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 97–113.
Tooley, P.W. & Therrien, C.D. (1991) Variation in ploidy
in Phytophthora infestans. In: Phytophthora (Lucas, J.A.,
Shattock, R.C., Shaw, D.S. & Cooke, L.R., eds.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 204–217.

Chapter 10

Fungal spores, spore dormancy,
and spore dispersal

This chapter is divided into the following major
sections:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

general features of fungal spores
spore dormancy and germination
spore dispersal
dispersal and infection behavior of zoospores
zoospores as vectors of plant viruses
dispersal of airborne spores
spore sampling devices and human health

Fungi are the supreme examples of spore-producing
organisms. They produce millions of spores, with an

astonishing variety of shapes, sizes, surface properties,
and other features – all precisely matched to the
specific requirements for dispersal and/or persistence
in different environments. A small part of this diversity
is illustrated in Fig. 10.1, for some of the more
bizarrely shaped spores of the freshwater aquatic fungi
that grow in fast-flowing streams. But even the common
rounded spores of fungi have properties that determine
whether they will be deposited on plant surfaces, or
on soil, or in the human lungs, etc. In this chapter we
discuss several examples of this fine-tuning, and we will
see that the properties of a spore tell us much about
the biology and ecology of a fungus.

(a)
Fig. 10.1 Examples of tetraradiate, multiple-armed and sigmoid spores found in fast-flowing freshwater streams.
Approximate spore lengths are shown in parentheses. (a) A single conidium of Dendrospora (150–200 mm); (b) conidium
of Alatospora (30–40 mm); (c) conidium of Tetrachaetum (70–80 mm); (d) conidium of Heliscus (30 mm); (e) conidium of
Clavariopsis (40 mm); (f) conidium of Lemonniera (60–70 mm); (g) conidium of Tetracladium (30–40 mm); (h) conidium of
Anguillospora (150 mm).

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

General features of fungal spores
Because of their extreme diversity we can define fungal
spores in only a general way, as microscopic propagules
that lack an embryo and are specialized for dispersal or
dormant survival. The spores produced by a sexual
process (e.g. zygospores and ascospores) usually function in dormant survival whereas asexual spores usually serve for dispersal. However, many Basidiomycota
do not produce asexual spores, or produce them only
rarely, and instead the basidiospores are their main dispersal agents. Some fungi have an additional spore type,
the chlamydospore. This is a thick-walled, melanized
cell that develops from an existing hyphal compartment
(or sometimes from a spore compartment) in conditions
of nutrient stress.
The properties of these different spore types vary considerably but, in general, the spores of fungi differ from
somatic cells in the following ways:
• The wall is often thicker, with additional layers or
additional pigments such as melanins.
• The cytoplasm is dense and some of its components
(e.g. endoplasmic reticulum) are poorly developed.
• Spores have a relatively low water content, low respiration rate, and low rates of protein and nucleic
acid synthesis.
• Spores have a high content of energy-storage materials such as lipids, glycogen, or trehalose.

185

sporing stage. The germination process usually takes 3–8
hours, but zoospore cysts of the Oomycota can germinate much faster (20–60 minutes) and some sexual
spores can take longer (12–15 hours).

Constitutive dormancy
Constitutive dormancy has been linked to several
factors but is still poorly understood. The oospores
of many Pythium and Phytophthora spp. seem to need
a postmaturation phase before they can germinate.
Initially the oospore wall is thick, about 2 µm diameter (Fig. 10.2), but it becomes progressively thinner
(about 0.5 µm) by digestion of its inner layers. This
process is hastened by keeping the spores in nutrientpoor conditions, at normal temperature and moisture
levels. Then, after several weeks, the spores will germinate in response to nutrients or other environmental
triggers. For example, Pythium oospores germinate in
response to common nutrients (sugars and amino
acids) or volatile metabolites (e.g. acetaldehyde) released
from germinating seeds.
Ascospores can eventually become germinationcompetent by aging, but can be triggered to germinate
at any time by specific treatments – in some cases a
heat shock (e.g. 60°C for 20–30 minutes), cold shock
(−3°C), or exposure to chemicals such as alcohols or
furaldehyde. The ascospores of Neurospora tetrasperma

Spore dormancy and germination
Almost all spores are dormant, in the sense that
their rate of metabolism is low. But they can be
assigned to two broad categories in terms of their
ability to germinate. Sexual spores often show constitutive dormancy. They do not germinate readily
when placed in conditions that are suitable for normal,
somatic growth (appropriate nutrients, temperature,
moisture, pH, etc.). Instead, some of them require
a period of aging (postmaturation) before they will
germinate, and others require a specific activation
trigger such as a heat shock or chemical treatment.
By contrast, nonsexual spores show exogenously
imposed dormancy – they remain dormant if the
environment is unsuitable for growth, but they will
germinate readily in response to the presence of
nutrients such as glucose.
When triggered to germinate, all spores behave in
a similar way. The cell becomes hydrated, there is a
marked increase in respiratory activity, followed by a
progressive increase in the rates of protein and nucleic
acid synthesis. An outgrowth (the germ tube) is then
formed, and it either develops into a hypha or, in the
case of some sexual spores, it produces an asexual

Fig. 10.2 A developing sexual spore (oospore) of Pythium
mycoparasiticum (Oomycota). The spore has a very thick
wall (w) and is contained in the outer wall (ow) of the
oogonium (female reproductive cell). The arrows mark
the positions of antheridia (male sex organs that fertilize
the oogonium).

186

CHAPTER 10

have been studied most thoroughly in this respect. Their
dormancy cannot be explained in terms of a general
permeability barrier, because they are permeable to
radiolabeled oxygen, glucose, and water. Instead, their
dormancy is linked to an inability to use their major
storage reserve, trehalose, which is not metabolized
during dormancy, but is metabolized immediately
after activation. The enzyme trehalase, which cleaves
trehalose to glucose, is found to be associated with the
walls of the dormant spores, separated from its substrate.
Activation somehow causes the enzyme to enter the cell,
as one of the earliest detectable events in germination.
Constitutive dormancy of some other spores has
been linked to endogenous inhibitors. For example,
uredospores of the cereal rust fungus Puccinia
graminis contain methyl-cis-ferulate, and those of
bean rust, Uromyces phaseoli, contain methyl-cis-3,4dimethoxycinnamate. Prolonged washing of spores
can remove these inhibitors, and this perhaps occurs
when the spores are bathed in a water film on a plant
surface. At first sight it seems surprising that a spore
adapted for dispersal should have an endogenous
inhibitor. However, this might prevent the spores from
germinating in a sporing pustule (they do not require
exogenous nutrients for germination) and ensure that
they germinate only after they have been dispersed.
Ecological aspects of constitutive dormancy
The behavior of constitutively dormant spores often has
clear ecological relevance. For example, a characteristic
assemblage of fungi occurs on the dung of herbivorous
animals (Fig. 10.8). Their spores are ingested with the
herbage, are activated during passage through the gut,
and are then deposited in the dung where they germinate to initiate a new phase of growth. The spores
of many of these coprophilous (dung-loving) fungi
can be activated in the laboratory by treatment at
37°C in acidic conditions, simulating the gut environment. Examples include the ascospores of Sordaria and
Ascobolus, the sporangiospores of several Zygomycota,
and basidiospores of the toadstool-producing fungi,
Coprinus and Bolbitius.
Heating to 60°C activates the spores of many thermophilic fungi of composts (Chapter 11). It also
activates the ascospores of pyrophilous (fire-loving)
fungi such as Neurospora tetrasperma which grows on
burnt ground or charred plant remains. Most of these
fungi are saprotrophs of little economic importance, but
one of them, Rhizina undulata (Ascomycota), causes the
“group dying” disease of coniferous trees in Britain and
elsewhere. It infects trees replanted into clear-felled
forests, and the foci of infection correspond to the sites
where the trash from the felled trees was stacked and
burned. The ascospores are heat-activated around or
beneath the fires, then the fungus grows as a saprotroph

on the stumps and dead roots and produces mycelial
cords that infect the newly planted trees. Once the cause
of this disease had been recognized, the problem was
easily solved by abandoning the practice of burning.
However this is not possible in regions where lightninginduced fires are a periodic, natural occurrence. Some
of the plants in these areas have become adapted to
fire – their seeds remain dormant for years until they
are heat-activated. Some of the mycorrhizal fungi are
similarly adapted, an example being the ascospores of
the mycorrhizal Muciturbo spp. in Australian eucalypt
forests.
Basidiospores of the common cultivated mushroom,
Agaricus bisporus, and of several mycorrhizal fungi
(see below) show constitutive dormancy, but these
spores will often germinate when placed next to growing colonies of the same fungus. For example, spores
of A. bisporus germinate in the presence of isovaleric
acid and isoamyl alcohol, which may be released from
the “parent” hyphae. The significance of this behavior
could be to increase the gene pool of the colony.
Dormancy and germination triggers in mycorrhizal
successions
Many forest trees of temperate and boreal regions
(e.g. pine, oak, beech, chestnut, etc.) form mycorrhizal
associations with Basidiomycota or Ascomycota
(Chapter 13). These mycorrhizal fungi produce a
sheath around the root tips and extend into the soil
as hyphae or mycelial cords (see Fig. 7.10). Several
experimental studies have shown that a succession of
mycorrhizal fungi occurs on young tree seedlings
that are planted in forest nurseries or in previously treeless sites. Some of these fungi establish mycorrhizas
rapidly on tree seedlings from airborne spores. Classic
examples of these “early (pioneer) colonizers” are
Laccaria and Hebeloma spp. Other mycorrhizal fungi
are slow to establish in new sites, but colonize after several years and eventually become dominant on the root
systems. A classic example is the fly agaric (Amanita
muscaria) on birch or pine trees. Figure 13.6 shows
examples of some of these fungi.
These successional patterns have been studied in
experimental field plots where the toadstools of mycorrhizal fungi appear above ground in autumn (Fig. 10.3)
and where the range of different mycorrhizal fungi
on the roots can be identified by features of the mycorrhizas themselves. When cores of soil were taken at
different distances from the trees (Fig. 10.4) mycorrhizas
of Hebeloma spp. predominated near the periphery of
the tree root systems, mycorrhizas of Lactarius spp.
predominated near the mid-zone of the root systems,
and mycorrhizas of Leccinum (a polypore) and an
unidentified mycorrhizal type predominated closest
to the tree trunks. Thus, there was clear evidence of a

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

(a)

187

(b)

Fig. 10.3 Rings of toadstools of mycorrhizal fungi (mainly Hebeloma and Lactarius species) around young birch trees in
late autumn in an experimental field plot.
700

Hebeloma
Lactarius
Leccinum

600

Unknown
Others

Number of root tips

500

400

300

200

100
Fig. 10.4 The changing pattern of naturally occurring mycorrhizal fungi at different distances from the
bases of birch trees in an experimental field plot.
(Data from Deacon et al. 1983.)
succession, with “pioneer” mycorrhizal species colonizing the youngest parts of the root system and being
replaced successively by other mycorrhizal species in
the older root regions.
These distribution patterns, in which mycorrhizas of
“pioneer” or “early” fungi are found at the periphery of

0

25

50
75
Distance from base of tree (cm)

100

the root system, but are replaced by later colonizers
(characteristic of older trees) near the tree base, were
explained by two types of experiment.
First, basidiospores were collected from fruitbodies of
either “pioneer” or “later” mycorrhizal fungi and were
added to pots of nonsterile soil. Then aseptically

188

CHAPTER 10

Fig. 10.5 Experimental study of mycorrhizal successions in field sites. (See Fox 1986.)
grown birch seedlings were planted in these soils.
Only the pioneer fungi formed mycorrhizas in these
conditions, and this was related to basidiospore germination, because only the pioneer fungi have basidiospores that germinate readily – the spores of the “later”
fungi germinate extremely poorly (often less than
0.1% germination in any conditions that have been
tested). Second, birch seedlings were raised aseptically
(without mycorrhizas) then planted beneath older
trees in a field site so that they would be infected by
the fungi already established in the site. Some of these
seedlings were planted directly into the undisturbed soil,
but others were planted where the soil had first been
removed with a corer (like the corers used for making
holes in putting greens) and then replaced immediately
(Fig. 10.5). All the seedlings in the cored positions
became infected by pioneer fungi, presumably from
spores in the soil. By contrast, all the seedlings planted
in undisturbed positions were infected by the “later”
fungi, presumably from hyphal networks which radiated through the soil.
So, the pattern of mycorrhizal establishment on
birch in previously treeless sites can be summarized as
follows. The pioneer fungi infect young seedlings in
nurseries or in the field, from basidiospores that land
on the soil surface and are washed into the root zone.
They probably have annual cycles of infection from

basidiospores as the root system grows and expands
into new soil zones. The “later” fungi cannot establish
initially because their spores germinate poorly. But
they germinate eventually, especially in older parts of
the root zone, and become dominant by spreading as
mycelial networks to infect further root tips.
In natural woodlands and forestry plantations,
seedlings are likely to be infected directly by the
“later” fungi, but in new sites they will initially be
infected by pioneer fungi. This has practical consequences, because only the pioneer fungi are suitable
for mycorrhizal inoculation programs, commonly
used in land-reclamation sites. The fungi most often
used for this are the puffball, Pisolithus tinctorius, and
the toadstool-forming fungus Paxillus involutus. Both are
pioneer colonizers that tolerate relatively high levels of
toxic minerals and the low water-retention properties
of mine-spoil and other land-reclamation sites.

Exogenously imposed dormancy
In laboratory conditions, most asexual spores germinate
readily at suitable temperature, moisture, pH and
oxygen levels. Some germinate even in distilled water,
although most require at least a sugar source, and a
few have multiple nutrient requirements. However, in

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

189

Fig. 10.6 A nutrient leaching system that
mimics soil fungistasis.

nature all these spores can be held in a dormant state by
the phenomenon termed fungistasis (or mycostasis).
This is very common in soil (Lockwood 1977), and has
also been reported on leaf surfaces.
Fungistasis is a microbially induced suppression of
spore germination. For example, spores often fail to
germinate in topsoil, where the level of microbial activity is high, but they germinate in sterilized soil or in
subsoils of low microbial activity. The germination
that occurs in sterilized soil can be prevented if the soil
has been recolonized by microorganisms, and even
single microorganisms – bacteria or fungi – will restore
the suppression. This suggests that fungistasis is caused
by nutrient competition or by general microbial
metabolites (or both), but not by specific antibiotics or
other inhibitors from particular microorganisms. A
long history of research suggests that volatile germination inhibitors such as ethylene (H2C = CH2), allyl
alcohol (H2C =CH.CH2OH), and ammonia can play a
role in fungistasis. But the strongest evidence implicates
nutrient deprivation as the key cause of fungistasis.
Even spores that can germinate in distilled water are
inhibited in soil because they leak nutrients into their
immediate surroundings, and these nutrients are continuously metabolized by other soil organisms.
Lockwood and his colleagues (see Hsu & Lockwood
1973) devised a simple experimental system to test
whether nutrient deprivation can mimic the fungistasis observed in soil (Fig. 10.6). In completely sterile
conditions, spores were placed on membrane filters over
a bed of washed sand or glass beads, then sterile water
was percolated slowly through the sand or beads so that
any nutrients released from the spores were continuously removed. Except for the special case of “activated”
(heat-treated) ascospores of Neurospora, which germinated in all conditions, the spores did not germinate
in the “nutrient-leaching” system, but they germinated if the flow of water was stopped for 24 hours or
when a flow of glucose solution was used in place of
water. By using very slow rates of water percolation it
was possible to simulate the fungistatic effects of natural soils. The spores of different fungi have different

fungistatic sensitivities (related to spore size, spore
nutrient reserves, and speed of germination), but with
few exceptions there is remarkably good agreement
between the sensitivity of spores to nutrient-leaching
in the model system and their sensitivity to soil
fungistasis (Table 10.1).
Ecological implications of fungistasis
Fungistasis causes spores to remain quiescent in soil or
other natural environments until nutrients become
available. Thus, saprotrophs can lie in wait for organic
nutrients, and root-infecting pathogens or mycorrhizal
fungi can wait for a root to pass nearby. In many cases
the germination trigger is nonspecific. For example,
the spores of many root pathogens can germinate in
response to the root exudates of both host and nonhost plants. This can be exploited for disease control,
especially in traditional crop-rotation systems (organic
farming) where the spores of parasitic fungi can be
induced to germinate but then die because they
cannot infect a plant. This phenomenon is termed
germination-lysis.
In a few cases there is evidence of host-specific
triggering of germination. Perhaps the best example
is the triggering of sclerotia of Sclerotium cepivorum
(Basidiomycota) which causes the economically important “white rot” disease of onions, garlic, and closely
related Allium spp. (Coley-Smith 1987). These small sclerotia (about 1 mm diameter) are produced abundantly
in infected onion bulbs and can survive for up to
20 years in soil until they are triggered to germinate
by the host. The germination triggers are volatile
sulfur-containing compounds (alkyl thiols and alkyl
sulfides) such as diallyl disulfide (DADS), but the host
plant releases the nonvolatile precursors of these compounds (alkyl sulfoxides and alkyl-cysteine sulfoxides)
and these are converted to the volatile germination
triggers by many common soil bacteria. Knowledge of
this system has suggested some novel approaches for
controlling S. cepivorum, but unfortunately with little
success to date. One approach would be to breed

190

CHAPTER 10

Table 10.1 Relationship between germination of fungal spores incubated on natural soil and on a nutrient-leaching
system designed to mimic the continuous removal of spore nutrients by soil microorganisms. (Data from Hsu & Lockwood
1973.)
Germination %
Fungus and spore type
Conidia
Verticillium albo-atrum
Thielaviopsis basicola
Fusarium culmorum
Curvularia lunata
Cochliobolus sativus
Alternaria tenuis
Activated ascospores
Neurospora crassa

Leaching system

Distilled water

Natural soil

Water flowing

Flow stopped for 24 h

60
89
94
95
97
95

9
4
20
16
21
54

8
5
9
13
19
71

no data
89
91
91
91
no data

98

87

84

no data

cultivars of onions, garlic, etc. that do not produce the
compounds that trigger sclerotial germination. But
this is not a viable proposition because the germination triggers are important flavor and odor components
of Allium spp. Another approach would be to trigger
germination in the absence of the host crop. In this
respect, artificial onion oil is used widely as a flavor
component of processed foods (including cheese-andonion flavored potato crisps) and it contains large
amounts of DADS. When applied to soil, artificial onion
oil triggers the germination of sclerotia, which then die
by germination-lysis. Up to 95% of sclerotia can be
destroyed in this way, but even the remaining few per
cent can be sufficient to cause significant crop damage.

Spore dispersal
Fungi have many different methods of spore dispersal.
Here we will focus on selected aspects, asking how
the spores or spore-bearing structures of fungi are
precisely tailored for their roles in dispersal. In doing
so, we cover many topics of practical and environmental
significance.

Ballistic dispersal methods of
coprophilous fungi
Coprophilous (dung-loving) fungi grow on the dung
of herbivores and help to recycle the vast amounts of
plant material that are deposited annually by grazing
animals. The spore dispersal mechanisms of these
fungi are highly attuned to their specific lifestyles – their
function is to ensure that the spores are propelled

from the dung onto the surrounding vegetation, where
they will be ingested and pass through an animal gut
to repeat the cycle. In several cases this is achieved by
ballistic mechanisms of spore discharge.
In the case of Pilobolus (Fig. 10.7) each sporebearing structure consists of a large black sporangium,
mounted on a swollen vesicle which is part of the sporangiophore. At maturity the sporangiophore develops
a high turgor pressure, the wall that encloses both the
sporangium and the vesicle breaks down locally by
enzymic means, and the vesicle suddenly ruptures,
squirting its contents forwards and propelling the sporangium for 2 meters or more. Mucilage released from
the base of the sporangium during this process serves
to stick the sporangium to any plant surface on which
it lands; then the spores are released from the sporangium and can be spread by water or other agencies.
As a further adaptation for dispersal, the sporangiophore
is phototropic, ensuring that the sporangium is shot
free from any crevices in the dung. The light signal is
perceived by a band of orange carotenoid pigment at
the base of the vesicle, and the vesicle itself acts as a
lens that focuses light on the pigment. A unilateral light
signal is thereby translated into differential growth of
the sporangiophore stalk, aligning the sporangium
towards the light source.
Pilobolus, therefore exhibits three special adaptations that also are found, to different degrees, in
several other coprophilous fungi (Fig. 10.8):
1 The spore-bearing structure is phototropic, an
adaptation also seen in the tips of the asci of
Ascobolus and Sordaria, which grow on dung.
2 There is an explosive discharge mechanism. This also
is seen in the asci of Ascobolus and Sordaria because

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

(a)

191

(b)

Fig. 10.7 Pilobolus (Zygomycota), a fungus with a ballistic method of spore discharge. (a) Several sporangia on a dung
pellet. (b) A sporangium orientated towards a light source, showing how the subsporangial vesicle acts as a lens.

the asci act as guns, shooting spores up to 1–2 cm
into the air. A different discharge mechanism is
found in Basidiobolus ranarum (Chytridiomycota)
which grows on the feces of lizards and frogs. In this
case the sporangium is mounted on a subsporangial
vesicle, as in Pilobolus, but the vesicle ruptures at
its base, squirting the sap backwards and propelling the sporangium forwards, like a rocket. Yet
another variation is found in Sphaerobolus stellatus
(Basidiomycota) which produces basidiospores in a
large ball-like structure within a cup-shaped fruitbody.
At maturity, the inner layer of the cup separates
from the outer layer and suddenly inverts, like a
trampoline, springing the spore mass into the air.
3 There is a large projectile, based on the ballistic
principle that large (heavy) objects travel further
than small objects if released at the same initial
velocity. Sphaerobolus stellatus has a spore mass
about 1 mm diameter, allowing it to be thrown
2 meters vertically.
However not all coprophilous fungi employ ballistic
mechanisms of spore discharge. In Pilaira (Zygomycota,
Fig. 10.8), which is closely related to Pilobolus in the
family Pilobolaceae, the sporangiophore merely extends
several centimeters at maturity so that the sporangium
collapses onto the surrounding vegetation.

Insect-dispersed fungi
Insects and other small arthropods can disperse several
types of fungi, including spores that are produced in

sticky, mucilaginous masses. This form of dispersal can
be highly efficient because the fungus takes advantage
of the searching behavior of the vector to reach a new
site. There are many of these fungus–vector associations,
ranging from cases where the association is almost incidental to cases of highly evolved mutualism. Here we
consider one classic example – the dispersal of Dutch
elm disease by a bark-beetle vector. We deal with
other mutualistic associations in Chapter 13.
Dutch elm disease
Dutch elm disease (Figs 10.9, 10.10) is caused by two
closely related fungi, Ophiostoma ulmi and O. novo-ulmi
(Ascomycota). These fungi enter the plant through
wounds made by bark beetles, then spread in the
water-conducting xylem vessels by growing in a yeastlike budding phase. This causes reactions in the xylem
vessels, leading to blockage and death of all or part of
the xylem. In many respects, the symptoms and host
reactions in Dutch elm disease resemble those caused
by other vascular wilt pathogens. But bark beetles of
the Scolytus and Hylurgopinus are specialized vectors
of Dutch elm disease.
The disease cycle starts when young, contaminated
beetles emerge from the bark of dead or dying elm trees
in early spring, fly to neighboring healthy trees, and
feed on the bark of the young twigs. During feeding,
the beetles cause incidental damage to the xylem,
thereby introducing the fungus into the tree. The fungus then spreads in the xylem, killing the whole tree
or some of its major branches, and the bark of the newly
killed trees is then used by the female beetles for egg

192

CHAPTER 10

Fig. 10.8 Diagrammatic representation of some coprophilous fungi. (a) Pilaira anomala (Zygomycota): the sporangiophore elongates to several centimeters at maturity and the spores “flop” onto the surrounding vegetation. (b) Mucor
racemosus (Zygomycota) with no special method of spore release. (c) Pilobolus (Zygomycota); see also (h) and (i).
(d) Ascobolus sp. (Ascomycota); the tips of the mature asci project from the apothecium and are phototropic, shooting the ascospores towards a light source. (e) Sordaria sp. (Ascomycota); the neck of the perithecium is phototropic
and the mature asci elongate up the neck to discharge the ascospores. (f) Coprinus sp. (Basidiomycota). (g) Sphaerobolus
sp. (Basidiomycota); the large spore mass is shot from the cup-shaped fruitbody when the layers of this separate and
the inner layer suddenly inverts. (h,i) Pilobolus, showing how the terminal vesicle of the sporangiophore acts as a lens
to focus light and orientate the sporangiophore, and showing also the mechanism of sporangium discharge (see also
Fig. 10.7).

laying. The female beetle tunnels into the inner bark
and eats out a channel, depositing eggs along its
length – the “brood gallery.” The eggs hatch and the
young larvae eat out a series of radiating channels before
they pupate for overwintering. Meanwhile, the fungus
that killed the tree grows from the xylem into the bark
and sporulates in the beetle tunnels. In this way, the
young adult beetles that emerge from the pupae in the
following spring become contaminated with spores; they
leave the bark and fly in search of new trees, repeating the disease cycle.

The fungus–vector relationship clearly benefits both
partners, because the beetle carries the fungus to a new
host, while the beetle is ensured of a fresh supply of
breeding sites in the bark of newly killed trees – it will
not lay eggs in older, dead bark. As shown in Fig. 10.10b,
the fungus can produce a sexual stage in the bark –
a cleistothecium with a long neck which extrudes
ascospores in a mucilaginous matrix. This sexual stage
can ensure the generation of recombinant strains,
and again the beetle is involved in this because adult
beetles feed on the bark late in the season, introducing

(a)

Fig. 10.9 Dutch elm disease caused by
Ophiostoma ulmi and O. novo-ulmi. (a)
Dying elm trees with thinning crowns.
(b) Coremia of Ophiostoma, consisting
of many aggregated conidiophores,
bearing minute conidia in a large,
sticky mass at the tip (much of this spore
mass was lost during preparation). (c)
Beetle bark galleries on the inside of the
bark; the initial gallery caused by the
adult female is marked, and radiating
from this are galleries produced by the
young larvae. (d) Section of a branch
from a dying elm tree, showing a ring
of blocked, discolored xylem vessels
from a nonlethal attack in a previous
growth season.

(c)

(b)

(d)

Fig. 10.10 Dutch elm disease. (a) Diagram of an intact coremium. (b) Sexual stage of Ophiostoma – a long-necked
cleistothecium (closed fruitbody) containing oval asci each containing eight ascospores. The asci break down at maturity
and the ascospores are extruded in mucilage at the tip. (c,d) Beetle brood gallery in the inner bark of a diseased tree.
The adult female beetle deposits eggs along the gallery, then the emerging beetle larvae eat out a series of lateral galleries
ending in chambers. The fungus sporulates in these chambers and contaminates the beetles that emerge in spring.

194

CHAPTER 10

new strains of the pathogen, often different from the
strain that killed the tree.
As testimony to the efficiency of this fungus–vector
relationship, new strains of C. novo-ulmi swept across
Britain and much of continental Europe in the late
1900s, decimating the native British elm population,
after these strains were introduced on shipments of
imported elm logs in the 1960s. A similar epidemic
spread across the USA early in the last century. In both
cases it seems that the epidemic arose from logs that
had been imported and were not de-barked. If the bark
had been removed from the logs (as is required by quarantine regulations) there would have been no problem
because the beetle vectors would have been removed.
Molecular characterization of Ophiostoma has been
used to trace the origins and histories of these epidemics
(Mitchell & Brasier 1994; Brasier 1995). This revealed
that O. ulmi has been present for many years in Britain
and much of continental Europe, but as a heterogeneous
population of nonaggressive strains comprising several
vegetative compatibility (VC) groups. This population
was in balance with the tree host, causing relatively
little damage. The recent British epidemics have been
caused by two aggressive subgroups of the fungus, one
imported from North America (termed NAN) and one
of Eurasian origin (EAN). These aggressive forms are
sexually incompatible with the original nonaggressive
population, so they have been described as a new
species, O. novo-ulmi. At the advancing margins of the
disease in Europe, the pathogen population is almost
genetically pure and exists as a single VC “super
group.” We could expect this from the fungus–vector
relationship, because the most aggressive strain will
kill most of the trees at the advancing front, and the
beetle population will proliferate in these trees, carrying the strain to new trees. However, behind the disease fronts the incidence of this super group declines
to only some 20–30% of the fungal population, suggesting that the population is returning to a more
stable form. One of the reasons may be that Ophiostoma,
like Cryphonectria discussed in Chapter 9, can harbor
virulence-suppressing dsRNA. A diversity of VC groups
acts as a barrier to transmission of hypovirus genes
– perhaps a natural defense against these extrachromosomal elements.

Dispersal of aquatic fungi: appendaged
spores
Fungi that grow as saprotrophs in aquatic environments often have spores with unusual shapes and
conspicuous appendages (Fig. 10.1). One of the more
common types is the tetraradiate (four-armed) spore,
often found in the fungi that grow on fallen tree leaves
in well-aerated, fast-flowing streams (e.g. Alatospora,

Tetracladium, Tetrachaetum). Similar tetraradiate spores
have been found in two marine fungi (Basidiomycota),
while tetraradiate sporangia are produced by Erynia
conica (Zygomycota), a fungus that parasitizes freshwater
insects. There is even a yeast, Vanrija aquatica, which
grows in mountain tarns, that produces tetraradiate
cells instead of the normal ovoid yeast cells. In extreme
cases, aquatic spores such as Dendrospora (Fig. 10.1)
can have up to 20 radiating arms. And other aquatic
spores are curved or sigmoid – for example, Anguillospora
(Fig. 10.1).
In contrast to the freshwater fungi of Fig. 10.1,
wood-rotting Ascomycota of estuarine and marine
environments often have ascospores with flakes of
wall material or mucilaginous appendages (Fig. 10.11).
All these bizarrely shaped spores must be functionally
significant, either in terms of their buoyancy or in terms
of their entrapment or adherence onto substrates in
aquatic environments.
Several lines of evidence suggest that the common
tetraradiate spores of freshwater fungi may serve a
range of different roles. For example, the yeast Vanrija
aquatica produces appendages in response to nutrientpoor conditions in laboratory culture, suggesting that
they might increase the surface area for nutrient
absorption. The tetraradiate conidia of other fungi
have been shown to sediment slowly in water, at
about 0.1 mm s−1, although differences in sedimentation rates are unlikely to be important in the turbulent, fast-flowing streams where these spores are
commonly found. Perhaps more important is the
role of spore shape in entrapment, because small air
bubbles are often trapped between the arms of tetraradiate spores, causing the spores to accumulate in the
“foam” of fast-flowing streams. In addition, these
spores settle like a tripod on a natural or artificial surface, and then respond rapidly by releasing mucilage
from the tips of the arms in contact with the surface,
but not from the fourth (free) arm. This attachment is
also followed rapidly by germination from the contact
sites, so that the fungus establishes itself from three
points, which is likely to increase the efficiency of
colonizing a substrate in competition with other
microorganisms. A quite different role was discovered
quite recently: some of the appendaged fungal spores
are produced by fungi that grow on the living leaves
of trees that overhang fast-flowing streams. These
conidia are easily dislodged from the conidiophores by
raindrops. So, the tetraradiate or sigmoidal spore form
might represent an adaptation to a multiplicity of
needs in the habitats where these fungi grow.
The mucilaginous appendages of the marine
Ascomycota function in attachment to surfaces. These
fungi often colonize wood in estuarine environments
(Moss 1986), where they have important roles as
decomposers of woody materials.

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

195

Fig. 10.11 Appendaged spores of estuarine and marine environments. (a) Ascospore of Pleospora with mucilaginous
appendages (stippled), about 400 mm. (b) Ascospore of Halosphaeria with chitinous wall appendages (25 mm). (c) Conidium
of Zalerion (25 mm). (d) Ascospore of Corollospora with membranous appendages (70 mm). (e) Ascospore of Lulworthia
with terminal mucilaginous pouches (60 mm). (f) Ascospore of Ceriosporiopsis with mucilaginous appendages (stippled)
(40 mm).

Dispersal and infection behavior of
zoospores
Zoospores are motile, wall-less cells that swim by
means of flagella. They are the characteristic dispersal
spores of Chytridiomycota, Oomycota, and plasmodiophorids, although only the Chytridiomycota are
true fungi.
Zoospores can swim for many hours using their
endogenous energy reserves, and they show a remarkable degree of sensory perception, owing to the presence
of receptors on the cell surface. These receptors enable
zoospores to precisely locate the sites where they will
encyst – whether on a host or an organic substrate. An
example was shown in Chapter 2 (see Fig. 2.2) for the
nematode parasite Catenaria anguillulae. Other important examples include the many Oomycota (Pythium,
Phytophthora, and Aphanomyces spp.) that cause devastating diseases of crop plants (Chapter 14) or of salmonid
fish, while a wide range of saprotrophic species play
important roles as primary colonizers of organic substrates in natural waters. In this section we discuss the
structure and function of zoosporic fungi. Many aspects
of zoospore biology and infection have been reviewed
by Deacon & Donaldson (1993) and Hardham (2001).

Structure and organization of zoospores
As shown in Fig. 10.12, the zoospores of Chytridiomycota are small, typically 5–6 µm diameter, and
tadpole-shaped. Except for some rumen chytrids

(which have several flagella) they have a single,
smooth, posterior flagellum of the whiplash type.
The most conspicuous feature of these zoospores is
the nucleus, surmounted by a large nuclear cap, which
is rich in RNA, protein, and ribosomes. The flagellar
membrane is continuous with the cell membrane, and
the core of the flagellum – the axoneme – consists of
a ring of nine triplets of microtubules surrounding
two central microtubules. This “9 + 2” arrangement is
typical of most motile, flagellate cells. At the root
of the flagellum is a kinetosome (a modified centriole
derived from the nuclear division that preceded
zoospore cleavage), and an array of tubular elements
that probably provide anchorage and energy transfer
to the flagellum. Surrounding the kinetosome is a
large mitochondrion shaped like a doughnut ring, and
a microbody–lipid complex which, presumably, supplies
the energy for beating of the flagellum. When the
zoospore comes to rest the flagellum is retracted into
the cell by a reeling-in mechanism involving the rotation of the cell contents, then a cyst wall is formed. It
is notable that, although the zoospores of Chytridiomycota are wall-less cells, they do not seem to have
an osmoregulatory apparatus.
The plasmodiophorids also have small zoospores,
about 5 µm diameter, but with two flagella – a short
one directed forwards and a longer one directed
backwards. By contrast, the zoospores of Oomycota
(Fig. 10.13) are larger, typically 10–15 µm, and kidneyshaped, with two flagella inserted in a ventral groove.
The longer flagellum is whiplash type and trails behind
the swimming spore; the shorter flagellum projects
forwards and is tinsel-type, with short glycoprotein hairs

196

CHAPTER 10

(a)

(b)
N

(a)

W

Fig. 10.13 (a) Scanning electron micrograph of a
zoospore of Phytophthora (Oomycota) with a posterior
whiplash flagellum and a shorter, anterior tinsel-type
flagellum. (b) Diagrammatic representation of the zoospore, showing the insertion of the flagella in the ventral
groove (shaded) and the location of the nucleus (N)
and water-expulsion vacuole (W). ((a) Image courtesy of
M.S. Fuller.)

(b)
Fig. 10.12 (a) Zoospores of Blastocladiella emersonii
(Chytridiomycota) with a smooth, posterior whiplash
flagellum. (Courtesy of M. S. Fuller.) (b) Electron micrograph of a longitudinal section of the zoospore of B.
emersonii. The zoospore plasma membrane is continuous
with the flagellar membrane (F) but only part of the
flagellum is seen in this section. M = mitochondrion;
MLC = microbody–lipid globule complex; N = nucleus;
NC = nuclear cap; V = vacuole. (Courtesy of M.S. Fuller; from
Reichle & Fuller 1967.)

(mastigonemes) projecting along its length. These act
like a series of oars, pulling the zoospore forwards as
the anterior flagellum generates a sine wave from its
base to its tip. This is estimated to account for at least
90% of the forward swimming thrust. The posterior
flagellum acts like a rudder. It periodically kicks at an
angle of about 90°C, causing the cell to change the
swimming direction.
The arrangement of organelles in zoospores of
Oomycota is shown in Fig. 10.14. The top section
passes through the region of flagellar insertion in the
zoospore ventral groove and shows the nucleus (N)

extending to the base of the flagella. Beneath the
plasma membrane are sheets of peripheral cisternae
(pc), large peripheral vesicles, dorsal vesicles, and ventral vesicles. The cell also contains mitochondria (M)
and fingerprint vacuoles (FV) which contain glucans that
probably serve as carbohydrate reserves. The asterisk
marks a cavity probably resulting from extraction of lipid
during preparation of the specimen. The lower section
passes through the ventral groove where the osmoregulatory water expulsion vacuole (WEV) is located.
The WEV consists of a central vacuole (CT) and surrounding vacuoles (SU). It contracts and expels water
regularly every few minutes.
The significance of this complex ultrastructural
organization of Phytophthora zoospores lies in the fact
that the zoospore is a transitory phase of the life cycle,
specialized for dispersal. When the zoospore locates a
suitable site for infection it transforms rapidly into a
walled cyst – a process that takes only a few minutes.
Thus, the zoospore is a pre-programed cell, destined to
undergo a rapid transition. The details of this are of
much interest and can be followed by cytochemical
methods.
The peripheral vesicles that lie just beneath the
zoospore membrane are of at least three types, and can
be distinguished by the binding of their proteinaceous
contents to specific monoclonal antibodies or lectins.
The large peripheral vesicles beneath most of the cell

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

197

Fig. 10.14 (a,b) Two parallel crosssections through a zoospore of
Phytophthora palmivora (Oomycota).
See text for details. (Courtesy of M.S.
Fuller; from Cho & Fuller 1989.)

periphery contain a glycoprotein that is thought to serve
as a protein store after encystment. These vesicles
migrate towards the center of the cell when a zoospore
encysts. The smaller dorsal vesicles contain a different glycoprotein which is released by exocytosis at an
early stage of encystment, and it accumulates on the
cell surface as a cyst coat. A third class of vesicles, the
ventral vesicles, are found only around the zoospore
ventral groove. They also contain a protein which is
released during encystment, but it is deposited locally
between the cyst and the surface on which encystment
has occurred, and it acts as an adhesive.
A newly encysted zoospore has no wall, only an
amorphous glycoprotein coat deposited by the dorsal
vesicles. But a true wall is synthesized beneath the cyst
coat in the first few minutes of encystment. This wall
is derived from the peripheral cisternae (membrane
lamellae) that lie immediately beneath the plasma
membrane of the motile spore (Fig. 10.15). Once the

Fig. 10.15 Close-up view of a part of the zoospore surface of Pythium aphanidermatum, showing the laminate
peripheral cisternae that will subsequently become vesicles
for release of the cyst wall.

198

CHAPTER 10

Fig. 10.16 Stages in encystment of
Phytophthora cinnamomi zoospores
(Oomycota) immunogold-labeled with
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) specific
to the contents of different peripheral
vesicles. (a) Outer region of a motile
zoospore showing two classes of peripheral vesicles: the contents of large
peripheral vesicles bind to a specific
mAb that has been complexed to
large (18 nm) gold particles (double
arrowheads) whereas the contents of
small dorsal vesicles bind to a different
mAb complexed to 10 nm gold particles (single arrowhead). (b) Zoospore
labeled at 1 minute after addition of
pectin to induce encystment. Most of
the small dorsal vesicles have released
their contents onto the cell surface but
the large peripheral vesicles still lie
beneath the surface. (c) Spore labeled
at 5 minutes after encystment. The
spore has started to synthesize a cell wall
(W), the surface of which is coated
with material from the small dorsal
vesicles. (d) Spore labeled after 10
minutes. The wall is now thicker, and
the large peripheral vesicles have
migrated towards the center of the
cyst. They are thought to be a protein
store for use during cyst germination
and germ-tube growth. (Photographs
courtesy of F. Gubler & A. Hardham;
(a) from Hardham 1995; (b–d) from
Gubler & Hardham 1988.)
cyst wall has developed, the water-expulsion vacuole
disappears. The sequence of cyst wall formation is
shown in Fig. 10.16.

Sensitivity of zoospores to lysis:
a potential basis for disease control
Zoospores of all types, including Chytridiomycota
(e.g. Allomyces spp.) and Oomycota (Saprolegnia,
Aphanomyces, Pythium, and Phytophthora) lack a cell wall
during their motile phase and the early stages of
encystment. For this reason zoospores are highly
susceptible to disrupution by surface-active agents
(surfactants) such as rhamnolipids which are pro-

duced by the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The key
feature of surface-active agents is that they have both
a hydrophobic and a hydrophilic domain, so they can
insert into the cell membrane of wall-less cells and disrupt the cells (Ron & Rosenberg 2001).
The roots of oat plants (Avena sativa) and the
closely related wild grass, Arrhenatherum elatius, produce
soap-like compounds (saponins) from a narrow zone
just behind the root tips. In this case the saponin
is termed avenacin (see Fig. 9.12), and it naturally
fluoresces bright blue when viewed under ultraviolet
illumination (Fig. 10.17). A similar saponin, β-aescin,
is produced by the leaves of horse chestnut trees
(Aesculus hippocastanum). When oat roots are placed
in a suspension of fungal zoospores the spores rapidly

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

(a)

199

(b)

(c)
i

ii

vii

iii

vi

iv

v

Fig. 10.17 (a) Oat root tips with natural blue autofluorescence caused by the presence of avenacin. (b) A
Pythium zoospore undergoing disorganization and lysis
in the presence of avenacin. (c) Responses of wall-less
zoospores of Oomycota to saponins such as avenacin or
b-aescin: (i) motile zoospore; (ii) immobilization and
rounding-up; (iii) development of phase-dark granules;
(iv) localization of granules and development of vacuoles;
(v) lysis; (vi,vii) ballooning followed by lysis. Disruption of
the zoospores usually occurs within 5–10 minutes. (From
Deacon & Mitchell 1985.)

accumulate at the root tips in response to root tip nutrients and then lyse within a few minutes (Fig. 10.17).
The use of surfactants such as rhamnolipids, or even
crude extracts of saponin-containing tissues such as oat
roots, could provide disease control in hydroponic
glasshouse-cropping systems where zoosporic fungi can
cause serious diseases. This is now being investigated
in several laboratories, to find environmentally safe
alternatives to the use of fungicides.

Fig. 10.18 Zoospore tracks of Oomycota, captured as negatives on photographic film during a 5-second exposure
and showing frequent random turns in the absence of an
attractant.
Clearly, the swimming activity of zoospores must
serve other roles. One of these roles is that swimming
zoospores can remain in suspension and be carried
in moving water, whereas nonmotile spores tend to
settle out. This has been demonstrated both in artificial
soils and in field soils, where zoospores of Oomycota
can escape entrapment in narrow, water-filled soil
pores, so they can remain suspended and spread in
surface run-off water, whereas zoospore cysts are easily
trapped in soil. But the main role of zoospores is that
their swimming is linked to sensory perception: they
can swim towards attractants such as nutrients or
oxygen (positive chemotaxis) or avoid unsuitable
chemical environments (negative chemotaxis). Zoospores also can respond to pH gradients, to electrical
or ionic fields (electrotaxis), and they can accumulate
by autoaggregation. The extreme responsiveness of
zoospores enables them to settle and encyst in environments that are most appropriate for subsequent
development. For example, zoospores often accumulate
in large numbers near root tips, at plant wound sites,
or around individual stomata on a leaf surface. This
“homing and docking” sequence of zoospores, discussed below, is as sophisticated and rapid as any that
have been described in the biological world.

Zoospore motility
In appropriate conditions zoospores of Oomycota
can swim for 10 hours or more, at rates of at least
100 µm s−1 fuelled by endogenous nutrient reserves. So
they could, in theory, swim as far as 3–4 meters for
dispersal to new environments. However, the zoospores
make frequent random turns (Fig. 10.18), and because
of this the rate of dispersion by Phytophthora zoospores
in still water has been found to be little more than the
rate of diffusion of a small molecule such as HCl.

The “homing and docking” sequence of
zoospores
The events in the “homing and docking” sequence of
zoospores (Fig. 10.19) have been studied in detail for
Pythium and Phytophthora species. The sequence begins
when a zoospore detects a gradient of chemoattractant,
which causes a partial suppression of random turns so
that the spore tends to move up the attractant gradient.
This phase of zoospore taxis, or zoospore kinesis, can

200

CHAPTER 10

Fig. 10.19 The homing and docking sequence of zoospores.
be studied using capillaries filled with potential attractants. Often the zoospores of plant pathogens show
chemotaxis to several individual sugars or amino
acids, or to volatile compounds such as ethanol and
aldehydes, which are likely to be released as fermentation products of roots in moist soil conditions.
However, the strongest responses are usually seen with
mixtures of compounds, such as seed and root exudates.
Most Pythium and Phytophthora species show taxis
to the roots of both host and nonhost plants, but a
few interesting examples of host-specific taxis have been
reported. For example, the host-specific pathogen
Phytophthora sojae shows chemotaxis in vitro to the
flavonoids daidzein and genistein, which are known to
be present in the soybean host. Similarly, Aphanomyces
cochlioides shows strong chemotaxis to the flavonoid
“cochliophilin A” from spinach plants. It should not
be assumed that these compounds are the only factors
involved in attraction to the host roots, but the

(a)

(b)

findings are notable because they parallel the behavior
of Rhizobium spp., which show in vitro chemotaxis to
the specific flavonoids of their hosts.
The next phase of the sequence seems to involve
recognition of a host surface component, because
the zoospores move over the host surface, with their
flagella in contact with this. Some zoosporic fungi
might have specific host surface requirements, but
often they respond to pectin and other polyuronates
(e.g. alginate) in vitro. For example, Fig. 10.20 shows
the massing and encystment of Pythium zoospores on
the root tip mucilage secreted by root cap cells of
wheat. Similar massing and encystment is seen in the
elongation zone of roots that are coated with calcium
alginate gel – a treatment that masks any specific
receptors on the root surface.
Recognition of a host surface component (perhaps
coupled with a high concentration of root-derived
nutrients) leads to orientated encystment, with the

Fig. 10.20 Accumulation and encystment of Pythium zoospores on wheat
roots. (a) Zoospores (z) accumulating
in large numbers on the surface of a
ball of root tip mucilage; some root cap
cells are indicated (rc). (b) Zoospores
(z) accumulating and encysting in the
elongation zone of wheat roots. In this
case the root had been coated with a
double layer of calcium alginate gel to
block any specific receptor compounds
on the root surface.

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

ventral groove of the zoospore located next to the host.
During this process the flagella are withdrawn but
the zoospore remains adhered to the host by secretion
of an adhesive. This stage of orientated encystment
is important, because the zoospores of Pythium and
Phytophthora spp. are known to have a fixed, predetermined point of germ-tube outgrowth. If the spore
were to settle in a different orientation the germ-tube
would not penetrate the host. There can also be a degree
of host-specific encystment at this stage, because the
Pythium spp. that parasitize grasses and cereals show
significantly more encystment on grass roots than on
the roots of dicotyledonous plants.
The precise orientation of encystment is also important because it ensures that the adhesive released from
the zoospore’s ventral vesicles will be deposited next

Fig. 10.21 (a) A suspension of zoospores of Phytophthora
parasitica was incubated in the presence of a fluorescent
probe (fura-2) that measures Ca2+ concentration in the suspending fluid. The zoospore suspension was then vortexed
(70-second interruption) to induce zoospore encystment
and the external Ca2+ measurements were resumed. The
trace shows that zoospore encystment caused an immediate
drop in external Ca2+ (signifying Ca2+ uptake by zoospores),
then a progressive Ca2+ release from the cysts, which
germinated within 90 minutes. (b,c) In identical experiments, the addition of lanthanum or verapamil (both of
which are Ca2+ channel blockers) prevented the release or
uptake of Ca2+. The vortexed cells were immobilized but
did not produce cyst walls. Another calcium-modulator,
TMB-8, caused the cells initially to behave like the controls
(an early uptake of Ca2+ after vortex-treatment) but with no
subsequent release of Ca2+ and no germination. TMB-8 is
known to block the release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores.
(All data from Warburton & Deacon 1998.)

201

to the host surface. Receptors on the flagella probably
are involved in this process, because monoclonal antibodies that bind to both flagella of Phytophthora
zoospores cause rapid encystment in vitro, whereas
other monoclonal antibodies that bind to only the anterior or the posterior flagellum do not cause rapid
encystment.
Cyst germination can be studied in vitro by agitating
a zoospore suspension, causing the spores to encyst, and
then adding individual amino acids or sugars to trigger
germination. However, cyst germination in vivo (on the
host plant) is suggested to be an autonomous process,
triggered by events in the earliest stages of encystment.
Consistent with this, major transmembrane fluxes of
calcium occur in the early stages of encystment, and
seem to coordinate cyst germination (Fig. 10.21).

202

CHAPTER 10

Oomycota

Pythium Phytophthora

Chytridiomycota

Catenaria

Plasmodiophorid

Plasmodiophora

Collectively, the results in Fig. 10.21 demonstrate a
central role of Ca2+ uptake and subsequent release in
the transition from a zoospore to a germinating cyst.
In normal conditions, when zoospores encyst on a
host surface they germinate within 20 or 30 minutes
by the emergence of a germ-tube, which usually penetrates the host directly. However, the zoospores of
Pythium and Phytophthora also have a default option.
If a zoospore does not locate a suitable host after several hours of swimming, it encysts before its nutrient
reserves are depleted and the cyst then releases a
further zoospore (Fig. 10.19). This process of repeated
emergence can occur two or three times before the
zoospore exhausts its nutrient reserves.

Parallel development among zoosporic
species
Many of the features described above for Oomycota
are also found in other zoosporic organisms, but
the details vary (Fig. 10.22). For example, zoospores
of Oomycota always dock onto a host or other surface
with the flagella and ventral groove located next to
the surface. The Chytridiomycota always seem to dock
“head-on,” with the flagellum orientated away from the
host. Plasmodiophorids show yet another variation: their
zoospores always seem to dock with the two flagella
orientated away from the host. But these obligately
parasitic organisms also display a unique mode of
behavior. When the zoospore settles and encysts on a

Fig. 10.22 Comparison of the docking and
penetration of a host by three types of zoosporic fungus (see text for details). In all three
types of organism the zoospore shows precise
orientation during encystment on a host surface,
related to the fact that these zoospores have a
predetermined site from which they penetrate
the host.
host surface, the cyst vacuole enlarges and a small adhesorium is produced at the site of contact with the host.
Then a pre-formed bullet-like stylet is shot through the
host wall and the contents of the cyst enter the host
cell as a wall-less plasmodium. Again, this provides
evidence of precisely orientated encystment, because the
stylet must be positioned correctly to ensure that the
protoplast will be delivered through the host cell wall.

Zoospores as vectors of plant viruses
About 20 plant viruses are currently known to be
transmitted by zoospores, and in some cases this is their
main or only means of transmission (Table 10.2).
These zoospore vectors belong to three genera:
Olpidium (Chytridiomycota), Polymyxa (plasmodiophorids), and Spongospora (plasmodiophorids). All are
common and usually symptomless parasites of roots.
The feature that makes them significant as vectors is
that the zoospore encysts on a root and then germinates to release a naked protoplast into the plant. Any
virus particles that bind to the surface of the swimming
zoospore will therefore be introduced into the host.
There are different degrees of specialization in these
virus–vector relationships. Olpidium spp. usually transmit isometric viruses such as cucumber necrosis virus
and tobacco necrosis virus, but these viruses have
additional (and perhaps more important) modes of
transmission. The swimming zoospores acquire these
viruses from soil when the virus particles adhere to a

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

203

Table 10.2 Some important viruses that are vectored by zoosporic fungi.
Host

Vector

Furoviruses: always vectored by fungi
Straight tubular particles,
Soil-borne wheat mosaic
250–300 + 100 –150 × 20 nm
Beet necrotic yellow vein
Potato mop top
Single-stranded RNA; genome
Peanut clump
divided between more than
Oat golden stripe
one particle
Broad bean necrosis

Wheat, barley
Sugar beet, spinach
Solanum spp.
Peanut
Avena spp.
Vicia faba

Polymyxa graminis
Polymyxa betae
Spongospora subterranea
Polymyxa graminis
Polymyxa graminis
Polymyxa graminis

Barley yellow mosaic type: always vectored by fungi
Filamentous particles,
Barley yellow mosaic
350–700 × 13 nm
Wheat yellow mosaic
Wheat spindle streak
Oat mosaic
Rice necrosis mosaic

Hordeum
Triticum
Triticum
Avena
Oryza

Polymyxa
Polymyxa
Polymyxa
Polymyxa
Polymyxa

Tobacco stunt type: characteristically vectored by fungi
Straight tubular particles,
Tobacco stunt
200–375 × 22 nm
Lettuce big vein

Nicotiana spp.
Lettuce

Olpidium brassicae
Olpidium brassicae

Virus type and features

Examples

graminis
graminis
graminis
graminis
graminis

Double-stranded RNA
Tobacco necrosis type: various means of transmission, including fungi
Tulip, Solanum, Vicia,
Tobacco necrosis
Isometric particles, 26–30 nm
many other plants
Single-stranded RNA

Cucumber necrosis
Melon necrotic spot

zoospore surface component. The virus presumably
remains on the plasma membrane when the zoospore
encysts, and will later be carried on the membrane
of the protoplast that enters the host. By contrast,
the zoospores of Polymyxa and Spongospora cannot
acquire viruses by swimming in virus suspensions;
instead, they acquire the virus inside an infected
plant. Many of these viruses are of a distinct type,
termed furoviruses (fungally-transmitted rod-shaped
viruses), and they have no other natural means of transmission. They include some of the most economically
important soil-borne viruses, such as beet necrotic
yellow vein virus, soil-borne wheat mosaic virus,
and potato mop-top virus. Other fungus-transmitted
viruses, such as the filamentous types (Table 10.2), show
some affinities to furoviruses but have a different
particle shape.
There is no evidence that any of these viruses multiply within the vectors. But they are carried internally
in the resting spores, which can persist in soil for 20

Cucumber
Melon, cucumber

Olpidium brassicae
Olpidium spp.
Olpidium radicale

years or more. So, once established in a field site, these
viruses are almost impossible to eradicate. Further
details of the zoospore-vectored viruses can be found
in Adams (1991), Hiruki & Teakle (1987), and Brunt &
Richards (1989).

Dispersal of airborne spores
Most terrestrial fungi produce airborne spores that are
dispersed by wind or rain-splash. These are the spores
of most significance in plant pathology and for allergies and fungal infections of humans. In this section
we consider how spores become airborne (take-off ), how
they remain airborne (flight), and how they are finally
deposited in appropriate environments for future
development (landing). These are features of fundamental significance in understanding the ecology of airborne fungi. The subject is covered in detail by Ingold
(1971) and Gregory (1973).

204

CHAPTER 10

Spore liberation – take-off
The essential feature of spore liberation is that a spore
needs to break free from the boundary layer of still
air that surrounds all surfaces. Above this boundary layer
the air becomes progressively more turbulent in local
eddies, until there is net movement of the air mass
which can carry spores to a new site. The depth of the
boundary layer can vary considerably – from a fraction
of a millimeter on a leaf surface on a windy day, to a
meter or more on a forest floor on a perfectly calm
day. So the fungi that grow in these different types
of environment require different strategies for getting
their spores airborne. Some of these strategies are

shown in Fig. 10.23. Often they involve adaptations of
the spore-bearing structures rather than of the spores
themselves.
Fungi that grow on leaf surfaces sometimes produce
chains of spores from a basal cell so that the mature
spores are pushed upwards through the boundary
layer as more spores are produced at the base of the
chain (e.g. Blumeria (Erysiphe) graminis and other powdery mildew pathogens). The spores are then removed
by wind or, sometimes more effectively, by mist-laden
air (e.g. Cladosporium). Other types of spore are flung
off the spore-bearing structures by hygroscopic (drying)
movements that cause the spore-bearing hyphae suddenly to buckle (e.g. Phytophthora infestans and downy
mildew fungi such as Peronospora). Fungi that grow on

Fig. 10.23 The diversity of mechanisms of spore liberation through a boundary layer of still air (shown by shading).

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

more rigidly supported surfaces can release the
spores by active processes. For example, the asci of
many Ascomycota function as small guns, shooting
ascospores to 1 or 2 cm distance, to break free of the
boundary layer. Spores can also “pop” from a supporting
structure when an enclosing wall layer suddenly ruptures, like two balloons that pop apart if compressed
and suddenly released (e.g. Conidiobolus).
Some other fungi are dispersed by rain-splash. In
these cases the spores often are linear or curved (e.g.
Fusarium, Fig. 10.24) and are produced in mucilage
on a pad of tissue (an acervulus) or in a splash cup so
that raindrops are caused to fragment on impact and
rebound as many tiny droplets which can carry the
spores into the air. Splash cups are also found in a group
of Basidiomycota that grow on decomposing wood
chips, on the surface of organic soils or on dung. A good
example is the genus Cyathus (see Fig. 2.21).
Raindrops or hail can also release dry spores that
are lying on a surface, by “puff” and “tap” mechanisms.

(a)

(d)

When a raindrop falls on a rigidly supported surface,
the drop splodges sideways, and the resulting puff
of air disturbs the boundary layer, causing the dry
spores to become airborne. Hailstones act differently –
they are most effective in redistributing spores from
lightly supported surfaces such as leaves. In puffballs
(Basidiomycota) such as Lycoperdon (see Fig. 2.23) the
mature basidiospores are enclosed in a papery fruitbody
with an apical pore, so that raindrops “puff” the
spores into the air, like bellows.
Toadstools display a different strategy from all those
above, made necessary by the deep layer of still air
that often exists on a woodland floor. When the stalk
(stipe) of a toadstool elongates, the cap (pileus) projects
into turbulent air. The basidiospores develop on short
stalks (sterigmata) and the spores are popped from the
stergimata when the continuous outer wall surrounding the sterigma and the spore breaks down, so that
the spores can drop from the gills or pores and be carried away by wind. Much of the variation in shape and

(b)

(e)

205

(c)

(f)

(g)

Fig. 10.24 Curved spores (macroconidia) with several compartments, typical of many species of Fusarium and other
splash-dispersed fungi.

206

CHAPTER 10

size of toadstools is related to this strategy – the toadstools with thick, rigid stipes (e.g. Boletus, Amanita) and
the large brackets produced by tree-rotting fungi (e.g.
Ganoderma) have very closely spaced and deep gills or
pores, just wide enough for spores to be popped from
the basidia and then to fall vertically into turbulent air.
Toadstools with thin, bendable stipes (e.g. Marasmius
oreades, the common fairy-ring fungus of grass turf ) have
widely spaced, shallow gills to ensure that the spores
fall free. Many of these strategies are illustrated in
Chapter 2 (see Figs 2.24–2.32).
This is more than just a catalogue of examples,
because it demonstrates how fungi have an integrated
lifestyle. The only reason for producing a fruitbody
is to disperse the microscopic spores, and the only
reason for producing a large or massive fruitbody is
to overcome the constraints to spore dispersal imposed
by a boundary layer.

Flight
The fate of spores in the air is determined largely
by meteorological factors – wind speeds, rain, etc. –
but at least two features of spores are significant for
long-distance dispersal: their resistance to desiccation,
conferred by hydrophobins in the walls, and their
resistance to ultraviolet radiation, conferred by wall
pigments. Thus, the hyaline (colorless), thin-walled
conidia of Blumeria graminis (cereal powdery mildew)
or the wind-borne sporangia of Phytophthora infestans
(potato blight) remain viable for only a short time
on bright, cloudless days, whereas the pigmented
uredospores of rust fungi (e.g. Puccinia graminis) and
conidia of Cladosporium can remain viable for days or
even weeks in air.
The use of spore-trapping devices mounted on the
outsides of aircraft has provided clear evidence of
long-distance dispersal of fungi. Figure 10.25 shows

an example where spores were carried on the westerly
winds across the North Sea from the English coast to
Denmark. The spore clouds were found to be clustered
at different altitudes and distances from the English
coast. From knowledge of the wind speeds it was possible to distinguish between spores released on different days in England and also to distinguish between
spores released in daytime (e.g. Cladosporium) and
those released at night (the pink yeast Sporobolomyces,
and various ascospores). Such long-distance dispersal can
be highly significant for plant disease epidemiology,
especially when new pathogenic races or fungicideresistant strains develop and are spread across or
between continents.

Spore deposition – landing
Spores suspended in the air can be removed in
three major ways – by sedimentation, impaction, or
washout. The shape, size and surface properties of
spores have major effects on these processes – even to
the extent that an understanding of a spore’s properties enables us to predict the circumstances in which it
will be deposited.

Sedimentation
All spores settle out of the air by sedimentation in calm
conditions, and the heavier (larger) spores settle faster
than lighter (smaller) spores. The sedimentation rates
can be measured in closed cylinders and, except for
unusually shaped spores for which correction factors
are needed, the rates are found to agree closely with
Stokes’s Law for perfect spheres of unit density (1.0).
The relevant equation is:
Vt = 0.0121r 2

Fig. 10.25 Positions of peak spore concentrations of Cladosporium spp. (light
shading) and damp-air spore types (dark
shading) at different altitudes over the
North Sea and at different distances from
the English coast. (From Lacey 1988;
based on the work of P.H. Gregory and
J.L. Monteith.)

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

207

Fig. 10.26 Illustration of the relationship
between spore size, wind speed, and impaction of spores onto a cylinder. (a) At low wind
speeds only the largest (heaviest) spores
impact. (b) At higher wind speeds progressively smaller (lighter) spores impact.

where Vt is the terminal velocity (cm s−1) and r is the
spore radius (µm). For example, spores of the cereal smut
pathogen Tilletia caries (17 µm diam) had a measured
Vt of 1.4 cm s−1, whereas puffball spores (Bovista plumbea,
5.6 µm diam) had a Vt of 0.24 cm s−1. Differences of this
order probably have little effect in outdoor environments, and so the spores of all types would remain
airborne or settle according to the prevailing conditions.
However, small differences can be significant in buildings and in the respiratory tract, discussed later.
Impaction
Impaction is one of the major mechanisms by which
large spores are removed from the air, and it has
special significance for plant pathogens. As shown
in Fig. 10.26, when spore-laden air moves towards an
object (or vice-versa), the air is deflected around the
object and tends to carry spores with it. But the
momentum (mass × velocity) of a spore will tend to
carry it along its existing path for at least some distance.
Three points arise from this:
1 at any given air speed the larger spores (greater
mass) have more chance of impacting than do
smaller spores;
2 as the air speed (velocity) increases, so progressively
smaller spores can impact;
3 as the size of the receiving object increases, so the
deflection of air is greater and this reduces the
chances of impaction.
These points are directly relevant to spores in nature.
All the fungi that infect leaves or that characteristically
grow on leaf surfaces (phyllosphere fungi) have large
spores, with sufficient mass and therefore sufficient
momentum to impact at normal wind speeds (up to
5 m s−1). Examples include Cladosporium herbarum (spores
8–15 µm diameter), Alternaria spp. (about 30 µm), and
the leaf-infecting pathogens Blumeria graminis (about
30 µm) and Puccinia graminis (about 40 µm). By contrast,
the typical soil fungi such as Penicillium, Aspergillus and

Trichoderma spp. have spores about 4–5 µm diameter,
too small to impact at normal wind speeds but they
can sediment out of the air in calm conditions.
The receiving object also determines the efficiency
of spore impaction. A classic demonstration of this
involved placing young branches of apricot trees in a
wind tunnel, and exposing the branches to air containing spores of Eutypa armeniacae (Ascomycota),
a pathogen of apricot trees. This fungus naturally
releases its spores as clusters of eight ascospores held
together in mucilage – a relatively large propagule
with sufficient momentum to impact at relatively
low wind speeds. As shown in Fig. 10.27, at all wind
speeds the spore clusters impacted best on the narrow
leaf stalks (petioles, about 1–2 mm diameter), less well
on the thicker young apricot stems, and even less well
on the broader leaf blades. And, as the wind speed was
increased, so the efficiency of impaction increased. It
might be considered that the impaction efficiencies
were quite low in all cases – never more than 3%. But
in an apricot orchard the spores that do not impact on
one shoot system would impact on another. On this
basis, it was estimated that most spore clusters would
be removed from the air as it travelled through an
orchard at 2 m s−1 – a typical wind speed that was measured in field conditions. Eutypa is a wound pathogen,
which commonly infects grape vines and apricots
through natural wounds or pruning wounds. After
impaction, the fungus relies on secondary spread by rain
or irrigation water, which disperses the mucilage and
carries the separate spores down to any wound sites.
Washout
Even light, steady rain will remove almost all suspended
particles from the air. However, the spore surface
properties then come into play. Wettable spores
become incorporated within the raindrops and finally
come to rest where the water does – spreading as a
film across a wettable surface or dripping from a nonwettable one. By contrast, nonwettable spores that are
covered with rodlets of hydrophobins remain on the

208

CHAPTER 10

Fig. 10.27 Efficiency of impaction of ascospore tetrads
of Eutypa armeniacae on leaf blades, petioles, and branch
stems of apricot shoots, at different wind speeds. Most
impaction occurs on the narrower objects (petioles) and
in all cases the efficiency of impaction is increased as the
wind speed increases. (From Carter 1965.)
surface of the raindrop, and if this rolls across a nonwettable surface such as a leaf cuticle it will leave the
spores behind as a trail. This is easily demonstrated in
a laboratory by rolling a water drop over a Penicillium
colony, when the drop becomes coated with the
nonwettable spores. If the spore-laden drop is then rolled
across a plastic Petri dish, the spores are left as a trail
across the plastic. The nonwettable spores can become
airborne again by the “puff and tap” mechanisms
mentioned earlier.

Air sampling devices and human health
Spores in the respiratory tract
The respiratory tract of humans and other animals
is a natural spore-trapping device, as people with
allergies know only too well. The respiratory tract is
also the route of entry for spores of several fungal
pathogens of humans, discussed in detail in Chapter
16. Three mechanisms of spore deposition in the respiratory tract are important: impaction, sedimentation,
and boundary layer exchange.

During each intake of breath the air speed is fastest
in the nose, trachea and bronchi (about 100 cm s−1) and
it diminishes with successive branching of the bronchioles. Therefore impaction will only occur in the upper
respiratory tract, where the air speed is fastest, and
only the heaviest (largest) spores will have sufficient
momentum to impact. The hairs in the nostrils are narrow and covered with mucilage, making them highly
efficient for intercepting the larger fungal spores and
pollen grains. Some of these airborne particles cause
rhinitis and other typical symptoms of hayfever.
All other particles that are too small to impact will
be carried deep into the lungs and reach the terminal
bronchioles and alveoli. This includes most particles
of 4–5 µm diameter or less, including the spores of
many common airborne fungi. Most of these spores
are expelled again, but a few will settle onto the mucosal
membranes by sedimentation during the brief period
(usually less than 1 second) when the air in the
alveoli is static between inhalation and exhalation.
Particles even smaller than this, including the airborne spores of actinomycetes (1–2 µm diameter),
can be trapped by boundary layer exchange. This is a
process in which small particles that are positioned very
close to the boundary layer (the lining epithelium) can
“flip” into the boundary layer by electrostatic or other
forces. The airborne spores of potentially pathogenic
fungi such as Aspergillus fumigatus, Blastomyces dermatitidis, Histoplasma capsulatum, and Coccidioides
spp. can settle in the alveoli by sedimentation, as do
the spores of several other Aspergillus and Penicillium
species. Some of these fungi, such as Aspergillus clavatus, cause acute allergic alveolitis in people who
have been repeatedly exposed to spore dusts and have
become sensitized. Several occupational diseases are
of this type – farmer’s lung, malt-worker’s lung, etc.
Once a spore has been deposited in the alveoli it persists until it is engulfed by a macrophage. By contrast,
the upper regions of the respiratory tract are lined with
ciliated epithelium which continuously sweeps mucus
upwards and removes any particles deposited there.
The importance of airborne spores in relation to
crop pathology, human ailments, and air quality in
general has led to the design of air-sampling devices
for the monitoring of spore loads. We end this chapter by considering the main types of device and the
principles on which they operate.

The rotorod sampler
The rotorod sampler is a very simple air-sampling
device, used mainly as an experimental tool (Fig. 10.28).
It consists of a U-shaped metal rod with two narrow
upright arms, attached to a spindle. The upright arms
revolve rapidly (about 2000 rev min−1) by a battery or

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

209

Fig. 10.28 The rotorod air sampler (e), and some representative spores and hyphal fragments commonly seen when
rotorod tapes are examined. Images are at various magnifications. (a) Uredospore of Puccinia graminis. (b) Darkly pigmented hyphae of Cladosporium, with a spore of Alternaria. (c) Various pigmented spores, including Cladosporium (in
the lower part of the frame). (d) An immature spore of Epicoccum purpurascens attached to a hyphal fragment.

electric motor. In order to sample spores and other
airborne particles, the arms are covered with narrow
strips of double-sided, transparent adhesive tape so
that spores impact on the tape and can be examined
with a microscope. This apparatus is cheap and
portable, and is highly efficient at trapping relatively
large particles, in the range 10–30 µm diameter,
including pollen grains and the spores of most leaf fungi.
It is much less efficient at trapping small particles. It
can be used to home-in on the source of a particular
type of spore, by making successive samplings in a small
area. For example, it has been used in a field site
in southern Britain to find the source of spores of
Pithomyces chartarum, a toxigenic fungus that causes the
facial eczema condition of sheep (see Fig. 7.20).

the orifice impact as a narrow band on a reel (double
arrowhead in Fig. 10.29) covered with transparent
sticky tape. The reel rotates slowly past the orifice on
a daily or weekly cycle, providing a continuous record
of the particles present in the air throughout the
sampling period. Finally, the tape is removed, cut
into sections representing different time periods, and
examined microscopically. Like the rotorod sampler,
the Burkard sampler is based on the principle of
impaction. The air entering the orifice is travelling
at relatively low speed, so only the larger (heavier) particles are deposited on the tape. These include many
pollen grains, the larger spores of plant-pathogenic
fungi, and the spores of many common allergens.

The Anderson spore sampler
The Burkard spore sampler
The Burkard spore sampler (Fig. 10.29) is a continuous
monitoring device that works on the same principle
as the rotorod sampler. It is used commonly in crop
epidemiology and for monitoring allergen levels,
including the pollen and spore counts announced on
radio and television.
This sampler consists of a sealed drum with a narrow slit orifice (arrowhead in Fig. 10.29) beneath a
weather-shield. Spores and other particles entering

The Anderson spore sampler (Fig. 10.30) is perhaps the
most ingenious and is claimed, with some justification, to simulate the deposition of airborne particles
in the human respiratory tract (Fig. 10.31). It consists
of a stack of perforated metal plates which fit together
to form an airtight cylinder, with space for open
agar-filled Petri dishes to be inserted between them. Each
metal plate has the same number of holes in its base,
but these holes become progressively smaller down the
stack. Air is drawn in at the top, and down through

>

(a)

(b)

Fig. 10.29 (a,b) The Burkard continuous monitoring sampler in assembled form (a) showing the air intake orifice, arrowhead and (b) showing the reel covered with adhesive tape (double arrowhead) on which the spores are trapped.

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 10.30 (a) The Anderson spore sampler in assembled form, and (b) three of the metal disks with perforations in
their bases. (c–e) Examples of colonies from agar plates at different levels in an Anderson sampler.

FUNGAL SPORES, SPORE DORMANCY, AND SPORE DISPERSAL

211

Fig. 10.31 Representation of the Anderson sampler, which simulates the deposition of different
sized particles in the human respiratory tract.

the apparatus by a motor-driven suction pump at the
base.
The air striking the first agar plate is travelling at low
speed, so only large particles will impact on this plate.
Any particles that do not impact are carried round
the agar plate in the airstream and pass through the
perforations at the next stage, and this is repeated
down the whole stack of plates. Since the same volume of air has to pass through successively smaller perforations (while the number of perforations remains
the same), its speed is increased progressively as it exits
the perforations, and this causes successively smaller
particles to impact on the agar plates. In fact even
the smallest spores such as those of the actinomycetes
Thermoactinomyces vulgaris and Faenia rectivirgula (1–
2 µm) will impact at the high air speeds on the lower
agar plates. These spores cause debilitating respiratory
conditions such as “farmer’s lung” (acute allergic
alveolitis).
It is important to note that all the metal plates
in an Anderson sampler have perforations that are
large enough for spores of all sizes to pass through
them. So the Anderson sampler is not a sieving device.
Instead, it sorts the airborne particles according to
their momentum (mass × velocity). In this respect it
acts on the same principle as the rotorod and Burkard
spore traps.
After this sampler has run for an appropriate time,
depending on the spore load, it is dismantled and the
agar plates are incubated to identify the colonies that
grow on them. In the example shown (the bottom row
of Fig. 10.30) the agar plates were, from left to right,
colonies from one of the uppermost agar plates,

colonies from the center of the stack of agar plates,
and colonies from the lowest agar plate, consisting
entirely of small actinomycete colonies. The agar plate
at the extreme right is an example of a split plate with
three different types of agar, designed to detect different types of organism simultaneously.

Cited references
Adams, M.J. (1991) Transmission of plant viruses by
fungi. Annals of Applied Biology 118, 479–492.
Brasier, C.M. (1995) Episodic selection as a force in fungal
microevolution, with special reference to clonal speciation and hybrid introgression. Canadian Journal of
Botany 73, S1213–S1221.
Brunt, A.A. & Richards, K.E. (1989) Biology and molecular biology of furoviruses. Advances in Virus Research
36, 1–32.
Carter, M.V. (1965) Ascospore deposition of Eutypa armeniacae. Australian Journal of Agricultural Research 16,
825–836.
Cho, C.W. & Fuller, M.F. (1989) Ultrastructural organization of freeze-substituted zoospores of Phytophthora
palmivora. Canadian Journal of Botany 67, 1493–1499.
Coley-Smith, J. (1987) Alternative methods of controlling
white rot disease of Allium. In: Innovative Approaches to
Plant Disease Control (Chet, I., ed.), pp. 161–177. Wiley,
New York.
Deacon, J.W. & Donaldson, S.P. (1993) Molecular recognition in the homing responses of zoosporic fungi,
with special reference to Pythium and Phytophthora.
Mycological Research 97, 1153–1171.
Deacon, J.W. & Mitchell, R.T. (1985) Toxicity of oat roots,
oat root extracts, and saponins to zoospores of Pythium

212

CHAPTER 10

spp. and other fungi. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 84, 479–487.
Deacon, J.W., Donaldson, S.J. & Last, F.T. (1983)
Sequences and interactions of mycorrhizal fungi on
birch. Plant and Soil 71, 257–262.
Fox, F.M. (1986) Groupings of ectomycorrhizal fungi on
birch and pine, based on establishment of mycorrhizas
on seedlings from spores in unsterile soils. Transactions
of the British Mycological Society 87, 371–380.
Gregory, P.H. (1973) Microbiology of the Atmosphere, 2nd edn.
Leonard Hill, Aylesbury.
Gubler, F. & Hardham, A.R. (1988) Secretion of adhesive
material during encystment of Phytophthora cinnamomi
zoospores, characterized by immunogold labeling with
monoclonal antibodies to components of peripheral
vesicles. Journal of Cell Science 90, 225–235.
Hardham, A.R. (1995) Polarity of vesicle distribution in
oomycete zoospores: development of polarity and
importance for infection. Canadian Journal of Botany
73(suppl.) S400–407.
Hardham, A.R. (2001) Cell biology of fungal infection of
plants. In: The Mycota VIII. Biology of the Fungal Cell
(Howard, R.J. & Gow, N.A.R., eds), pp. 91–123. SpringerVerlag, Berlin.
Hardham, A.R., Cahill, D.M., Cope, M., Gabor, B.K.,
Gubler, F. & Hyde, G.J. (1994) Cell surface antigens of
Phytophthora spores: biological and taxonomic characterization. Protoplasma 181, 213–232.

Hiruki, C. & Teakle, D.S. (1987) Soil-borne viruses of
plants. In: Current Topics in Vector Research, vol. 3
(Harris, K.F., ed.), pp. 177–215. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Hsu, S.C. & Lockwood, J.L. (1973) Soil fungistasis: behavior of nutrient-independent spores and sclerotia in a
model system. Phytopathology 63, 334–337.
Ingold, C.T. (1971) Fungal Spores and their Dispersal.
Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Lacey, J. (1988) Aerial dispersal and the development of
microbial communities. In: Micro-organisms in Action:
concepts and applications in microbial ecology (Lynch, J.M.
& Hobbie, J.E., eds), pp. 207–237. Blackwell Scientific,
Oxford.
Lockwood, J.L. (1977) Fungistasis in soils. Biological
Reviews 52, 1–43.
Mitchell, A.G. & Brasier, C.M. (1994) Contrasting structure
of European and North American populations of
Ophiostoma ulmi. Mycological Research 98, 576–582.
Moss, S. (1986) The Biology of Marine Fungi. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Reichle, R.E. & Fuller, M.F. (1967) The fine structure of
Blastocladiella emersonii zoospores. American Journal of
Botany 54, 81–92.
Ron, E.Z. & Rosenberg, E. (2001) Natural roles of biosurfactants. Environmental Microbiology 3, 229–236.
Warburton, A.J. & Deacon, J.W. (1998) Transmembrane Ca2+
fluxes associated with zoospore encystment and cyst
germination by the phytopathogen Phytophthora parasitica.
Fungal Genetics and Biology 25, 54–62.

Chapter 11

Fungal ecology: saprotrophs

This chapter is divided into the following major sections:
• a theoretical model: the concept of life-history
strategies
• the biochemical and molecular toolbox for fungal
ecology
• a “universal” decomposition sequence
• the fungal community of composts
• fungal decomposers in the root zone
• fungal communities in decaying wood
The importance of fungi in ecosystem processes is undeniable. Fungi are the main agents of decomposition
in many terrestrial and aquatic environments. They are
particularly important in the breakdown and recycling of cellulose and hemicelluloses, which together
account for nearly 70% of all the plant wall material
that is recycled annually. In addition, fungi have a
unique role in degrading woody substrates, which
contain cellulose intimately complexed with lignin
(lignocellulose). And, fungi degrade many other
natural and manmade materials, causing serious
economic losses.
In previous chapters we dealt with the physiology,
growth, genetics, and dispersal of fungi – the basis
for understanding fungal ecology. But when we turn
to fungi in natural environments we face a major
problem, because natural communities are extremely
complex: they contain many types of substrate,
interacting species, and microhabitats. Therefore, at
a practical level we need to find well-defined communities that can be dissected to provide key insights

into fungal behavior. We will do this by focusing on
a few natural “model” systems that have been well
researched – the leaf zone, leaf litter, the root zone,
self-heating composts, and wood decay. The principles
derived from these natural model systems apply more
generally across the fungal kingdom. We will also
explore the biochemical and molecular toolbox that
enables us to track and identify fungi in complex
natural materials.

A theoretical model: the concept of
life-history strategies
Ecology lends itself to theoretical models as a basis for
synthesizing complex information. The references at the
end of this chapter cite some key publications in this
field. Here we will briefly discuss one of these models,
first developed by animal ecologists, then applied to
plants and later to fungi – the concept of life-history
strategies (Fig. 11.1).
Initially, ecologists developed the concept of rselected and K-selected organisms, these being the two
extreme expressions of the life history of an organism.
The r-selected organisms (ruderals) establish themselves
and grow rapidly in suitable conditions, but after a short
phase of growth they produce many offspring, each of
which has only a low chance of reproductive success.
Weed plants are classic examples of this strategy, as are
many of the fast-growing fungi of the Zygomycota
(Mucor, Rhizopus, etc. – see Chapter 2). At the other
extreme, K-selected organisms typically establish and
develop slowly, live for a long time, and produce few
offspring, but each of these offspring has a significant

214

CHAPTER 11

(Fig. 11.1) representing the extreme expressions of
ruderal, stress-tolerant, or K-selected behavior. In theory, any organism should be able to be placed within
this triangle, depending on its degree of expression
of the three primary strategies, ruderal behavior,
stress-tolerance, or K-selection, renamed combative
behavior in the case of fungi. The value of this and
other theoretical models is discussed by Andrews
(1992).

The biochemical and molecular toolbox for
fungal ecology
Assessing the fungal content of natural
materials by biochemical “signature
molecules”
Fig. 11.1 A method of defining the life-history strategy
of a fungus according to its degree of expression of the
three “primary strategies” – ruderal behavior (R), K-selected
behavior, or combative behavior (K/C) and stress-tolerance.

chance of establishing in a new environment. The
larger mammals are good examples of this, as (in some
respects) are the Basidiomycota that produce perennial
fruiting bodies on trees (Fig. 11.2). So the distinction
between r- and K-selected organisms is, in essence, a
distinction between how these types of organism
invest their food resources for producing offspring.
A third factor, stress-tolerance, was added to the
two original life-history strategies, creating a triangle

(a)

Several biochemical methods have been used to estimate the fungal content of natural materials, but all
have limitations. One of the early methods developed
in the 1970s was to determine the chitin content of
soils and other materials, by hydrolysing chitin to the
monomer N-acetylglucosamine, which can be assayed
colorimetrically. This method has also been used to
estimate the fungal content of plant tissues colonized
by plant pathogens or mycorrhizal fungi. The main
drawback is that the chitin content of fungal walls can
vary in different fungi, in different growth conditions,
or at different stages of a fungal life cycle. Also, it is
difficult to distinguish between the chitin of fungal
walls and the chitin of insect exoskeletons in natural

(b)

Fig. 11.2 Ganoderma adspersum, which exhibits predominantly K-selected behavior. This fungus progressively rots the
heartwood of standing trees (especially beech, Fagus sylvatica) and produces woody, perennial, hoof-like fruitbodies
which release millions of spores. The current year’s young growth is white.

FUNGAL ECOLOGY: SAPROTROPHS

215

materials. This limits the value of chitin assays except
in well-defined model systems.
An alternative method is to estimate the ergosterol
content by extracting ergosterol from a sample and
assaying it by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and UV detection at 280 nm. Ergosterol
is the characteristic sterol of most fungal membranes
and is absent from plants and other soil organisms.
However, again the ergosterol content can vary
markedly between fungal taxa. In a critical analysis
of all such methods, including the assay of other “signature molecules” such as phospholipid fatty acids,
Olsson et al. (2003) concluded that the comparison of
biomass between different fungi is very difficult using
any currently available biochemical marker.

antibody is used which binds to the primary antibody
and which is also tagged with a fluorescent compound
so that the target fungus can be seen under a fluorescence microscope. Alternatively, the secondary antibody
can be linked to an enzyme which releases a dye from
a colored substrate. This technique, termed ELISA
(enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay), can be used
to quantify the amount of specific antigen in a sample.
The main problem with both techniques is that the
antibodies can cross-react with the antigens of other
fungi. Monoclonal antibodies offer more specificity
because each is derived from a single cell line producing one specific antibody. An example of their use in
a different context was discussed in Chapter 10 (see
Fig. 10.16).

Antibody techniques

Fluorescent vital dyes

Fluorescent antibody techniques enable fungi to be
identified on the basis of their surface or internal antigens. Antibodies are raised to the antigens of a specific
fungus by standard techniques, involving the inoculation of rabbits, then the antibodies are used to detect
the fungus in a natural sample. For this, a secondary

Fungi can be visualized directly by treatment with
fluorescent dyes (fluorochromes) that bind to the cell
surface or accumulate in specific cellular organelles. The
cells are then viewed under a fluorescence microscope
(Fig. 11.3). Some of these dyes, when pre-loaded into
hyphae, can be translocated for up to 9 mm as the

Fig. 11.3 Examples of some fluorescent vital dyes; see color images on the Internet for higher resolution. (a) Hyphae
of Sclerotium cepivorum treated with CMFDA, which accumulates in fungal vacuoles and shows as bright green fluorescence. (b) Hyphae and spores of Pythium oligandrum, stained with Cellufluor which binds to chitin in fungal walls
and fluoresces blue. (c) Hyphae of Fusarium oxysporum stained with DiI and DiO, giving green or red fluorescence of
the fungal membranes. (d) Hyphae of Botrytis cinerea stained with CMAC, giving blue fluorescence of the vacuoles.
(e) Hyphae of Fusarium oxysporum stained with Nile red, showing intense yellow fluorescence of lipid droplets, while
the cytoplasm fluoresces orange.

216

CHAPTER 11

hyphal tips extend. They can potentially be used to trace
the growth and interactions of fungi in soils or other
natural substrata. They also distinguish between living
and dead cells if the dye is accumulated by an active
metabolic process. Soils have a strong quenching
effect on fluorescence, which limits the usefulness of
fluorochromes in this environment, but fluorescent
vital dyes can be valuable as tracers in microcosm
studies (Stewart & Deacon 1995).
One of the most commonly used fluorochromes
is the stilbene dye, Cellufluor (or Calcofluor White)
which binds to β-1,4 linked polymers in fungal walls
and produces an intense blue fluorescence. However,
it does not stain the cytoplasm, so it cannot be used
to distinguish living from dead hyphae. Another
common fluorochrome, with many applications,
is the phenoxazine dye, Nile red, which is highly
specific for neutral lipids. It enters the cell membrane
and causes lipid droplets to fluoresce bright yellow, while
the cytoplasm fluoresces orange. Another compound,
carboxyfluorescein diacetate (CFDA), is valuable as an
indicator of living fungal hyphae, because it is hydrolysed within the cells to release carboxyfluorescein,
a hydrophilic compound that accumulates in vacuoles
and fluoresces bright green. Two chloromethyl dyes
(chloromethylfluorescein diacetate, CMFDA, and
aminochloromethyl coumarin, CMAC) are also
membrane-permeable. Once inside the hyphae they
are thought to undergo a reaction mediated by
glutathione-S-transferase, resulting in a cell-impermeable
product. The products of both of these dyes accumulate in vacuoles and fluoresce either green (CMFDA)
or blue (CMAC). They are very photostable and can
retain their fluorescence for at least 72 hours. Two
further types of fluorochrome are widely used: the
carbocyanine dyes called DiIC18 and DiOC18, which
are lipophilic and bind to membranes, producing
red and green fluorescence respectively, and DAPI (4′
6-diamidino-2-phenylindole-2HCl) a blue-fluorescent
compound that intercalates in the A-T-rich regions of
DNA and enables nuclei to be seen (Fig. 11.4).

Identifying fungi by oligonucleotide
probes
As described in Chapter 9, an increasing range of
molecular tools such as RFLP, RAPD, AFLP (amplified
fragment length polymorphism), or fluorescent
AFLP can be used for tracking fungi. All are available
in kit form and require no detailed knowledge of
molecular biology. They have had a significant impact
on studies of fungal population biology.
More recently, the technique of fluorescence in-situ
hybridization (FISH) has been used widely by microbial ecologists (and also for “chromosome painting” in
genetics), but only a few fungal ecologists have used
this technique to date. It is based on the principle that
single-stranded DNA or RNA probes will hybridize
with complementary nucleic acid sequences in an
environmental sample. Fluorescent labeling of the
probes enables these nucleic acid sequences to be
visualized even if the organism cannot be cultured. The
oligonucleotide probes are typically based on the
small subunit (18S) ribosomal RNA gene sequences
(Chapter 9). Some are universal probes, complementary
to a 16S rRNA or 18S rRNA gene sequence found in
all known organisms – for example [5′-GAA TTA CCG
CGG TAA CTG CTG-3′]. Others are specific for particular groups of organisms, and are termed signature
sequences. For example:
• the sequence UUCCCG is found in more than 95%
of bacteria but never in the archaea or eukaryotes;
• the sequence CACACACCG is found only in archaea, never in bacteria or eukaryotes;
• the sequence AAACUUAAAG is found in all eukaryotes and archae but never in bacteria.
Other sequences can be constructed for particular
species, an example being a probe that was developed
specifically to study the population dynamics of
Sydowia polyspora (Aureobasidium pullulans) on leaf surfaces (Li et al. 1997). A colorimetric variant of this
technique, termed CISH, can be used when the autofluorescence of fungi or their substrates precludes the
use of FISH (Schröder et al. 2000).

A “generalized” decomposition sequence
No man is an Iland, Intire of it selfe; every man
is a peece of the Continent, a part of the maine
. . .” (John Donne 1624)

Fig. 11.4 Nuclei fluorescing blue in a hypha stained with
the nucleus-specific dye, DAPI.

The decomposition of organic matter is brought
about by a wide range of fungi and other organisms
(bacteria, nematodes, mites, springtails, etc.) acting in

FUNGAL ECOLOGY: SAPROTROPHS

consort. The types of organisms that are active in
these communities can vary, but the overall course
of decomposition is similar in many situations (Fig. 11.5)
because it involves an overlapping sequence of activities of fungi with different patterns of behavior and

217

different abilities to degrade particular types of substrate
(Table 11.1).
In this section we will look at the main stages in
a generalized decomposition sequence, starting with
the organisms that colonize the surfaces of living

Host death
V
Epiphytic fungi
Weak parasites
Pioneer saprotrophic fungi
Polymer-degrading fungi
Secondary opportunistic fungi
Degraders of recalcitrant compounds

Fig. 11.5 Representation of the overlapping phases of activity of different types of fungi in a decomposition sequence.
Table 11.1 The main behavioral groupings of decomposer fungi.
Group

Features

1. Resident microbes on
living tissues

(i) Grow on generally low levels of available substrates
(ii) Often tolerate stress conditions
(iii) Are usually displaced when the host tissues die

2. Endophytes, weak
parasites and pathogens

(i) Grow initially by tolerating host resistance factors or other special conditions
(ii) Generally utilize simple soluble substrates or storage compounds but not
structural polymers
(iii) Generally poor competitors for dead organic matter

3. Pioneer saprotrophic fungi

(i) Generally utilize simple soluble substrates or storage compounds but not
structural polymers
(ii) Good competitors, with fast growth, etc. and short life cycles
(iii) Cannot defend a resource against subsequent invaders

4. Polymer-degrading fungi

(i) Degrade the main structural polymers (cellulose, hemicelluloses, chitin, etc.)
(ii) Have an extended growth phase, defending a resource by antibiosis or by
sequestering mineral nutrients, etc.
(iii) Substrate-specialized, and sometimes tolerant of stress factors (extremes of
temperature, pH, etc.)

5. Degraders of recalcitrant
materials

(i) Specialized to degrade recalcitrant organic materials (lignin etc.) and gain
access to polymers (cellulose etc.) complexed with them
(ii) Long growth phase, and defend a resource by antagonism or mutual
inhibition (deadlock)
(iii) Can gain access to mineral nutrients (nitrogen, etc.) that previous colonizers
have exploited

6. Secondary opportunists

(i) Nutritionally opportunistic: grow on dead remains of other fungi, insect
exoskeletons, etc., or parasitize other fungi, or grow commensally with
polymer-degraders.
(ii) Tolerant of the metabolic byproducts of other fungi
(iii) Often antagonistic

218

CHAPTER 11

tissues, through to the final stages of decomposition
that result in the production of soil humus – a highly
complex mixture of organic compounds that persist for
tens or hundreds of years and that play a vital role in
soil fertility. For reviews of decomposition sequences
the following texts are strongly recommended: Carroll
& Wicklow (1992), Harper & Webster (1964), and
Hudson (1968).

The resident fungal population of living
tissues
The surfaces of all higher organisms support a population of bacteria and yeasts that grow on the simple,
soluble nutrients that leak from the host tissues. This
is as true of humans as it is of the living leaves of plants
– it is estimated that, of all the cells in a human
body, fewer than 0.1% are human cells! Normally,
these resident microbes cause no harm and can even
be beneficial in suppressing invasion by potential
pathogens. But they can become invasive as the host
tissues begin to senesce, initiating the decomposition
process.
The yeasts and yeast-like fungi that colonize the
surfaces of living plant leaves have been studied in
detail. They grow in an environment termed the
phyllosphere, where the conditions are relatively
hostile because of exposure to UV irradiation and wide
fluctuations in temperature, moisture and nutrient
levels. Several common yeasts are found in this environment, including both Ascomycota and Basidiomycota, such as species of Candida, Cryptococcus,
Rhodotorula, Torulopsis, and Sporobolomyces. Many of
them have carotenoid pigments, which quench the toxic
effects of reactive oxygen species (Chapter 8). Several
also produce capsules and slime for adhesion to the
plant surfaces. One of the basidiomycetous yeasts,
Filobasidiella (Cryptococcus) neoformans, is notable
because it has become one of the most serious lifethreatening pathogens of immunocompromised people
in western societies, and a different form of this
fungus (variety gattii) causes an endemic disease of
immunocompetent people in Australia, Papua New
Guinea, and parts of Africa, India, south-east Asia
and Central and South America (Chapter 16). This
variety of the fungus is commonly associated with
eucalypt trees, and the extensive plantations of eucalypts that have been established outside of Australia
may provide the inoculum source for spread of this
human disease.
In stark contrast to this, the yeast Candida oleophila,
which grows on leaf and fruit surfaces, has been
marketed commercially as a biological control agent.
It is applied to fruit surfaces, where it competes for
nutrients, helping to reduce the incidence of fruit-rot

fungi that invade through minor wounds (Chapter
12).
The distribution of leaf surface yeasts can be studied
by pressing leaves against the surface of malt-extract
agar, then removing the leaves and incubating the agar
plates (Fig. 11.6). The surfaces of young leaves support
a relatively low microbial population, but as the
leaves start to senesce the population increases and is
often dominated by dimorphic fungi such as Sydowia
polyspora (Aureobasidium pullulans; see Fig. 6.7) and a
yellow Candida species that produces a fringe of fungal hyphae with clusters of yeast cells (Fig. 11.6).

Endophytes, weak parasites, and
pathogens
In recent years, many fungi have been discovered to
grow as symptomless endophytes within plants that
show no obvious sign of infection or distress. Often
they occur sparsely as hyphae in the intercellular fluids
and wall spaces of their plant hosts. A specialized group
of these fungi – the “clavicipitaceous endophytes” –
are known to produce toxic alkaloids in grasses
(Chapter 14). Other fungal endophytes have attracted
interest as potential sources of novel metabolites
(bioprospecting), although recent studies of the endophytic Colletotrichum isolates from tropical rainforests
in Guyana suggest that the diversity of endophytic fungi
(and thus of their products) may have been overestimated: most of the endophytes were nonhost-specific
and were found repeatedly in different samples (Lu
et al. 2004).
Pathogens and weak parasites colonize living plant
tissues or tissues that are beginning to senesce. They
gain an advantage over purely saprotrophic fungi
because they tolerate or overcome the host defense
factors. They can remain active for a time after the
tissues have died, usually by exploiting the more
readily utilizable nutrients. Several mitosporic fungi
that produce melanized hyphae and spores are often
seen at this stage. They include Alternaria spp. and
Cladosporium spp., and a range of similar fungi (Fig. 11.7)
which utilize sugars and other soluble nutrients,
including the sugar-rich “honeydew” that aphids
excrete when they tap into plant phloem. Several
of these fungi grow well in laboratory culture when
supplied with soluble cellulose sources such as
carboxymethylcellulose, but they seldom grow well
on “crystalline” cellulose (filter paper, cotton fabric, etc.).
This suggests that they might utilize the swollen
(hydrated) cellulose and hemicelluloses in moist plant
tissues, as explained in Chapter 6.
Some plant pathogens that attack living plant tissues
can continue to grow after the plant has died, by
slowly using the dead tissues that they colonized

(a)

(b)

Fig. 11.6 (a) Leaf print of a mature birch leaf, incubated on agar, showing a predominance of a yellow Candida-like
fungus that produced a fringe of hyphae from the leaf margin (arrowhead). (b) A single colony of the Candida-like
fungus, showing widely spaced radiating hyphae with clusters of yeast-like cells at intervals along the hyphae.

Fig. 11.7 An assortment of (mainly) darkly pigmented spores of fungi that typically colonize the dead or dying tissues
of stem bases and the above-ground parts of senescing leaves and stems.

220

CHAPTER 11

(a)

(b)

Fig. 11.8 (a,b) Darkly pigmented sapstain fungi growing in the medullary rays of felled trees.

while the plant was still alive. Classic examples of this
are the stem base fungi such as the take-all fungus
(Gaeumannomyces graminis, Chapter 12) and the eyespot
fungus (Tapesia yallundae) of cereal crops. The inoculum surviving from the previous growing season can
then initiate infection of a subsequent cereal crop.

Pioneer saprotrophic fungi
Several species of Mucor, Rhizopus and other
Zygomycota are commonly found in soils or fecalenriched materials, and also in the rhizosphere (root
zone) of plants, where they utilize sugars and other
simple soluble nutrients. Several Pythium species also
fall into this category because they colonize fresh
plant residues in soil, although they are best known
as pathogens of living root tips and other fleshy plant
tissues (Chapter 12).
The spores of these and similar fungi germinate and
grow rapidly in response to soluble nutrients, and
within a few days they produce a further batch of asexual dispersal spores or sexual resting spores (see Fig. 2.8).
They usually cannot degrade the more complex structural polymers (cellulose, etc.). In laboratory culture they
are found to be intolerant of the antibiotics or growth
metabolites of other fungi, and they do not themselves
produce antibiotics. So, these pioneer fungi typically
have a short exploitative phase and a high competitive ability.
The sapstain fungi that rapidly colonize newly
felled trees are typical pioneer saprotrophs. They grow
in the nonwoody (parenchymatous) medullary rays
and they discolor the wood by their darkly pigmented

hyphae (Fig. 11.8). Although they cause no structural
damage to the timber, they can seriously reduce its
marketable value. These staining fungi include several species of Ophiostoma (related to Ophiostoma ulmi
which causes Dutch elm disease; Chapter 10).
Vanneste et al. (2002) describe how natural products
and biological control agents are being developed to
control the sapstain fungi in New Zealand. However,
similar “bluestain” fungi such as Chlorosplenium aeruginascens (Ascomycota) cause an attractive turquoise
pigmentation of wood. This used to be highly valued
for producing inlaid veneers in decorative objects, termed
Tunbridge Ware because the industry was based in the
Kentish town of Tunbridge Wells.

Polymer-degrading fungi
Several fungi have an extended phase of growth on the
major structural polymers such as cellulose, hemicelluloses, or chitin. Once established, these fungi tend to
defend the resource against potential invaders, either
by sequestering a critically limiting nutrient such
as nitrogen or by producing inhibitory metabolites
(Chapter 6).
The large number of fungi in this category differ
in the types of substrate they utilize, their different
environmental requirements, and their growth in
different phases of a decomposition sequence. The
following examples illustrate this diversity.
When cereal straw and other cellulose-rich materials
are buried in soil they are colonized by fungi such
as Fusarium, Chaetomium, Stachybotrys, Humicola, or
Trichoderma spp. The Fusarium spp. tend to be favored

FUNGAL ECOLOGY: SAPROTROPHS

by low water potentials (drought stress) because
they can grow at almost undiminished rates when
the water potential is lowered to −5 MPa in culture
(Chapter 8). Trichoderma spp. often are favored by soil
acidity (pH stress) because they can grow at about
pH 3.0 in culture. A spectrum of salt-tolerant cellulolytic
fungi is found on plant remains in estuarine waters (e.g.
Lulworthia spp., Halosphaeria hamata, and Zalerion varium) and a different spectrum is found in freshwater
streams (some of the fungi with tetraradiate spores, such
as Tetracladium, Lemonniera, and Alatospora – Chapter
10). Chitinous materials are colonized by yet another
group of fungi, such as Mortierella spp. (Zygomycota)
in soil or Chytridium confervae (Chytridiomycota) in
freshwater habitats.
Polymer-degrading fungi can exploit different
microhabitats, and thereby coexist in a single substrate resource. Evidence for this has come from
microscopical examination of transparent cellulose
film (“Cellophane”) buried in soil (Tribe 1960). In wet
soils the film is colonized by cellulolytic chytrids (e.g.
Rhizophlyctis rosea; Fig. 11.9) and chytrid-like organisms
(e.g. Hyphochytrium catenoides). These degrade the
cellulose locally by forming finely branched rhizoids
between the layers of the film. Other parts of the film
can be colonized by mycelial fungi such as Humicola
grisea, Fusarium spp., and Rhizoctonia. The Rhizoctonia
and Fusarium colonies form loose networks over the surface of the film, whereas Humicola is seen as localized,
compact colonies that “root” into the film and produce
fans of hyphae within it, like the fans of Pythium
graminicola shown in Fig. 11.9.

Fig. 11.9 A small piece of transparent cellulose film
(about 3 × 2 cm) retrieved from soil and stained with
trypan blue to show fungi growing at different
levels in the film. Rhizophlyctis rosea produces finely
branched rhizoidal systems. At a different plane of
focus, Pythium graminicola produces finger-like branching
systems.

221

Fungi that degrade recalcitrant (resistant)
polymers
Fungi that degrade the more resistant polymers such
as lignocellulose (cellulose complexed with lignin)
often predominate in the later stages of decomposition.
Several of them are Basidiomycota, including Mycena
galopus, a common small toadstool in the leaf litter
of woodlands. Other common examples are the fairy
ring fungi, frequently seen in old grasslands. These
fungi grow on the thick mat of accumulated dead
leaf sheaths of grasslands and spread progressively
outwards year by year. Several fungi produce these
rings, including the common edible field mushroom
(Agaricus campestris). They usually cause no damage
because they grow on dead organic matter, and often
the only sign of their presence is a ring of more vigorous, lush growth of the grass, resulting from mineral
nutrients released from breakdown of the organic
matter. But the “fairy ring champignon” Marasmius
oreades is an interesting exception because it can kill
the grass (Fig. 11.10) as the rings spread progressively
outwards. The reason is that this fungus produces a mass
of fungal hyphae just beneath the grass surface,
and these hyphae dry in mid summer, becoming
hydrophobic and preventing water from penetrating
the soil. Even fungicides are ineffective in preventing
death of the grass, but surfactants (including dilute
washing-up liquids) can reduce much of this damage.
Keratin-degrading fungi, related to the dermatophytic pathogens of humans and other animals
(Chapter 16), are found in the later stages of decomposition of hair or animals’ hooves. They might occur
earlier, but they become conspicuous only after an
initial phase of exploitation by Zygomycota and
Penicillium spp. which utilize the more readily available
proteins and lipids.
The ecological success of fungi that develop later
in the decomposition sequence is related to their specialized ability to degrade polymers that most other
fungi cannot utilize. However, it does not necessarily
follow that they use these complex polymers as their
main energy source. In fact, Mycena galopus, mentioned above, cannot degrade lignin in culture unless
it is also supplied with cellulose or hemicelluloses as
more readily utilizable substrates. The chief attribute
of these fungi seems to be that they degrade or modify
the recalcitrant polymers and so gain access to other
substrates that are chemically or physically complexed
with the resistant polymers. Much of the cellulose
in plant cell walls is intimately associated with lignin,
either covalently bonded to it or encrusted by it,
and this “lignocellulose” is largely unavailable to
fungi that cannot modify the lignin. In one of the

222

(a)

CHAPTER 11

(b)

(d)

(c)

(e)

Fig. 11.10 Part of a fairy ring caused by Marasmius oreades (a), and part of the turf lifted to show the mass of white
fungal hyphae just below the soil surface (b). A ring of small toadstools of Marasmius (c) develops near the killing zone
in autumn. (d) Close-up of two fruitbodies of Marasmius, showing the typical widely spaced gills. (e) Toadstools of
another fairy-ring fungus – the waxy, scarlet-colored Hygrocybe sp. These toadstools form rings of fruitbodies but they
do not kill the turf.

best-studied lignin-degrading fungi, Phanerochaete
chrysosporium, the production of lignin-degrading
enzymes is strongly stimulated by a critical shortage of
nitrogen. This could explain why these fungi occur in
the later stages of decomposition – they might need to
wait until other fungi have sequestered most of the available nitrogen.

Secondary (opportunistic) invaders
At many stages in the decomposition of natural materials there are opportunities for secondary invaders to
grow. Some of these opportunists might grow in close
association with polymer degraders, using some of
the breakdown products released by enzyme action.
As discussed later, Thermomyces lanuginosus seems to
behave in this way in composts. Other secondary
invaders are known to parasitize other fungi in culture

(e.g. Pythium oligandrum, Chapter 12) or they grow on
dead hyphal remains; yet others (e.g. Mortierella spp.)
might grow on the fecal pellets or shed exoskeletons
of microarthropods that are abundant in decomposing
materials. The range of potential behavior patterns of
these fungi makes it difficult to generalize, but their
features commonly include: (i) nutritional opportunism, because they can scavenge low levels of nutrients, and (ii) the ability to tolerate the metabolic
byproducts of other fungi.
Eventually all the decomposable materials will be
utilized, leaving a residue of humic substances (soil
humus). These are heterogeneous polymers consisting
of a framework of aromatic and aliphatic molecules
complexed with proteins and sugars. They are essentially nondegradable and they play an essential role in
soil fertility by enhancing soil structure and water
retention, and by providing ion-exchange sites for
micronutrients in the soil.

FUNGAL ECOLOGY: SAPROTROPHS

The fungal community of composts
Composts can be made from any type of decomposable organic matter, stacked into a heap (or long
heaps called windrows in the case of mushroom composts) and supplied with adequate mineral nutrients
(especially nitrogen), moisture, and aeration. They are
used on a vast scale for the commercial production of
mushrooms (Agaricus), where the compost normally
consists of a mixture of cereal straw and animal manure. They are also used extensively for the processing
of horticultural and urban wastes.
Provided that the basic requirements are met, the
decomposition process follows an essentially standard
pattern, shown in Fig. 11.11 for an experimental
compost made from wheat straw supplemented with
nitrogen in the form of ammonium. Within a few days
the temperature in the bulk of the compost rises to
70–80°C, caused by the heat generated when microorganisms grow on the more readily utilizable nutrients. Bacteria are primarily responsible for this initial
heating phase. They include the thermophilic actinomycetes that cause farmer’s lung disease (Chapter 10),
and members of the bacterial genus Thermus, which
used to be considered a typical inhabitant of thermal
springs but has recently been found to be almost
universally present in composts and other self-heating
materials. Fungi play only a minor role in the early
stages of composting because they are slower to initiate growth, and the maximum temperature for growth
of any fungus is about 62–65°C (Chapter 8).
After “peak-heating” the compost starts to cool
because most of the microorganisms are killed in the
center of the heap, but some Bacillus spp. can survive
as spores, and other bacteria can recolonize from the

223

surface, giving rise to second and third smaller
temperature peaks. Then the temperature gradually
declines to ambient temperature over 20–30 days.
Bacterial populations remain high throughout this
time, but fungi are considered to play the most important role when they recolonize after peak-heating and
degrade much of the organic matter as the temperature slowly declines.
Chang & Hudson (1967) recognized several behavioral groups of fungi, occurring at different stages of
the composting process. They are modified here for ease
of presentation.
1 A mixture of weak parasites and pioneer saprotrophic fungi are found in the first few days. Many
of them were present on the original material,
including the leaf-surface fungi (Cladosporium, etc.)
and Fusarium spp. which often grow on cereal straw.
A few thermophilic fungi also grow in the first
few days, notably Thermomucor pusillus and Mucor
(or Thermomucor) miehei. These are pioneer saprotrophic fungi, which have maximum growth temperatures of 57–60°C. They are inactivated or killed
by the peak-heating and they do not reappear.
2 Cellulolytic species of Ascomycota and mitosporic
fungi colonize after peak-heating and grow over
the next 10–20 days. High temperature might activate the dormant ascospores of some of these fungi
(Chapter 10). Their incidence can differ between
different types of compost, but these cellulolytic
fungi commonly include Chaetomium thermophile,
Humicola insolens, Thermoascus aurantiacus (Fig. 11.12),
Scytalidium thermophilum, and Aspergillus fumigatus
(see Fig. 8.4). The temperature range of each fungus
is likely to determine how quickly it colonizes
after peak-heating (see Fig. 8.2). For example, C.

Fig. 11.11 Changes in temperature (thick line), populations of mesophilic fungi (broken line), and populations of
thermophilic fungi (narrow line) in a wheat straw compost. (Based on Chang & Hudson 1967)

224

CHAPTER 11

(b)

(a)

(c)

Fig. 11.12 (a) Thermoascus aurantiacus produces a thick, crusty, golden-brown colony on agar. (b) The crusty appearance is due to the presence of many cleistothecia (closed ascocarps) which contain asci. (c) Within each ascus is a
cluster of eight ascospores, shown in different stages of maturity.

thermophile (maximum about 55°C, optimum about
50°C) might start earlier than H. insolens (maximum
about 55°C, optimum about 37°C), and these two
fungi are known to recolonize before A. fumigatus
(maximum 52°C, optimum 37°C). During the prolonged warm-temperature phase after peak-heating
a compost can lose up to half of its original dry
weight, and nearly two-thirds of the main plant
wall components such as cellulose and hemicelluloses
(mixed polymers of arabinose, xylose, mannose,
and glucose). The mitosporic fungus, Thermomyces
lanuginosus (see Fig. 8.3) has a temperature maximum
of about 62°C, and optimum of about 47°C. It
grows during the high temperature phase and is one
of the commonest fungi in all types of compost.
However, it is noncellulolytic, and it seems to
grow as a commensal, utilizing some of the sugars
released by the enzymes of other fungi (see later).
3 As the temperature falls below 35–40°C, the thermophilic fungi start to decline but A. fumigatus
remains active. The compost is then colonized
progressively by mesophilic fungi, including some
mitosporic fungi (e.g. Fusarium, Doratomyces) and
Basidiomycota such as Coprinus cinereus (max. about
40°C but its optimum is much lower). Coprinus spp.
represent the degraders of recalcitrant polymers.
They utilize lignocellulose and are highly antagonistic
to many other fungi, damaging their hyphae on
contact by a process termed hyphal interference
(Chapter 12). Spores of the commercial mushroom,

Agaricus bisporus, can be introduced into the compost once this has cooled to below 30°C. It cannot
be added earlier because of its temperature requirements, but it must be added before Coprinus
becomes established or it will be antagonized. In
practice, this problem is overcome (and the whole
commercial composting process is accelerated) by
pasteurizing commercial composts soon after peak
heating so that most of the resident fungi are killed
before Agaricus is introduced (Chapter 5).

The central role of nitrogen in the
composting process
An adequate supply of mineral nutrients is essential
for composting and for the decomposition of organic
matter in general. A supply of nitrogen is particularly
important, and can often be the rate-limiting factor.
The availability of nitrogen is often expressed in terms
of the carbon-to-nitrogen (C : N) ratio – the ratio of
elemental nitrogen to elemental carbon, assuming
that both the nitrogen and the carbon are available in
usable forms.
To appreciate the significance of this, we must make
two points:
1 Fungal hyphae typically have a C : N ratio of
approximately 10 : 1, although it can vary depending on the age of the hyphae and other factors.

FUNGAL ECOLOGY: SAPROTROPHS

2 During growth on a carbon substrate, fungi convert
approximately one-third of the substrate carbon into
cellular material (a substrate conversion efficiency
of about 33% as explained in Chapter 4). The other
two-thirds is respired to CO2. These values are only
approximate, but they serve as guidelines.
It follows that a material with a C : N ratio of about
30 : 1 is a “balanced” substrate – it can be degraded
rapidly and completely because:
10 of the carbon “units” (units are unspecified) are
incorporated into fungal biomass;
20 of the carbon units are released as CO2;
1 unit of nitrogen is incorporated into fungal
biomass.
Now, consider a material of C : N ratio 100 : 1 (wheat
straw is roughly 80 : 1, sawdust ranges from 350 : 1 to
1250 : 1, and newsprint has essentially no nitrogen).
The fungus starts to grow on this material, but the
available nitrogen is depleted long before all the
organic carbon has been used. Viewed in simple
terms, decomposition will stop at the point where:
10 C units are combined with 1 N unit in the
mycelium;
20 C units have been respired to CO2;
70 C units are left in the residual substrate.

Fig. 11.13 A laboratory experiment simulating
a succession of thermophilic fungi growing on
cellulose (Deacon 1985; see text for details). A.
fum = Aspergillus fumigatus; N = nitrogen; Scyt =
Scytalidium thermophilum; Thermo = Thermoascus
aurantiacus; T.l. = Thermomyces lanuginosus.

225

In effect the fungus is now starved because there is no
nitrogen available for growth. At this point several
things can happen. Some fungi seem to recycle their
cellular nitrogen, perhaps by controlled autolysis of
the older hyphae. Other fungi preferentially allocate
nitrogen to essential metabolic processes – for example,
wood-decay fungi such as Coriolus versicolor seem to
do this (discussed later). A third possibility is to recruit
extra nitrogen from soil, but this is not possible in a
“closed” system such as a compost. In practice, many
of the fungal hyphae will die when nitrogen becomes
limiting, and the nitrogen can then be reused, either
by the remaining cells of the same species or by other
species. The same points apply to any essential mineral
nutrient that is in short supply.

Can nitrogen-depletion drive a
decomposition sequence?
This question arises from the comments above: if
one fungus depletes the available nitrogen and cannot
recycle it, then a proportion of the cells will die and
their products might be used by another fungus later
in the succession.
This possibility has been tested experimentally in
laboratory conditions (Fig. 11.13), with flasks containing 7 g sterile filter paper (almost pure cellulose) plus
nitrate as the nitrogen source (C : N, 200 : 1) and

226

CHAPTER 11

other mineral nutrients. All flasks were inoculated
with the cellulolytic fungus, Chaetomium thermophile
and incubated for 4 weeks at 45°C. At that stage
Chaetomium had degraded 1 g of the original flask
contents but its growth had stopped and there was no
further breakdown after 7 weeks. This was shown to
be due to nitrogen depletion, because the addition of
extra nitrogen at 4 weeks led to further cellulose
breakdown (Fig. 11.13).
Other treatments were also introduced at 4 weeks (the
stage at which Chaetomium was nitrogen-depleted)
but no extra nitrogen was supplied. In all cases these
treatments involved placing a small inoculum block
of a thermophilic fungus on the original Chaetomium
colony. When Scytalidium thermophilum was added
to the Chaetomium flasks at 4 weeks there was no further breakdown of the cellulose, although Scytalidium
can degrade cellulose when grown alone. By contrast,
the addition of either Thermoascus aurantiacus or
Aspergillus fumigatus to the 4-week Chaetomium flasks
led to a further weight loss after 7 weeks. A. fumigatus
was the most effective in this respect – it almost
doubled the original weight loss. These fungi were
seen to grow over the original Chaetomium colony. Even
a noncellulolytic fungus, Thermomyces lanuginosus,
caused some additional weight loss when it was added
after 4 weeks.
The implication of these findings is that the early
colonizers in a substrate succession (in this case
Chaetomium which has the highest temperature
optimum for growth) can be displaced by fungi that
occur later in the succession (e.g. Thermoascus or A.
fumigatus) in conditions of nitrogen starvation.
Basidiomycota (Agaricus bisporus, Coprinus cinereus, etc.)
typically occur late in the succession of fungal activities in natural materials, and many of them have been
shown to use proteins as nitrogen sources. Indeed, A.
bisporus can grow in culture media when nitrogen is
supplied only in the form of living or heat-killed bacteria. We noted earlier that Phanerochaete is induced
to synthesize lignin-degrading enzymes in response to
nitrogen limitation; and in Chapter 12 we will see that
Basidiomycota such as Coprinus disrupt the hyphae
of other fungi on contact, which perhaps provides a
source of organic nitrogen. So it seems that nitrogen
availability is a key factor in fungal successions, and
that the later colonizers have special abilities to obtain
(recycle) the nitrogen that earlier colonizers have
utilized.

Fungal decomposers in the root zone
Living roots provide a continuous input of nutrients
into soil, evidenced by the fact that motile pseudomonads and zoospores of Oomycota or plasmodiophorids

accumulate near the root tips. Amino acids, sugars,
and other organic molecules are found frequently in
root exudates, and the total microbial population
increases progressively with distance behind the tips
until it reaches a plateau. At this point the population
level is likely to represent the “carrying capacity” of the
root – in other words, the rate of continuing nutrient
release is matched by the rate at which these nutrients
are utilized by the existing population.
The zone of soil influenced by the presence of a root
is termed the rhizosphere. As we saw in Chapter 10,
fungal spores can be induced to germinate by the
presence of root exudates or even by small signalling
molecules that may not serve as nutrients. But this
is only the start of a continuous process of root
colonization by saprotrophs, parasites, and pathogens
until, eventually, the roots die and their nutrients are
returned to the soil.
The behavior of roots is difficult to investigate in
field conditions, but this can be done in a glasshouse
if plants are grown in soil containers with a sloping
transparent face so that periodic observations can
be made (the roots being blacked out except during
periods of observation). Figures 11.14 and 11.15 show
the results of one such experiment where groundnut
plants (Arachis hypogea) were grown over a 14-week
period (Krauss & Deacon 1994). The whole visible part
of the root system was traced at weekly intervals, and
the individual roots were scored as being either alive
(white roots) or dead (brown decaying roots or roots
that had disappeared).
Figures 11.14 and 11.15 reveal an astonishingly
high rate or rhizodeposition, i.e. the shedding of root
material into the soil where it becomes available to
the microbial population of the rhizosphere. Although
the total (cumulative) root length increased throughout the period of observation, up to plant maturity at
14 weeks or 20 weeks (depending on the groundnut
cultivar), the maximum length of living (white)
roots on any plant was reached at between 2 and
4 weeks after sowing the seeds. Beyond that time, the
taproot continued to grow and produced more root
laterals, but the rate of root death (disappearance)
exceeded the rate of new root production, leading to
a decline in total root length. An early onset of root
lateral death, 5 weeks after sowing, was also recorded
in a field plot of groundnuts in Malawi. So, at least for
this crop, there is a continuous process of “root shedding” which would provide a continuous input of
organic matter for fungi and other soil microbes.
Other studies have focused on the roots of cereals
and grasses, using vital dyes to follow the progressive
death of the root cortex. Acridine orange penetrates
roots, binds to the DNA in the nuclei, and fluoresces
bright green under a fluorescence microscope (Fig.
11.16a,c). Alternatively, roots can be infiltrated with

FUNGAL ECOLOGY: SAPROTROPHS

227

4

Fig. 11.14 Cumulative root production (white symbols), cumulative root decay (black symbols below
the line), and white living roots (black symbols
above the line) of groundnut plants grown for 14
weeks (near-maturity). Nearly identical results were
obtained for five different groundnut cultivars (two
replicates of each). (From Krauss & Deacon 1994.)

(a)

Root length (m)

2

(b)

0
2

5
8
Plant age (weeks)

11

14

–2

–4

neutral red which accumulates in the intact protoplasts,
then a solution of strong osmotic potential is used
to shrink the protoplasts (Fig. 11.16b,d). In both
methods the number and distribution of living cells can
be counted. For glasshouse-grown wheat seedlings, the
outermost root cortical cell layer dies first – typically
in root regions that are 7–10 days old – and then the
successively deeper cortical cell layers die at approximately 3–4 day intervals, until only the innermost cortical cell layer (next to the root endodermis) remains
alive. This progressive root cortical death behind the
extending root tips is seen when roots are grown
in soil or in aseptic conditions. It is faster in some
cereals than in others, faster in cereals than in grass
roots, and faster in laboratory than field conditions.
But in all cases the root cortex dies, and this does not
affect root function, because the root tips continuously
extend into new zones of soil, while the older root
regions serve a transport function, with a largely
redundant, senescent root cortex.

Fungal invasion of cereal and grass roots

Fig. 11.15 Representative tracings of the root system of
a single groundnut plant. Root distribution was traced
onto a transparent overlay at weekly intervals, but only
the tracings at 6 weeks (a) and 13 weeks (b) are shown.
Solid lines represent roots that were white (alive) at the
times of these tracings. Broken lines represent roots that
were present earlier but had decayed and disappeared.
Nearly identical results were found for five groundnut
cultivars (two replicates of each). (From Krauss & Deacon
1994.)

The pattern of root cortical cell death, described
above, precisely matches the pattern of fungal invasion
in the roots of perennial ryegrass, Lolium perenne
(Fig. 11.17), originally described by Waid (1957). The
sequence is summarized below, but essentially it
involves the successive invasion of roots by parasites,
weak parasites, and saprotrophs, responding to the
progressive natural senescence of the root cortex:
1 The growing root tips are virtually free from fungal
hyphae, but an increasingly complex fungal community develops with distance (age) behind the tips.

228

CHAPTER 11

Fig. 11.16 Natural (nonpathogenic) cortical cell death in soil-grown wheat roots stained with acridine orange (a,c) or
neutral red (b,d). All the cortical cell layers are alive in (a) and most layers are alive in (b). The outer five (of a total six)
cell layers have died in the older root regions (c and d) but the innermost (sixth) layer always remains alive until the
root itself dies. (From Lascaris & Deacon 1991.)

2 Even in young root zones, and persisting into the
old root zones, a fungus with hyaline (colorless)
hyphae is seen in the innermost cortical cells. This
is almost certainly an arbuscular mycorrhizal fungus
growing in the living host cells (Chapter 13).
3 Behind the root tips, Mucor and Penicillium species
are found on the root surface, and they remain
associated with the surface of roots of all ages.
These fungi are assumed to grow on the soluble nutrients that leak from root cells, or possibly the root
surface mucilage (a pectin-like material). However,
their hyphae cannot be seen or identified easily in
the root zone, so it is possible that they have an
initial phase of growth or periodic phases of growth
and then persist as spores on or near the root
surface.
4 A fungus with darkly pigmented hyphae is found on
the root surface in young root zones, and is seen to

occur progressively deeper in the cortex as the roots
age. This fungus is Phialophora graminicola, one of the
most abundant fungi on grass roots. It is a weak
parasite that exploits a narrow window of opportunity, invading the root cortical cells as they start to
senesce, but ahead of purely saprotrophic species
(Chapter 12).
5 As Phialophora progresses inwards through the root
cortex, it is followed by a sequence of fungi, including an unidentified sterile (nonsporing) fungus that
grows as hyaline (colorless) hyphae, and Fusarium
culmorum which is a characteristic colonizer of dead
and dying tissues but also can be pathogenic to
cereals and grasses in conditions of water-stress.
6 In the old root zones Trichoderma spp. and
Clonostachys rosea (formerly called Gliocladium
roseum) colonize the outer cortex. These are characteristic soil and rhizosphere fungi. They are known

FUNGAL ECOLOGY: SAPROTROPHS

229

Vascular tissues
Endophyte

Endo

Endo

Endo

Endo

Endo
Ph

Inner
cortex

Ph
Ster

Ph
Ster
Ph

Fus

Ster
Fus

Outer
cortex

Ph

Trich
Clon

Ster

Fus

Fus

Trich
Clon

Trich
Clon
Zygo

Trich
Clon
Zygo

Fus
Zygo
Pen
Clon
Trich

Fus
Zygo
Pen
Clon
Trich

Fus
Zygo
Pen
Clon
Trich

Fus
Zygo
Pen
Clon
Trich

Ph
Ph
Phialophora
Ster

Root
surface

Fus
Fus
Fusarium
Zygo
Zygo
Zygomycota
Pen
Pen
Penicillium
Clon
Clonostachys Clon
Trich
Trichoderma Trich
Progressive age/distance behind root tip

Fus
Zygo
Pen
Clon
Trich

Fig. 11.17 The sequence of fungal invasion of ryegrass roots, with increasing age and distance behind the extending
root tips. Phialophora graminicola (Ph), a weak parasite, initiates the invasion sequence as the root cortex starts to senesce.
Subsequent invaders include a sterile hyaline fungus (Ster), Fusarium culmorum (Fus), and then a suite of saprotrophic
fungi, including Zygomycota (Zygo), Penicillium (Pen), Clonostachys rosea (Clon), and Trichoderma (Trich). (Based on
Waid (1957) but with additional information and interpretation.)
to antagonize and to overgrow other fungi on agar
plates (Chapter 12). So they probably grow in the root
cortex as secondary (opportunistic) invaders.

Fungal communities in decaying wood
In terms of both its physical and chemical properties,
wood is an exceptionally difficult substrate to degrade,
so it is largely unavailable to most fungi. Wood
consists mainly of cellulose (40–50% dry weight),
hemicelluloses (25–40%), and lignin (20–35%). Of
these, lignin often presents the main obstacle to wood
decay, because it is a complex aromatic polymer that
encrusts the cell walls, preventing access of enzymes
to the more easily degradable cellulose and hemicelluloses. Lignin is highly resistant to breakdown by
conventional enzyme systems because it is chemically
complex, variable, nonhydrolysable, and waterinsoluble. Wood also has a very low nitrogen content
(commonly a C : N ratio of about 500 : 1) and low
phosphorus content. And, it contains potentially
fungitoxic compounds, which are deposited in the
heartwood. In broad-leaved trees the toxic compounds
are usually tannins, well know for their ability to
cross-link proteins, making animal skins resistant to

decay. By contrast, conifers contain a range of phenolic
compounds such as terpenes, stilbenes, flavonoids and
tropolones. The most toxic of the tropolones are the
thujaplicins which act as uncouplers of oxidative
phosphorylation; they are particularly abundant in
cedarwood, making this a naturally decay-resistant
wood for high-quality garden furnishings, etc.
Despite this formidable list of obstacles, woody tissues
are degraded by fungi, and these fall into three types
according to their mode of attack on the woody cell
walls – soft-rot fungi, brown-rot fungi, and white-rot
fungi.

Soft-rot fungi
Soft-rot fungi grow on wood in damp environments.
They are the characteristic decay fungi of fence posts,
telegraph poles, wooden window frames, the timbers
of cooling towers, and wood in estuarine or marine
environments. They have a relatively simple mode of
attack on wood, illustrated in Fig. 11.18. Their hyphae
grow in the lumen of individual woody cells, usually
after entering through a “pit” (depression) in the wall.
Then they produce fine penetration branches that
grow through the thin, lignin-coated S3 layer of the

230

CHAPTER 11

Fig. 11.18 (a) Diagram of the cell wall layers in woody tissue, showing the arrangement of cellulose microfibrils. ML =
middle lamella between adjacent woody cells; P = thin primary wall with loosely and irregularly arranged microfibrils;
S1–S3 = secondary wall layers. (b) Characteristic decay pattern of a soft-rot fungus in the S2 layer. The fungus penetrates by narrow hyphae, then forms broader hyphae in planes of weakness in the wall, and these hyphae produce
rhomboidal cavities where the cellulose has been enzymatically degraded.

wall, to gain access to the thick, cellulose-rich S2 layer.
When the penetration hyphae find a longitudinal
plane of weakness in the S2 layer, they produce
broader T-shaped hyphae which grow along the plane
of weakness and secrete cellulase enzymes. The diffusion of these enzymes creates a characteristic pattern
of decay, seen as rhomboidal cavities within the cell
wall. These persist even when the fungi have died, leaving the characteristic “signature” of a soft-rot fungus.
The soft-rot fungi have little or no effect on lignin,
which remains more or less intact. All the soft-rot
fungi need relatively high nitrogen levels for wood
decay, typically about 1% nitrogen content in the
wood. If this is unavailable in the wood itself, then nitrogen can be recruited from the environment, such as
the soil at the bases of fence posts.
The fungi that cause soft rots include several
Ascomycota and mitosporic species, such as
Chaetomium and Ceratocystis in terrestrial environments and species of Lulworthia, Halosphaeria, and
Pleospora in marine and estuarine environments.

Brown-rot fungi
Brown-rot fungi are predominantly Basidiomycota,
including common species such as Schizophyllum commune, Fomes fomentarius (the “hoof fungus” of Scottish
birch woods; see Fig. 2.24), and the “dry-rot fungus”,
Serpula lacrymans (see Fig. 7.8). Many of the brown-rot
fungi produce bracket-shaped fruitbodies (basidiocarps)
on the trunks of dead trees, but the characteristic feature of these fungi is that the decaying wood is brown
and shows brick-like cracking – a result of the uneven
pattern of decay, causing the wood to split along lines
of weakness (Fig. 11.19) (Bagley & Richter 2002).
The “dry-rot” fungus, Serpula lacrymans, causes
major damage to structural timbers in the buildings of
Europe. However, the term dry-rot does not indicate a
different type of wood decay; instead, it signifies that
this fungus, once established, can generate sufficient
water from the breakdown of cellulose in the wood
to continue growing even when the environmental

FUNGAL ECOLOGY: SAPROTROPHS

231

Fig. 11.19 Part of a pine stump showing the characteristic brick-like decay by
brown-rot fungi.
conditions are quite dry. Serpula lacrymans is also
notable because it posed an enigma for a long time: it
is very common in poorly ventilated buildings in
Britain and much of Europe, but nobody had ever found
it in a natural environment. Singh et al. (1993) then
discovered that it occurs rarely in the Himalayan
forests of northern India, which seem to be its natural habitat. Dry rot has been recorded in Europe since
about 1765, before there was any export of timber from
India. So this “rare” fungus seems to have arrived in
Europe as air-borne basidiospores and then flourished
in buildings where the climatic conditions are similar
to those in its natural habitat.
The term “brown rot” refers to the characteristic
color of the decayed wood, because most of the
cellulose and hemicelluloses are degraded, leaving
the lignin more or less intact as a brown, chemically
modified framework. However, the decay is typically
irregular, with some groups of wood cells being heavily
degraded while others are only slightly so. This causes
the wood to crack in a brick-like manner.
The hyphae of brown-rot fungi occur very sparsely
in the wood, often restricted to the lumen of woody
cells, and yet they cause a generalized decay in which
the S2 wall layer is almost completely degraded. This
type of decay cannot be explained by the diffusion of
cellulase enzymes, which are too large to diffuse very
far, and too large even to pass through the pores in
the S3 layer. In fact, the cellulases of brown-rot fungi
have little effect on cellulose in vitro, unlike the cellulases of soft-rot fungi. Instead, the brown-rot fungi
degrade cellulose by an oxidative process, involving
the production of hydrogen peroxide during the

breakdown of hemicelluloses. Being a small molecule,
H2O2 can diffuse through the woody cell walls to
cause a generalized decay. In support of this, the characteristic decay pattern of brown-rot fungi can be
mimicked experimentally by treating wood with H2O2
alone, and at least one of these fungi, Poria placenta,
has been shown to degrade cellulose only if hemicelluloses also are present, as substrates for generating
H2O2. This mode of attack is an efficient way of using
the scarce nitrogen resources in wood, because it does
not require the release of large amounts of extracellular enzymes.

White-rot fungi
White-rot fungi are more numerous than brown-rot
fungi. They include both Ascomycota (Fig. 11.20) and
Basidiomycota (e.g. Armillaria mellea, the boot-lace
fungus – see Fig. 5.14, and Coriolus versicolor, shown
in an unexpected setting, Fig. 11.21). Is nothing
sacred?!!
The white-rot fungi seem to use conventional cellulase enzymes for wood decay, but they are extremely
efficient in their use of nitrogen. For example, the nitrogen content of Coriolus versicolor is about 4% when the
fungus is grown on laboratory media of C : N ratio
32 : 1, but only 0.2% when grown on a medium of
C : N 1600 : 1. In nitrogen-poor conditions this fungus
seems preferentially to allocate nitrogen to the production of extracellular enzymes and essential cell
components, and it also efficiently recycles the nitrogen in its mycelia (Levi & Cowling 1969). White-rot

(a)

(b)

Fig. 11.20 Two common Ascomycota that cause white rots. (a) Xylaria hypoxylon, the “candle snuff” fungus often seen
on rotting stumps. (b) Xylaria polymorpha (“dead man’s fingers”).

(a)

(b)

Fig. 11.21 Small, leathery, bracket-shaped fruitbodies of Coriolus versicolor.

FUNGAL ECOLOGY: SAPROTROPHS

233

Fig. 11.22 Structural components of lignin, showing the three main phenyl-propane units and three of the main types
of bond that link them. Note that only a small part of the lignin molecule is shown.

fungi might also benefit from the growth of nitrogenfixing bacteria in wood.
The most remarkable feature of white-rot fungi is their
ability completely to degrade lignin – they are the only
organisms known to do this. As shown in Fig. 11.22,
lignin is a complex polymer composed of three types
of phenyl-propane unit (six-carbon rings with threecarbon side chains) bonded to one another in at least
12 different ways. If lignin were to be degraded by conventional means it would require a multitude of
enzymes. Instead, lignin is degraded by an oxidative
process. The details of this are complex, but essentially
the white-rot fungi produce only a few enzymes
(lignin peroxidase, manganese peroxidase, H2O2generating enzymes, and laccase) and these generate
strong oxidants, which virtually “combust” the lignin
framework (Kirk & Farrell 1987).
The major enzyme that initiates ring-cleavage is
laccase, which catalyses the addition of a second
hydroxyl group to phenolic compounds. The ring can
then be opened between two adjacent carbon atoms
that bear the hydroxyl groups (Fig. 11.23). This process occurs while the ring is still attached to the lignin
molecule. It is termed ortho fission, in contrast to meta
fission which bacteria employ to cleave the phenolic
rings of pesticide molecules (where the ring is opened
at a different position – see Fig. 11.23).

HOOC

OH

OH
Protocatechuic acid
Ortho fission
HOOC

Or

Meta fission
HOOC

COOH
COOH

Acetate
+
Succinate

OH
COOH
CHO

2 Pyruvate
+
Formate

Fig. 11.23 Patterns of opening of aromatic rings. (Left)
During lignin breakdown, by the process of ortho fission.
(Right) During the breakdown of pesticides and other xenobiotics, by meta fission. Initially the ring is substituted
with two hydroxyl groups on adjacent carbon atoms. Then
it is opened either between these two carbons (ortho
fission) or adjacent to one of them (meta fission, which
is a plasmid-encoded function of bacteria).

234

CHAPTER 11

(a)

(c)

The other enzymes are involved mainly in generating or transferring oxidants. They include glucose
oxidase which generates H2O2 from glucose, manganese peroxidase which oxidizes Mn (II) to Mn (III),
and which can then oxidize organic molecules, and
lignin peroxidase which catalyses the transfer of
singlet oxygen from H2O2 to aromatic rings and is one
of the main initiators of attack on the lignin framework. These initial oxidations involving single electron

(b)

Fig. 11.24 (a) Part of a decaying
beech stump showing dark zone
lines at the junctions between
mutually
incompatible
fungal
colonies. (b) A decorative wooden
bowl made from spalted (zonelined) beech wood. (c) Part of an
extensively degraded woody stump
showing continuous plates of melanized cells within the stump tissues.

transfers generate highly unstable conditions, setting
off a chain of chemical oxidations.
Clearly, the degradation of lignin is highly dependent
on a supply of oxygen, so it does not occur in waterlogged conditions. Lignin degradation also poses
potential hazards to the fungus because some of
the oxidative intermediates can be fungitoxic. The
white-rot fungi generate such compounds from
phenyl-propane units in vitro, but detoxify them by

FUNGAL ECOLOGY: SAPROTROPHS

polymerization into melanin-like pigments. Evidence
of this can often be seen where two colonies of wooddecay fungi meet and produce heavily melanized zone
lines (actually continuous plates of melanized cells)
in the region of contact (Fig. 11.24). When fungi are
isolated from either side of a zone line they are found
to belong to different species or, more commonly,
different strains of a single species that are somatically
incompatible with one another. Zone-lined wood
(also termed “spalted” wood) has become fashionable
for ornaments (Fig. 11.24).

Biotechnology of wood-decay fungi
Lignocellulose is abundant as a byproduct of the
wood-processing industries and also in crop residues,
so there is the potential to use it as a cheap commercial substrate. For example if the cellulose could be
degraded to sugars, these could be used to produce fuel
alcohol by microbial fermentation, as an alternative
to fossil fuels. This prospect has stimulated research
on delignification, especially by the white-rot fungus
Phanerochaete chrysosporium which grows rapidly
in submerged liquid culture and, unusually for
Basidiomycota, produces abundant conidia. In nearoptimum culture conditions it can degrade as much
as 200 mg lignin per gram of mycelial biomass per day.
However, it also degrades and utilizes the cellulose
component of lignocellulose, defeating the object of the
exercise. Genetic engineering offers a potential solution
to this, and was made possible by the discovery
that Phanerochaete produces lignin peroxidase in the
early stationary phase of batch culture (Chapter 4). The
enzyme production was strongly promoted by nitrogen
limitation and further stimulated by addition of lignin.
By comparing the mRNA produced in these conditions
and in corresponding noninducing conditions, the gene
for lignin peroxidase was identified, then sequenced
and cloned into E. coli. The enzyme produced by the
recombinant bacterium acts on a range of lignin
“model compounds” in vitro so there is a prospect of
using high-yielding recombinant microorganisms for
delignification processes.
White-rot fungi and their enzyme systems also have
potential for bioremediation of land contaminated by
aromatic pollutants, and many other processes, discussed
by Ralph & Catcheside (2002).

Cited references
Andrews, J.H. (1992) Fungal life-history strategies. In: The
Fungal Community: its organization and role in the ecosystem (Carroll, G.C. & Wicklow, D.T., eds), pp. 119–145.
Marcel Dekker, New York.

235

Bagley, S.T. & Richter, D.L. (2002) Biodegradation by
brown rot fungi. In: The Mycota X. Industrial Applications
(Osiewicz, H.D., ed.), pp. 327–341. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
Carroll, G.C. & Wicklow, D.T. (1992) The Fungal Community: its organization and role in the ecosystem. Marcel
Dekker, New York.
Chang, Y. (1967) The fungi of wheat straw compost:
paper II. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 50,
667–677.
Chang, Y. & Hudson, H.J. (1967) The fungi of wheat straw
compost: paper I. Transactions of the British Mycological
Society 50, 649–666.
Deacon, J.W. (1985) Decomposition of filter paper cellulose by thermophilic fungi acting singly, in combination,
and in sequence. Transactions of the British Mycological
Society 85, 663–669.
Harper, J.L. & Webster, J. (1964) An experimental analysis of the coprophilous fungus succession. Transactions
of the British Mycological Society 47, 511–530.
Hudson, H.J. (1968) The ecology of fungi on plant
remains above the soil. New Phytologist 67, 837–874.
Kirk, T.K. & Farrell, R.L. (1987) Enzymatic “combustion”:
the microbial degradation of lignin. Annual Review of
Microbiology 41, 465–505.
Krauss, U. & Deacon, J.W. (1994) Root turnover of
groundnut (Arachis hypogea L.) in soil tubes. Plant & Soil
166, 259–270.
Lascaris, D. & Deacon, J.W. (1991) Comparison of methods
to assess senescence of the cortex of wheat and tomato
roots. Soil Biology and Biochemistry 23, 979–986.
Levi, M.P. & Cowling, E.B. (1969) Role of nitrogen in wood
deterioration. VII. Physiological adaptation of wooddestroying and other fungi to substrates deficient in
nitrogen. Phytopathology 59, 460–468.
Li, S., Spear, R.N. & Andrews, J.H. (1997) Quantitative
fluorescence in situ hybridization of Aureobasidium
pullulans on microscope slides and leaf surfaces. Applied
and Environmental Microbiology 63, 3261–3267.
Lu, G., Cannon, P.F., Reid, A. & Simmons, C.M. (2004)
Diversity and molecular relationships of endophytic
Colletotrichum isolates from the Iwokrama Forest
Reserve, Guyana. Mycological Research 108, 53–63.
Olsson, P.A., Larsson, L., Bago, B., Wallander, H. & van
Aarle, I.M. (2003) Ergosterol and fatty acids for biomass
estimation of mycorrhizal fungi. New Phytologist Letters
159, 7–10.
Ralph, J.P. & Catcheside, D.E.A. (2002) Biodegradation by
white-rot fiungi. In: The Mycota X. Industrial Applications
(Osiewacz, H.D., ed.), pp. 303–326. Springer-Verlag,
Berlin.
Schroder, S., Hain, M. & Sterflinger, K. (2000)
Colorimetric in situ hybridization (CISH) with digoxigeninlabeled oligonucleotide probes in autofluorescent
hyphomycetes. International Microbiology 3, 183–186.
Singh, J., Bech-Andersen, J., Elborne, S.A., Singh, S.,
Walker, B. & Goldie, F. (1993) The search for wild dry
rot fungus (Serpula lacrymans) in the Himalayas. The
Mycologist 7, 124–130.
Stewart, A. & Deacon, J.W. (1995) Vital fluorochromes
as tracers for fungal growth studies. Biotechnic and
Histochemistry 70, 57–65.

236

CHAPTER 11

Tribe, H.T. (1960) Decomposition of buried cellulose
film, with special reference to the ecology of certain
soil fungi. In: The Ecology of Soil Fungi (Parkinson, D.
& Waid, J.S., eds), pp. 246–256. Liverpool University Press,
Liverpool.
Vanneste, J.L., Hill, R.A., Kay, S.J., Farrell, R.L. & Holland,
P.T. (2002) Biological control of sapstain fungi with

natural products and biological control agents: a review
of the work carried out in New Zealand. Mycological
Research 106, 228–232.
Waid, J.S. (1957) Distribution of fungi within the
decomposing tissues of ryegrass roots. Transactions of the
British Mycological Society 40, 391–406.

Chapter 12

Fungal interactions: mechanisms
and practical exploitation

This chapter is divided into the following major sections:
• the terminology of species interactions
• antibiotics and their roles in species interactions
• antibiotics and disease control by Trichoderma
species
• hyphal interference: a classic example of applied biological control
• mycoparasites: fungi that parasitize other fungi
• competitive interactions among fungi
• commensalism and mutualism among fungi
Microorganisms interact in many diverse ways. In this
chapter we consider some of the major types of interaction involving fungi, and the potential for exploiting
these interactions for practical benefit. We will also
discuss the use of several commercially available
biological control agents. (See Online resources for this
chapter.)

The terminology of species interactions
The terminology of species interactions is difficult,
but for most purposes we can distinguish three broad
categories of interaction among fungi:
1 The ability of one species to exclude another by
competition (sometimes called exploitation competition), i.e. by being faster or more efficient in
exploiting a resource (space, substrate, etc.).
2 The ability of one species to exclude or replace
another by antagonism (sometimes called inter-

ference competition or combat), i.e. by directly
affecting another organism through antibiotic production, parasitism, etc.
3 The ability of two species to coexist (commensalism)
to the benefit of one or both (mutualism).
It must be emphasized that these types of interaction
grade into one another, because fungi can behave differently in different situations.

Antibiotics and their roles in species
interactions
An antibiotic can be defined somewhat arbitrarily as a
diffusible secondary metabolite of one (micro)organism
that inhibits another (micro)organism at a concentration of 100 µg ml−1 or less. This definition serves to
exclude general metabolic byproducts such as CO2 or
organic acids. It restricts the term to specific highly
active compounds that affect specific cellular targets.
The best-known antibiotics from fungi are the penicillins (Chapter 7), cephalosporins, and griseofulvin
(Chapter 15), which are used clinically to control bacteria or, in the case of griseofulvin, other fungi. Some
more recently discovered antibiotics include fusidic acid
from the mitosporic fungus Fusidium coccineum, which
is active against Gram-positive bacteria, fumagillin
from Aspergillus fumigatus, which is used to control parasitic protozoa in veterinary medicine, and sordarin,
from a species of Sordaria (Ascomycota) to control fungal infections of humans.
These are only a few of the 1000 or more antibiotics
known to be produced by fungi. Most of the antibiotics
discovered in routine screens by chemical companies

238

CHAPTER 12

are not used commercially because of their nonspecific
toxicity or other undesirable side-effects. Patulin is
one such example (see Fig. 7.13); it was a promising
antibiotic but its development was abandoned because, among other things, it was found to be a potent
mycotoxin. However, antibiotics are produced naturally
in a wide range of environments and they play significant roles in species interactions. Some of the most
common fungi that produce antibiotics in natural and
agricultural environments are species of Ascomycota
and mitosporic fungi, including Penicillium, Aspergillus,
Fusarium, and Trichoderma. The Basidiomycota also
produce several antibiotics, but very few antibiotics have
been recorded from Chytridiomycota, Zygomycota, or
Oomycota, perhaps because these organisms have a
short life cycle and do not need to defend a substrate
against invaders.

Antibiotics in natural environments:
the control of fungi by fluorescent
pseudomonads
The past two decades have brought major advances in
the detection of antibiotics in the root zone (rhizosphere) of crops, helping to explain how fluorescent
pseudomonads can control fungal pathogens of roots.
Fluorescent pseudomonads are found on the roots
of many plants, often at high population levels, and
can be detected easily by plating soil dilutions onto
“King’s B agar.” This is an iron-deficient medium,
so it induces these bacteria to release fluorescent
siderophores (iron-chelating compounds) to capture
iron (Chapter 6). However, only a small subset of
fluorescent pseudomonads (including strains of
Pseudomonas fluorescens and P. aureofaciens) are highly
effective in controlling fungi. These strains produce
specific antifungal antibiotics such as phenazine-1carboxylic acid (PCA) and 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol
(DAPG) (Fig. 12.1).

OH

N

N

Yield
O
C

COOH
HO

Such strains were first recognized in field conditions,
where crops such as tobacco or wheat grown in sites
with naturally high populations of PCA- or DAPGproducers grew better than crops with low population
levels of these bacteria. The terms disease-suppressive
soil, and disease-conducive soil are used to describe
this difference. In experimental studies, diseasesuppressive soils can be converted to disease-conducive
soils by pasteurization (treatment at about 60°C
for 30 minutes). Conversely, the reintroduction of
antibiotic-producing pseudomonads, at sufficiently
high levels, can render the soils suppressive again.
The most detailed studies on soil suppressiveness have
been made for the take-all fungus, Gaeumannomyces
graminis – one of the most important root pathogens
of cereal crops. This fungus infects roots from inoculum that persists in soil from a previous cereal crop,
and it then grows along the roots as darkly pigmented
“runner hyphae” (see Fig. 9.11). From these, it sends
infection hyphae into the root, destroying the cortical
cells and entering the vascular system, where it destroys
the phloem (sugar-conducting cells) and blocks the
water-conducting xylem vessels with dark vascular
gels. The level of take-all infection increases progressively from one season to the next if cereals are grown
repeatedly in a site. But after 3 or 4 years of cereal monoculture the disease reaches a peak and then spontaneously declines to a level at which cereals can be grown
continuously without suffering serious yield losses.
This spontaneous decline in the disease level is termed
take-all decline (Fig. 12.2) and it is always strongly correlated with a high population of antibiotic-producing
fluorescent pseudomonads, which seem to be favored
by continuous cereal cropping.
A significant advance in understanding this
phenomenon was made in the early 1990s, when
Thomashow et al. (1990) used high performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) to detect phenazine1-carboxylic acid (PCA) in the rhizosphere of young

CH3

Take-all level

OH
O

C
CH3

Phenazine-1-carboxylic acid

2,4-diacetyl phloroglucinol

Fig. 12.1 Two antibiotics from fluorescent pseudomonads
that are widely implicated in control of plant-pathogenic
fungi.

1 2 3 4 5 etc
Years of cereal cropping
Fig. 12.2 Take-all decline when cereals are grown continuously (year after year) in field conditions.

FUNGAL INTERACTIONS

239

5
160
4

Fig. 12.3 The effects of different population levels
of a diacetyl-phloroglucinol producing fluorescent
pseudomonad on disease level (or shoot height)
of wheat seedlings grown in take-all infested soil.
(Reproduced from Raaijmakers & Weller 1998.)

wheat seedlings. These seedlings had been raised
from seeds inoculated with phenazine-producing
pseudomonads and grown in pots of natural soil
containing the take-all fungus. After 4 weeks the
seedlings were harvested and the rhizosphere soil was
found to have antibiotic levels of 30–40 nanograms per
gram of root with adhering soil. The levels of PCA were
about 10 times higher when the inoculated seedlings
were grown in sterile soil, but this would be expected
because of the lack of competition from other rhizosphere bacteria. Compared with controls (untreated
seeds) the PCA-treated seeds caused a significant
reduction of disease. In contrast to the natural
phenazine-producing strains, phenazine-minus strains
obtained by transposon mutagenesis gave no reduction
of disease and had no detectable antibiotic levels,
but back-mutation to a phenazine-plus phenotype
restored the ability to reduce disease. Identical results
were obtained with a diacetyl-phloroglucinol (DAPG)producing strain. So, there is clear evidence for a role
of antibiotic-producing fluorescent pseudomonads in
take-all suppressive soils.
An interesting feature revealed by these studies is that
the population of antibiotic-producing pseudomonads
builds up progressively on wheat crops, but only (or
largely) when the take-all fungus is present. Wheat can
be grown repeatedly in the absence of the take-all fungus in glasshouse conditions, and this does not lead to
a build-up of the antagonistic pseudomonads. So it
seems that the crop has to go through a build up of
disease before the disease suppression sets in.
The likely reason for this is shown by the
experimental results in Fig. 12.3. Wheat seeds were
inoculated with different inoculum densities of
DAPG-producing pseudomonads and then sown in a
glasshouse in pots of natural soil containing take-all

3

120

2

100

Shoot height (mm)

Disease severity

140

80
1

101

102

103

104

105

106

107

Pseudomonas fluorescens (cfu g–1 root)

inoculum. The seedlings were sampled after 4 weeks and
assessed for disease severity and plant height. There was
no disease control until the population level of DAPG
strains on the roots exceeded 104 colony-forming
units per gram of root. But, at colony levels of 105 and
above, there was a marked and significant decrease in
disease severity and a corresponding increase in plant
height. This “all or nothing” effect is characteristic of
a bacterial signalling system called quorum sensing –
a term derived from the meetings of committees,
where a certain number of people (a quorum) has to
be present before a decision can be taken. Quorumsensing by a population of Gram-negative bacteria
involves the continued release of molecules called
N-acyl homoserine lactones (Fig. 12.4). When the
concentration of these molecules reaches a certain level
(indicating that the population is large enough) the
relevant genes are switched on. In this case, it is the
genes controlling antibiotic production and therefore
the control of take-all disease. The production of
phenazine antibiotics is known to be under the
control of a quorum-sensing system (Chin-A-Woeng
et al. 2003), but there is no evidence as yet that DAPG
production is regulated in a similar way.

O
O

N
H H
O

Fig. 12.4 Structure of N-hexanoyl- L-homoserine lactone,
a quorum-sensing molecule that regulates the synthesis
of phenazine antibiotics by fluorescent pseudomonads.
(From Wood et al. 1997.)

240

CHAPTER 12

Antibiotics and disease control by
Trichoderma species
Trichoderma species (Fig. 12.5) are well-known for their
ability to antagonize other fungi. They were among
the first fungi to be shown to produce antibiotics in
soil (Weindling 1934). In fact, they produce several
antibiotics, including both volatile and nonvolatile
compounds, active against fungi, bacteria or both
(Fig. 12.6).
Many Trichoderma species, such as T. viride, T.
αharzianum, and T. hamatum, produce 6-pentyl-α
pyrone (6-PAP) as the major volatile antibiotic, while
the major nonvolatile antibiotics include trichodermin,
suzukacillin, and alamethicine. But Trichoderma
virens (as distinct from T. viride) produces a different
spectrum of antibiotics: some strains produce viridin,
viridiol (a reduction product of viridin), gliovirin,
and heptelidic acid, whereas other strains of this
fungus produce viridin and gliotoxin.
The differences in antibiotic production between
strains of Trichoderma seem to be important, and
have led to the widespread use of Trichoderma species

(a)

as commercial biological control agents against plantpathogenic fungi (see later). For example, 6-PAP is
produced by some (but not all) strains of T. viride,
T. harzianum, and T. hamatum, and these 6-PAP producers are more antagonistic than are nonproducing
strains when tested against plant pathogens in vitro or
in seedling bioassays. The strains of T. virens that produce gliovirin inhibit the growth of Pythium ultimum
but not Rhizoctonia solani in vitro, and when applied
experimentally to cotton seeds only the gliovirinproducing strains controlled seedling diseases caused
by P. ultimum. Conversely, gliotoxin is more active
against Rhizoctonia than against Pythium in vitro, and
gliotoxin-producing strains are better at controlling
Rhizoctonia on seedlings (Howell et al. 1993).
Antibiotics are not the only factors in the antagonistic
repertoire of Trichoderma. Many strains grow rapidly in
culture – up to 25 mm 24 h−1 at room temperature. They
secrete chitinase and β-1,3-glucanase when grown in the
presence of other fungi or on fungal wall components.
The hyphae of Trichoderma also coil round the hyphae
of other fungi (Fig. 12.5) and eventually penetrate the
hyphae from these coils. Few other fungi have such a
formidable arsenal of antagonistic mechanisms.

(b)

Fig. 12.5 (a) Aerial spore-bearing structures of Trichoderma harzianum: the condiophores branch at right angles
and produce conidia at the tips of flask-shaped phialides. (b) Trichoderma species frequently coil round the hyphae of
other fungi (in this case, Rhizoctonia solani) and penetrate or disrupt the host hyphae. ((a) Courtesy of Samuels, G.J,
Chaverri, P., Farr, D.F. & McCray, E.B. Trichoderma Online, Systematic Botany and Mycology Laboratory, ARS, USDA;
from http://nt.ars-grin.gov/taxadescriptions/keys/TrichodermaIndex.cfm)

FUNGAL INTERACTIONS

241

Fig. 12.6 Structures of some antibiotics
produced by species of Trichoderma.

Commercial biocontrol formulations of
Trichoderma
Trichoderma species are easily grown in culture media
and have been marketed in many formulations, with
varying degrees of success. One example, among
many, is the product Trichodex™ (T. harzianum) for
control of Botrytis cinerea (gray mould) on grapes.
Although it was reported not to be as effective as commercial fungicides it can be used as an alternating treatment with fungicides (O’Neill et al. 1996), halving the
total fungicide input, which is environmentally desirable. Trichoderma is also impregnated into dowels,
which are hammered into drill-holes in trees to help
control wood-rot fungi, and similarly can be inoculated
into plum trees to help control silver leaf disease,
caused by toxins of the fungus Chondrostereum purpureum
(Basidiomycota) growing in the wood. A commercial
product of this type, called Trichodowels™, is marketed
through garden centers in New Zealand.
However, one role of Trichoderma spp. in biological
control exceeds all others – the inoculation of soilless rooting media in commercial glasshouses where
seedlings are raised. Soil-less rooting media composed
of peat-based or similar materials have a low resident
microbial population, and so have little biological
“buffering” capacity. If any seedling pathogens
become established in these conditions they can

spread rapidly and cause major damage. So, various
formulations of Trichoderma, with wheat bran or other
organic food bases, are incorporated into the rooting
medium, to help establish an antagonistic microflora.
One of the most successful commercial biocontrol
strains, Trichoderma harzianum strain T-22, was developed
by fusing the protoplasts of two “wild” strains, then
allowing the hybrid strain to regenerate a wall and to
revert to a stable phenotype. The resulting T-22 strain
exhibits very strong “rhizosphere competence” – it
colonizes the whole root system and persists throughout the life of a crop. This strain is marketed under the
name Bio-Trek 22G™ for golf course turf, and under
other names for field crops or greenhouse potting
mixes. Novel strains generated by protoplast fusion do
not involve genetic engineering, so they do not fall
under the regulatory requirements for GM (genetically
modified) products.

Hyphal interference
Hyphal interference is a specific term describing the
behavior of several Basidiomycota that antagonize
other fungi at points of contact (Fig. 12.7). This
antagonism can be between different species of
Basidiomycota, or between Basidiomycota and other
fungi. It was discovered during in vitro studies on the

242

CHAPTER 12

Fig. 12.7 Hyphal interference on an
agar plate. Hyphae of Heterobasidion
annosum (previously termed Fomes
annosus) have been antagonized
where they were contacted by single
hyphae of Phlebiopsis gigantea (previously termed Peniophora gigantea).
The agar plate was then flooded with
a dilute solution of neutral red, which
was not taken up by the undamaged
hyphae but entered the damaged
hyphae of Heterobasidion (seen as
darker pigmentation).

interactions of fungi from herbivore dung (see Fig. 10.8)
and it helps to explain how the Basidiomycota can
ultimately dominate a fungal community, truncating
the activities of other fungi (Ikediugwu 1976). It also
explains why the Basidiomycota tend to be mutually
exclusive. For example, toadstools of both Coprinus
heptemerus and Bolbitius vitellinus occur on dung, but
never in the same piece of dung because these two
species antagonize one another (Ikediugwu & Webster
1970).
Hyphal interference occurs rapidly, a few minutes
after hyphal contact, and often is localized to a single
hyphal compartment. The first visible sign is vacuolation and loss of turgor in the affected hyphal compartment. If a dye such as neutral red is added at this
stage it is taken into the affected compartment but does
not enter the healthy hyphal compartments, indicating that hyphal interference causes loss of normal
membrane integrity. In electron micrographs the
affected cytoplasm is seen to be degenerate, the mitochondria are swollen, and a wide gap is seen between
the retracted plasma membrane and the hyphal wall.
The damage is often contained within a hyphal compartment by zones of dense, coagulated cytoplasm on
either side of the contact point. The mechanism of
hyphal interference is still unclear, but a poorly diffusible
factor seems to be involved, because hyphal interference can occur between hyphae separated by a cellophane membrane up to 50 µm wide.
Hyphal interference is not a parasitic phenomenon,
because there is no evidence of invasion of the
damaged hyphae. Instead, it seems to be an efficient
means of inactivating other hyphae that are potential
competitors for the same substrates.

Control of pine root rot by hyphal
interference
Soon after hyphal interference was discovered in
the 1970s, it was recognized as a possible basis for
explaining an important biological control system –
the control of pine root rot by an antagonistic fungus,
Phlebiopsis gigantea. Pine root rot is caused by
Heterobasidion annosum (Basidiomycota), which is the
most important pathogen of coniferous trees in the
northern hemisphere, responsible for major economic
losses in the forestry industry. This fungus grows
slowly but progressively along the woody roots, rotting
them and spreading from tree to tree by root-to-root
contact. Eventually, it can spread into the base of
the trunk, causing a butt rot which destroys some of
the most valuable timber. When established in a site,
Heterobasidion is almost impossible to eradicate, except
by mechanical extraction of all the infected stumps and
major roots. So, control measures have focused on
preventing it from becoming established, especially in
newly afforested sites (Fig. 12.8).
Heterobasidion produces air-borne basidiospores from
bracket-shaped fruitbodies at the bases of infected
trees. These spores pose little threat in undisturbed
forests because they have insufficient food reserves to
initiate infection of woody roots when washed into the
root zone. However, the situation is different in commercial forestry, where trees are felled for harvest or
thinned to create the desired plant density as the
plantation develops. The tissues of the exposed stump
surfaces can remain alive for several months, but
with declining resistance to infection. These exposed
stumps provide a highly selective environment for

FUNGAL INTERACTIONS

(a)

(d)

(b)

(e)

243

(c)

(f)

Fig. 12.8 Control of pine root rot (Heterobasidion annosum) by Phlebiopsis gigantea. (a) A pine plantation showing a
large disease gap (near the top) caused by H. annosum. (b) Trees within this gap are spindly and dying. (c) Bracketshaped fruiting bodies of H. annosum growing from the base of a heavily diseased tree. (d) Sachets containing spores
of P. gigantea, which can be diluted with water and inoculated onto freshly exposed stump surfaces. (e) Brick-like spores
of P. gigantea are produced abundantly in laboratory culture by fragmentation of the hyphae. (f) A pine stump 1 year
after treatment with spore suspension of P. gigantea, showing abundant growth of P. gigantea over the stump surface.
(Images courtesy of the late J. Rishbeth.)

pathogens like Heterobasidion, which can colonize
from basidiospores and then grow down into the
dying roots and infect the adjacent healthy trees
(Fig. 12.9).
The simplest way to avoid this is to kill the stump
surface tissues with phytotoxic chemicals such as urea
or boron-containing compounds, enabling saprotrophs
to rot the stumps and to exclude Heterobasidion. This
is common practice in many forests, but is environmentally undesirable, especially if the forests are in
catchment areas for domestic water supplies. Rishbeth
(1963) developed an alternative control method in
which spores of Phlebiopsis gigantea were applied to
exposed stump surfaces immediately after the trees
had been felled. P. gigantea is a weakly parasitic fungus
that rapidly colonizes the stump tissues of pine trees,
but poses no threat to healthy trees. It then grows down
into the major roots and prevents Heterobasidion from
becoming established. This type of biological control
is termed pre-emptive (competitive) niche exclusion.

We will see other examples of this on leaf and fruit
surfaces, later in this chapter.
Hyphal interference also seems to be involved in
the control of Heterobasidion, because the hyphae of P.
gigantea antagonize Heterobasidion on contact (Fig. 12.7).
As shown in Fig. 12.9, P. gigantea might have multiple
roles in this biocontrol system, helping to protect
fresh stump surfaces, helping to contain any existing
pockets of infection by Heterobasidion in the root zone,
and potentially preventing the pathogen from growing up to the stump surface and sporulating there.
In developing this practical biocontrol method,
Rishbeth made use of the fact that P. gigantea is one
of the relatively few Basidiomycota that sporulate
readily in laboratory culture. The hyphae fragment
behind the colony margin to produce many brickshaped conidia, which can be used as inoculum to apply
to stump surfaces. In the initial biocontrol formulations,
Phlebiopsis spores were packaged in sachets containing
sucrose solution at a water potential that prevented

244

CHAPTER 12

Fig. 12.9 Possible mode of action of Phlebiopsis gigantea in controlling Heterobasidion annosum in recently felled pine
stumps. 1, P. gigantea is inoculated onto freshly exposed stump surfaces and prevents colonization of the stumps from
airborne basidiospores of H. annosum (shown by the double lines). 2, When P. gigantea has colonized the dying stump
and root tissues it prevents the spread of H. annosum from existing foci of infection in the root zone. 3, P. gigantea
might also prevent H. annosum from growing up to the stump surface to sporulate.

spore germination, and also containing a dye
(bromocresol purple). For application to stump surfaces,
the sachets were diluted with water, allowing the
spores to germinate, and the dye enabled foresters
to see that the stump surfaces had been treated.
More recently, the spores have been produced as dry
powder formulations by commercial companies.
This biocontrol system proved highly effective in pine
forests over much of Europe and North America. But
in Britain it had one significant limitation – P. gigantea
could be used only to protect pine stumps and was
not effective in protecting Sitka spruce, which is the
most common plantation tree in Britain. Now it seems
that there is a simple explanation for this: the strains
of P. gigantea used to control the disease in Britain are
endemic strains, specialized to colonize pine stumps,
whereas the strains used in Scandinavia have a broader
host range and can protect spruce as well as pines.
In Finland a commercial preparation of P. gigantea,
marketed as Rotstop™, effectively controls H. annosum
on spruce. The UK Forestry Commission is currently
investigating the possibility of introducing such strains
into Britain.

Mycoparasites: fungi that parasitize other
fungi
The fungi that parasitize other fungi can be grouped
into two broad categories: necrotrophic mycoparasites,
which invade and destroy other fungal cells and then
feed on the dead cell contents, and biotrophic mycoparasites, which can establish a specialized feeding
relationship, usually by producing haustoria to penetrate and absorb nutrients from living fungal hyphae.
These two types of mycoparasite are equivalent to the
necrotrophic and biotrophic parasites of plants, discussed in Chapter 14.

Biotrophic mycoparasites
There are several types of biotrophic mycoparasite
with different feeding mechanisms ( Jeffries & Young
1994), but the most common and distinctive group are
the haustorial biotrophs. These fungi penetrate living
host hyphae to produce a haustorium inside the host
wall but separated from the cell contents by a host cell

FUNGAL INTERACTIONS

245

Fig. 12.10 Electron micrograph of an
appressorium (ap) and a branched
haustorium of the mycoparasite
Piptocephalis unispora (Zygomycota) in
a fungal host, Cokeromyces recurvatus.
hw = host wall; ol and il = outer layer
and inner layer of the Piptocephalis
wall. The haustorium is surrounded
by a continuous membrane (the extrahaustorial membrane, labelled e).
(Courtesy of P. Jeffries; from Jeffries &
Young 1976.)
membrane (Fig. 12.10). The parasite draws nutrients
from the host hyphae, and uses these nutrients to
produce sporulating structures on the host colony.
Often this type of parasitism causes little damage, as
long as the host fungus has an adequate food supply.
Biotrophic mycoparasitism similar to that in Fig. 12.10
is found in several Zygomycota (Piptocephalis, Dispira,
and Dimargalis spp.) that have elongated, few-spored
sporangia (merosporangia; see Fig. 2.11). With only few
exceptions, these fungi parasitize other Zygomycota such
as Mucor and Pilaira on dung or in soil. Most of these
biotrophic mycoparasites can be grown in laboratory
media containing extracts of host or nonhost hyphae.
The need for hyphal extracts can be replaced by
relatively high concentrations of vitamins (especially
thiamine) and amino acids, and by providing glycerol
instead of glucose as the carbon source. These nutrients
could be expected to occur in the host hyphae.
The haustorial biotrophs seem to depend entirely on
their fungal hosts in nature. Their spores are triggered
to germinate near host hyphae, and the germ-tubes

show pronounced tropism towards the host. Then the
germ-tube tip produces an appressorium on the host
surface and a penetration peg enters the host to form
a haustorium. The mycoparasite Piptocephalis virginiana
shows evidence of specific recognition in the infection
process (Manocha & Chen 1990). It infects only some
members of the order Mucorales, and the walls of
these hosts were found to have two surface-located
glycoproteins. Removal of these glycoproteins by
treating hyphae with NaOH or proteinase led to
impaired attachment and appressorium formation. The
treated hyphae (with their glycoproteins removed)
were found to bind lectins that recognize fucose,
N-acetylgalactosamine, and galactose, and this binding
pattern of the treated hyphae was identical to that of
nonhost hyphae. However the untreated host hyphae
did not bind these lectins, so it is suggested that the
glycoproteins that occur normally on host hyphae
cover the fucose, N-acetylgalactosamine, and galactose
residues (which somehow interfere with infection), and
enable the parasite to attach and infect. In support

246

CHAPTER 12

of this, the normal hosts are found to be resistant
to parasitism if they are grown in liquid culture
media, but susceptible when grown on agar plates. The
hyphae from liquid culture were found to have the three
sugar residues on their surface, presumably because the
glycoproteins that cover them were not produced in
liquid culture conditions.
Potential control of potato black scurf by Verticillium
biguttatum
The mitosporic fungus Verticillium biguttatum is a
biotrophic mycoparasite with potential for use as a
biocontrol agent of the specific strains of Rhizoctonia
solani (anastomosis group AG4) that cause black scurf
disease of potatoes. This disease is characterized by
the familiar black or brown crusts that develop on
the surface of potato tubers. The crusts are sclerotial
masses of Rhizoctonia and they significantly reduce the
marketability of the crop even though the damage is
only superficial. Like all biotrophs, V. biguttatum has
relatively little effect on the growth of its fungal host.
It penetrates from germinating spores, produces haustoria within the host hyphae (Fig. 12.11), and then
forms a limited mycelium outside the host, where it
sporulates. The infected host hyphae grow more or less
unimpeded, but even a localized infection of a host
colony can markedly suppress the production of

(a)

sclerotia over the colony. Apparently V. biguttatum
creates a nutrient sink towards itself within the host
mycelial network, counteracting the normal nutrient
sink towards developing sclerotia.
V. biguttatum can be grown easily on normal laboratory media, and it produces abundant spores for
use in biocontrol. These spores have been shown to
reduce black scurf in field experiments, but there is one
significant limitation: V. biguttatum needs a relatively
high temperature (at least 12°C) for growth, whereas
Rhizoctonia can start to grow at about 4°C so it colonizes potato plants earlier in the growing season,
before the mycoparasite can grow. This problem
would not be important if potato tubers could be
inoculated later in the growing season, because sclerotia
are produced only when the potato skins begin to
mature. Agronomists in the Netherlands are exploring
potential ways of doing this by lifting the potato
tubers before the skins mature, inoculating the tubers
with V. biguttatum, and then returning the potatoes to
the soil until the skins mature – a technique termed
“green crop harvesting” (van den Boogert et al. 1994).
Ampelomyces quisqualis, a biotrophic mycoparasite
of powdery mildew fungi
Ampelomyces quisqualis is one of several naturally
occurring biotrophic mycoparasites that are being

(b)

Fig. 12.11 Mycoparasitism of Rhizoctonia solani (anastomosis group 4) by Verticillium biguttatum. (a) Spores of V. biguttatum germinate near the host hyphae and grow towards the host in a spiral manner, then penetrate the living hyphae
to produce club-shaped haustoria (arrowheads). (b) A similar image, showing that the parasitized host hyphae are still
alive; they have intact vacuoles, and videotaped sequences show active protoplasmic streaming. (From van den Boogert
& Deacon 1994.)

FUNGAL INTERACTIONS

developed for commercial control of the damaging
powdery mildew fungi in glasshouse crops. The host
range of Ampelomyces is restricted to the powdery
mildew fungi (Chapter 14) but it infects many of these
and is found in at least 28 countries around the world.
It has the potential to control several important diseases, including powdery mildew of grapes, cucumbers,
strawberries, tomatoes, and ornamentals. Ampelomyces
produces flask-shaped pycnidia (see Fig. 2.33) that
contain many asexual spores, which are extruded
from a pore and are dispersed by water splash. These
spores germinate and directly infect the hyphae, conidiophores or immature sexual structures (cleistothecia)
of the powdery mildew hosts. Ampelomyces does not kill
the host tissues initially, but as the powdery mildew
colonies grow it produces pycnidia over the colony
surface and at this stage the host hyphae are killed.
Several cycles of infection can occur in a single growing
season, leading to significant control of the powdery
mildew hosts.
This mycoparasite survives as pycnidia between
crops or growing seasons, because it is unable to
grow in the absence of an appropriate host fungus.
This is one of the practical limitations of exploiting
Ampelomyces for disease control, because the powdery
mildew fungi must always be present, resulting in at
least some crop damage. But this can be minimized
by applying spore formulations of A. quisqualis early
in the growing season. The fungus is marketed commercially, under the trade name AQ10™.

Necrotrophic mycoparasites
Necrotrophic mycoparasites are quite different from
the biotrophs discussed above. They have characteristically wide host ranges and in many cases they
produce inhibitory toxins or other metabolites as part
of the parasitic process. Below, we consider three
examples to illustrate these points.

247

Fig. 12.12 Antagonism of a hyphal compartment of
Fusarium oxysporum by Clonostachys rosea. The damaged
compartment has lost its turgor but the adjacent compartments (top left and bottom right) are unaffected. A
narrow Fusarium hypha (arrowhead) has regrown into the
damaged compartment from a septal pore. (Courtesy of
V. Krauss.)
vacuolation and loss of turgor about 30–90 minutes after
contact (Fig. 12.12). This is slower than hyphal interference by Basidiomycota, which can take only a few
minutes, but C. rosea also branches and coils round the
damaged compartments, so it seems to use the host
hyphae as a nutrient source. In nature C. rosea is probably a secondary (opportunistic) invader of decomposing
organic matter, gaining some of its nutrients by
antagonizing living hyphae, some by exploiting dead
hyphae, and some from the underlying substratum.
A fungus called Gliocladium catenulatum is very
closely related to Clonostachys rosea (and probably
should be reclassified as Clonostachys). A strongly
antagonistic strain of this fungus is marketed by a
company in Finland (Kemira Agro OY) as a biological
control agent of several common plant diseases such
as damping off, seed rot, root rot, and stem rots.
Antagonism by Talaromyces flavus

Antagonism by Clonostachys rosea (formerly
Gliocladium roseum)
Clonostachys rosea, formerly known by its asexual stage
Gliocladium roseum, is a very common soil fungus
that produces abundant asexual spores. Its sexual
stage is Bionectria ochroleuca, although this is much less
widespread than the asexual stage. C. rosea colonizes
organic matter in soil and frequently overgrows other
fungi on agar plates. In fact, the easiest way to isolate
this fungus is to sprinkle crumbs of soil onto the
colonies of other fungi: C. rosea then produces its
typical sporing structures in 8–10 days (Table 12.1).
In nutrient-rich conditions, C. rosea can kill some
fungi by producing diffusible inhibitors, but on water
agar it antagonizes the hyphae by causing localized

Talaromyces flavus (Ascomycota) has a Penicillium-like
asexual stage. It first attracted attention as a parasite
of Rhizoctonia solani because it coils round Rhizoctonia
hyphae on agar plates, penetrating the hyphae and
causing localized disruption. However recent interest
has focused on its potential to control the vascular
wilt pathogen Verticillium dahliae (see Chapter 14). It
invades the melanized microsclerotia of Verticillium on
diseased roots, and sporulates on the surface of the
microsclerotia. T. flavus produces up to four antibiotics
in culture, one of them being an antifungal compound, talaron. However, it exerts its main effect –
at least on the hyphae of V. dahliae – by secreting
the enzyme glucose oxidase, which generates H2O2
from glucose (Kim et al. 1988). Consistent with this,

248

CHAPTER 12

(a)

(b)

Fig. 12.13 (a) A method for detecting Pythium oligandrum or other mycoparasites in soil. Three soil crumbs (white arrowheads) were placed on an agar plate previously colonized by a soil fungus, Phialophora. Within 4 days, P. oligandrum
started to grow across the Phialophora colony, collapsing the aerial hyphae (black arrowheads) and producing spinywalled oogonia (top right). (b) Narrow hyphae of P. oligandrum attacking and destroying a Phialophora hypha, leading
to production of a spiny-walled oogonium.

Talaromyces was found to antagonize V. dahliae only
when glucose was present in culture media, and not
when other common sugars were used. A commercial
source of glucose oxidase had the same effect on
hyphae of V. dahliae, but only in the presence of glucose; and these effects could be reproduced by low concentrations of H2O2 alone. It seems that Talaromyces has
several potential mechanisms for antagonizing other
fungi; they might act separately or in combination.
Mycoparasitic Pythium species
Most Pythium species are aggressive plant pathogens that
cause economically damaging seedling diseases and
root rots (Chapter 14). But six Pythium species are nonpathogenic to plants and instead they are aggressive
parasites of other fungi. In Britain the most common
of these is Pythium oligandrum which has distinctive
spiny-walled oogonia (Fig. 12.13). Like Trichoderma and
Clonostachys, discussed earlier, P. oligandrum can grow
from soil crumbs sprinkled onto agar plates previously
colonized by other fungi. Using this technique as a
method of detection, P. oligandrum has been found
in nearly half of the soils sampled in Britain, especially
from agricultural sites. P. oligandrum and similar fungi (e.g.
P. acanthicum and P. periplocum) are equally common
in the USA, continental Europe, and New Zealand.

Mycoparasitism by Pythium oligandrum has been
studied in detail by videomicroscopy (Fig. 12.14). In the
sequence shown, a hyphal tip of the plant pathogen
Botrytis cinerea contacted a hypha of P. oligandrum and
then lysed within 3 minutes, spilling the contents of
the Botrytis hypha. P. oligandrum then produced many
hyphal branches in the lysate and penetrated the
Botrytis hypha. Many similar sequences, involving different host fungi and different mycoparasitic Pythium
species, are described in Laing & Deacon (1991).
Some fungi are not invaded by P. oligandrum until
1 or 2 hours after contact, and during this time
the mycoparasite coils round the host hypha from
branches that originate at the initial contact point. P.
oligandrum then penetrates from beneath the coils.
This is commonly seen in interactions with plantpathogenic Pythium spp. and in interactions with
mature hyphae of Rhizoctonia solani (Fig. 12.15).
Detection of mycoparasites on precolonized agar
plates
Necrotrophic mycoparasites are easily detected and
isolated from soil using the precolonized plate method
(Fig. 12.13). This reveals an interesting feature, because
different types of mycoparasite that occur naturally in
soil are detected on different types of precolonized agar

Fig. 12.14 Frames from a videotaped sequence when a hypha of Botrytis cinerea (Bc) contacted a hypha of Pythium
oligandrum (Po) on a film of water agar. The times shown are from the start of recording (0 minutes).

Fig. 12.15 Frame from a videotaped
sequence when Pythium oligandrum
(growing from top right) contacted
a hypha of Rhizoctonia solani. The
Pythium hypha grew on, but within 5
minutes it branched at the contact
point and coiled round the Rhizoctonia
hypha. At about 49 minutes after the
initial contact, P. oligandrum penetrated the host hypha and caused the
protoplasm to coagulate.

250

CHAPTER 12

Table 12.1 The ability of different mycoparasites to grow across colonies of other fungi on agar plates. (Data from
Mulligan & Deacon 1992.)

Mycoparasite

Precolonizing fungus

Number of soils yielding the
mycoparasite (max. 28)

Pythium oligandrum

Fusarium culmorum
Trichoderma aureoviride
Rhizoctonia solani
Botrytis cinerea
F. culmorum
T. aureoviride
R. solani
B.cinerea
F. culmorum
T. aureoviride
R. solani
B. cinerea
F. culmorum
T. aureoviride
R. solani
B. cinerea

18
3
0
12
20
27
26
25
2
0
22
13
0
11
3
19

Clonostachys rosea

Trichoderma harzianum

Papulaspora sp.

Note: Soils were collected from 28 different locations in Britain and were stored air-dried. Twenty-eight plates of potato-dextrose agar
were inoculated with Fusarium culmorum, and similarly 28 plates were inoculated with Trichoderma aureoviride, Rhizoctonia solani, or Botrytis
cinerea. When these fungi had covered the agar plates a small amount of air-dried soil was added, and the plates were incubated
to detect any mycoparasites that grew across the fungal colonies. All the mycoparasites either grew completely across the established
fungal colonies or not at all. The results show that four mycoparasites are common in soil (detected in at least 18 of the 28 soils tested).
But, with the exception of Clonostachys rosea which grew across any fungus, the different mycoparasites are selectively favored by different “host” fungi.

plate (Table 12.1). For example, in the top data line
of the table, Pythium oligandrum was detected in 18 (of
a total 28) different soil samples that were sprinkled
onto agar precolonized by Fusarium culmorum, but
P. oligandrum was detected on only three plates precolonized by Trichoderma, and on none of the agar
plates precolonized by Rhizoctonia. These data indicate
that different mycoparasites are selectively favored
by different “host” fungi – at least in laboratory
conditions.
A mycoparasite unique to Britain!
Well, that’s not exactly true. There is a mycoparasite
that has only ever been recorded in Britain, and it is
very common. Pythium mycoparasiticum (see Fig. 10.2)
is a relatively slow-growing parasite that has been
recorded frequently on precolonized agar plates, but
only if the soil is serially diluted with sand to dilute
out the spores of more aggressive mycoparasites,
which outcompete P. mycoparasiticum in “raw” soil
(Deacon et al. 1991). It almost certainly occurs in
many countries, and this example serves to illustrate

that other fungi await discovery by using novel isolation techniques.
Pythium oligandrum as a biological control agent
Pythium oligandrum and the other mycoparasitic
Pythium spp. have the potential to be used for biocontrol
of plant pathogens, especially as seed treatments to control seedling pathogens. In this respect, P. oligandrum
grows rapidly on cheap commercial substrates such as
molasses, and it produces large numbers of oospores
in shaken liquid culture. These oospores have been
applied to seeds of cress, sugar beet, and other crops,
using a commercial seed-coating process, and were
reported to give good protection against seedling disease caused by Pythium ultimum in experimental conditions (McQuilken et al. 1990). A commercial powder
formulation of P. oligandrum has been developed in
the former Czech Republic. However, it is not used
widely, if at all, because of technical problems. The
major problem is that the oospores of P. oligandrum
germinate slowly and poorly because they exhibit constitutive dormancy (Chapter 10). Only a maximum

FUNGAL INTERACTIONS

10–40% of oospores freshly harvested from culture
broth will germinate readily, and this value drops to
5% or less when the oospores are dried for storage, making commercial production uneconomic. P. oligandrum
and other mycoparasitic Pythium spp. could only be
used as commercial biocontrol agents if methods can
be developed to ensure consistently high oospore germination. However, this does not preclude a natural
role for P. oligandrum as a biocontrol agent. There is
strong evidence that P. oligandrum helps to suppress
disease caused by Pythium ultimum in the irrigated
cotton fields of California. It seems to do this by competing with P. ultimum for the crop residues at the end
of the growing season, preventing P. ultimum from using
these residues to build up its inoculum level in the soil
(Martin & Hancock 1986).

Competitive interactions on plants
Competition, as defined at the start of this chapter,
embraces all the types of interaction in which one
organism gains ascendency over another because it
arrives sooner, grows faster, uses the substrate more
efficiently, etc. Competition is probably the most
common type of interaction in natural environments,
but this is difficult to prove unless all other potential
mechanisms can be discounted. Here we consider a few
cases where the evidence for competition is strong.

Control of the take-all fungus by
Phialophora graminicola
As we saw in Chapter 9 (see Fig. 9.11), the take-all
fungus Gaeumannomyces graminis attacks the roots of

(a)

251

cereals and grasses by growing as dark runner hyphae
and invading the vascular tissues of the root. There
are three forms of this fungus, termed varieties. G.
graminis var. tritici is a major pathogen of wheat and
barley roots; G. graminis var. graminis is often nonpathogenic; and G. graminis var. avenae attacks oat
crops and the fine turf grasses (Agrostis spp.) used on
golf-course greens, bowling greens, and other fine
playing surfaces (Fig. 12.16).
The take-all patch disease of fine turf grasses,
caused by G. graminis var. avenae, is rarely seen
because it occurs only in specific circumstances:
1 When the existing turf is heavily limed to correct for
over-acidity.
2 When new turf is established in sites that have
been chemically fumigated or fungicide-treated to
destroy pests and diseases.
3 When natural turf on golf course greens is removed
and replaced by new grass, laid on a bed of sand.
All three of these circumstances have one factor in
common – the natural, resident microbial antagonists,
which normally prevent take-all patch disease from
developing, are reduced or destroyed. For example,
over-acidity (case 1 above) is caused by the repeated
use of ammonium fertilizers, applied year after year,
to maintain the greenness of the turf. The ammonium
ion is absorbed by roots, and H+ ions are released in
exchange, leading to a progressive lowering of the turf
pH. Eventually the turf pH is so low that the grass
no longer responds to added fertilizer. The turf is then
heavily limed to restore the pH to near-neutrality.
This leads to serious outbreaks of take-all patch disease (Fig. 12.16), initiated by air-borne ascospores of

(b)

Fig. 12.16 (a,b) Take-all patch disease of turf on a golf-course green, caused by G. graminis var avenae. Note the poor
quality of the turf, where the fine turf grasses have been killed by the fungus and have been replaced by weeds and
course-leaved grasses.

252

CHAPTER 12

(a)

(b)

Fig. 12.17 (a,b) The neck of a perithecium of G. graminis var avenae, with long (c. 80 µm) ascospores that are released
from the apical ostiole and can infect turf grasses that are not protected by natural antagonists.

G. graminis var. avenae (Fig. 12.17). These spores would
not have sufficient nutrient reserves to infect if they
had to compete with the normal resident microbial antagonists. But these antagonists are pH-sensitive, and
have been largely eliminated by the very low turf pH.
Chemical fumigants and fungicides (case 2) act in a
similar way, because they progressively reduce the
population of resident antagonists. And, sand beds
(case 3) have a naturally low resident population of
antagonists, because of their low organic matter content. The disease patches then spread rapidly for 2
or 3 years, killing the fine-leaved turf grasses and
enabling the coarser grass species and weeds to
invade. Then the patches stop spreading, but the
quality of the playing surface is seriously damaged.
Two different types of natural antagonist have been
implicated in the control of take-all patch disease.
First, antibiotic-producing fluorescent pseudomonads,
which are known to suppress G. graminis in turf of nearneutral pH. Second, the fungus Phialophora graminicola,
which is a nonpathogenic invader of the grass root
cortex (Fig. 12.18) and also is known to suppress G.
graminis in turf of near-neutral pH (Deacon 1973).
In summary, the key to preventing the take-all patch
disease of grass turf lies in the management of turf pH,
which must be maintained at a level that supports the
natural antagonists, Phialophora, and/or fluorescent

pseudomonads. This example illustrates that competition for a resource (competitive niche exclusion) can
be a highly effective means of disease control.

Frost damage, and postharvest decay of
fruit
Leaf and fruit surfaces support a characteristic population of epiphytic bacteria and yeasts. Among these
are strains of Pseudomonas syringae that have natural
surface proteins with ice-nucleation activity. The presence of these bacteria on plant surfaces promotes the
formation of ice crystals when the air temperature
falls even slightly below 0°, resulting in frost damage.
If these bacteria are absent then the temperature can
cool to − 4° or lower before icing occurs, and this
difference can be important for frost-sensitive plants.
Lindow and his co-workers (see Lindow 1992) showed
that mutant strains (ice−) of P. syringae lacking the
surface protein can be pre-inoculated onto leaves to
exclude the wild-type (ice+) strains and give significant
protection against frost injury – another example of
pre-emptive competitive niche exclusion.
Other strains of P. syringae, and strains of the
yeast Candida oleophila, have been exploited to protect
against postharvest damage to fruit. Even slight

FUNGAL INTERACTIONS

253

Fig. 12.18 Colonization of cereal or grass roots by Phialophora graminicola, a nonpathogenic parasite of roots that can
effectively suppress invasion by the aggressive take-all fungus. (a) Dark runner hyphae of Phialophora in a grass root
cortex. (b) Clusters of darkly pigmented cells of Phialophora within the root cortex. (c) Heavy invasion of the cortex of
a cereal root by Phialophora, but the vascular tissues are not invaded. (d) At higher magnification, Phialophora hyphae
have colonized the root cortex, but the endodermis (e) prevents invasion of the vascular tissues.

damage to the fruit surface during processing and
packing can create portals for entry of decay fungi
(Botrytis cinerea, Penicillium spp., Mucor spp., etc). To counteract this, biocontrol strains can be applied to fruit
surfaces and are reported to give significant protection
by colonizing minor wounds. Like the ice− strains of
P. syringae, they act by competing for nutrients.
Currently, at least two companies market these products in the USA, using different protectant strains. The
products based on strains of P. syringae are marketed
for control of postharvest decay of apples and pears,
under the tradename Biosave 110, while Biosave 100
is marketed to control decay of citrus fruits. A product
based on a strain of Candida oleophila is marketed
under the tradename Aspire, to control Penicillium
spp. on citrus fruit, and B. cinerea and some Penicillium
spp. on apples. Fruit treated with these naturally occurring strains is exempt from the normal “tolerance” levels
that conventional fungicides are subject to.

Commensalism and mutualism
If we exclude lichens as organisms in their own right
(Chapter 13), there are few well-established examples
of fungi that live in association with other fungi, to
their mutual benefit (mutualism) or to the benefit of
one and not to the detriment of the other (commensalism). These types of association might be common,
but they are not well documented. Here we consider
one example, from laboratory experiments on the
interaction between Thermomyces lanuginosus (a noncellulolytic fungus of composts) and the cellulose-

degrading fungus, Chaetomium thermophile. It extends
the example discussed earlier (see Fig. 11.13).
Both T. lanuginosus (T.l.) and C. thermophile (C.t.)
grow during the prolonged high temperature phase
of composts, when much of the cellulose is degraded
(Chapter 11). It is assumed that T.l. grows in these
conditions by using sugars made available by C.t. or
other cellulolytic fungi. But this is difficult to demonstrate in the complex environment of a compost, so
most of the evidence has come from in vitro studies.
The methods used are similar to those described in
Chapter 11. Flasks containing sterile filter paper with
nitrate and other mineral nutrients were inoculated
with C.t. alone, T.l. alone, or C.t. + T.l. The flasks
were incubated for up to 7 weeks at 45°, and the loss
of dry weight of the flask contents was determined
(Fig. 12.19).
Thermomyces could not grow alone, because it cannot degrade cellulose and it cannot use nitrate as a
nitrogen source. By contrast, Chaetomium grew well
when inoculated alone, degrading about 1000 mg of cellulose after 4 weeks, and about 1200 mg after 7 weeks.
But the combination of Chaetomium and Thermomyces
gave an even larger weight loss – nearly 1500 mg after
4 weeks and over 1600 mg after 7 weeks. All these differences were statistically significant.
In addition to using a “standard” level of nitrogen
(giving a C : N ratio of 174 : 1), this experiment
included a double level of nitrogen (C : N of 88 : 1).
The effect of this was to allow the rate of decomposition to continue for longer, so that after 7 weeks
Chaetomium alone had degraded 2000 mg (of the original 7000 mg) of filter paper, while the combination

254

CHAPTER 12

repress the synthesis of further cellulases. So, by
using some of these sugars Thermomyces might have
relieved this negative feedback.
• Thermomyces must also have influenced the efficiency
of nitrogen usage so that nitrogen was available to
maintain the rate of cellulose breakdown for longer
than when Chaetomium was growing alone. We
saw in Chapter 11 that Chaetomium soon becomes
nitrogen-limited, presumably because it cannot
recycle nitrogen efficiently.
It would be interesting to know if Chaetomium benefits
in some way from the interaction, perhaps by increasing its own biomass or by staving off its replacement
by other fungi in composts. However, there is no evidence on this point, so this example must be described
as one of commensalism. At the least, this example
shows that fungi do not always have negative impacts
on one another.

Fig. 12.19 Weight losses of filter paper (originally 7 g dry
weight) in flasks inoculated with Chaetomium thermophile
alone (Ct) or C. thermophile with the noncellulolytic fungus Thermomyces lanuginosus (Ct+Tl) and incubated at
45°C. Mineral nutrients were supplied in the flasks with
either a standard amount of nitrogen (C : N ratio 174 : 1)
or double nitrogen (C : N ratio 88 : 1). (Data from Deacon
1985.)

Online resources
Database of Microbial Biopesticides (DMB). http://
www.ippc.orst.edu/biocontrol/biopesticides/
Weeden, C.R., Shelton, A.M., Li, Y. & Hoffman, M.P.,
eds. Biological Control: a guide to natural enemies
in North America. Cornell University. http://
www.nysaes.cornell.edu/ent/biocontrol/

General texts
of Chaetomium and Thermomyces resulted in a 2700 mg
weight loss.
The interpretation of even simple experiments like
these is difficult, but a number of points can be made:
• The losses in dry weight of the flask contents
actually underestimate the amount of cellulose
degraded, because some of the breakdown products
of cellulose are converted into fungal biomass
(which remains in the flasks).
• Thermomyces grew well in association with
Chaetomium. It was seen to grow over the filter
paper and produced its characteristic spores. So, in
some way Thermomyces must have obtained both a
carbon source (sugars) and a nitrogen source from the
association. Yet there was no evidence of parasitism,
and this was confirmed by study of hyphal interactions on agar.
• Thermomyces in some way enhanced the breakdown
of cellulose by Chaetomium. This might be expected
from knowledge of the regulation of cellulase
enzymes (Chapter 6), because any sugars that accumulate would slow the rate of enzyme action and also

Cook, R.J. & Baker, K.F. (1983) The Nature and Practice of
Biological Control of Plant Pathogens. American Phytopathological Society, St Paul, Minnesota.
Deacon, J.W. (1983) Microbial Control of Plant Pests and
Diseases. Van Nostrand Reinhold, Wokingham.
Gnanamanickam, S.S., ed. (2002) Biological Control of Crop
Diseases. Marcel Dekker, New York.

Cited references
Chin-A-Woeng, T.F.C., Bloemberg, G.V. & Lugtenberg,
B.J.J. (2003) Phenazines and their role in biocontrol by
Pseudomonas bacteria. New Phytologist 157, 503–523.
Deacon, J.W. (1973) Factors affecting occurrence of the
Ophiobolus patch disease of turf and its control by
Phialophora radicicola. Plant Pathology 22, 149–155.
[Note: Ophiobolus is now called Gaeumannomyces; P.
radicicola is now called P. graminicola.]
Deacon, J.W. (1985) Decomposition of filter paper cellulose by thermophilic fungi acting singly, in combination,
and in sequence. Transactions of the British Mycological
Society 85, 663–669.
Deacon, J.W., Laing, S.A.K. & Berry, L.A. (1991) Pythium
mycoparasiticum sp. nov., an aggressive mycoparasite
from British soils. Mycotaxon 62, 1–8.

FUNGAL INTERACTIONS

Howell, C.R., Stipanovic, R.D. & Lumsden, R.D. (1993)
Antibiotic production by strains of Gliocladium virens and
its relation to the biocontrol of cotton seedling diseases.
Biocontrol Science and Technology 3, 435–441.
Ikediugwu, F.E.O. (1976) The interface in hyphal interference by Peniophora gigantea against Heterobasidion
annosum. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 66,
291–296. [See also pp. 281–290; note that Peniophora is
now called Phlebiopsis.]
Ikediugwu, F.E.O. & Webster, J. (1970) Antagonism
between Coprinus heptemerus and other coprophilous
fungi. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 54,
181–204.
Jeffries, P. & Young, T.W.K. (1976) Ultrastructure of infection of Cokeromyces recurvatus by Piptocephalis unispora
(Mucorales). Archives of Microbiology 109, 277–288.
Jeffries, P. & Young, T.W.K. (1994) Interfungal Parasitic
Relationships. CAB International, Wallingford.
Kim, K.K., Fravel, D.R. & Papavizas, G.C. (1988) Identification of a metabolite produced by Talaromyces flavus
as glucose oxidase and its role in the biocontrol of
Verticillium dahliae. Phytopathology 78, 488–492.
Laing, S.A.K. & Deacon, J.W. (1991) Video microscopical
comparison of mycoparasitism by Pythium oligandrum,
P. nunn and an unnamed Pythium species. Mycological
Research 95, 469–479.
Lindow, S. (1992) Ice− strains of Pseudomonas syringae
introduced to control ice nucleation active strains on
potato. In: Biological Control of Plant Diseases; progress and
challenges for the future (Tjamos, E.C., Papavizas, G.C. &
Cook, R.J., eds), pp. 169–174. Plenum Press, New York.
McQuilken, M.P., Whipps, J.M. & Cooke, R.C. (1990)
Control of damping-off in cress and sugar-beet by
commercial seed-coating with Pythium oligandrum. Plant
Pathology 39, 452–462.
Manocha, M.S. & Chen, Y. (1990) Specificity of attachment
of fungal parasites to their hosts. Canadian Journal of
Microbiology 36, 69–76.
Martin, F.M. & Hancock, J.G. (1986) Association of
chemical and biological factors in soils suppressive
to Pythium ultimum. Phytopathology 76, 1221–1231.

255

Mulligan, D.F.C. & Deacon, J.W. (1992) Detection of
presumptive mycoparasites in soil placed on hostcolonized agar plates. Mycological Research 96, 605–
608.
O’Neill, T.M., Elad, Y., Shtienberg, D. & Cohen, A. (1996)
Control of grapevine grey mould with Trichoderma
harzianum T39. Biocontrol Science and Technology 6,
139–146.
Raaijmakers, J.M. & Weller, D.M. (1998) Natural plant
protection by 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol-producing
Pseudomonas spp. in take-all decline soils. Molecular
Plant–Microbe Interactions 11, 144–152.
Rishbeth, J. (1963) Stump protection against Fomes annosus. III. Inoculation with Peniophora gigantea. Annals of
Applied Biology 52, 63–77. [Note: Fomes annosus is now
called Heterobasidion annosum; Peniophora is now called
Phlebiopsis.]
Thomashow, L.S., Weller, D.M., Bonsall, R.F. & Pierson III,
L.S. (1990) Production of the antibiotic phenazine-1carboxylic acid by fluorescent Pseudomonas species in
the rhizosphere of wheat. Applied and Environmental
Microbiology 56, 908–912.
van den Boogert, P.H.J.F. & Deacon, J.W. (1994)
Biotrophic mycoparasitism by Verticillium biguttatum
on Rhizoctonia solani. European Journal of Plant Pathology
100, 137–156.
van den Boogert, P.H.J.F., Kastelein, P. & Luttikholt, A.J.G.
(1994) Green-crop harvesting, a mechanical haulm
destruction method with potential for disease control
of tuber pathogens of potato. In: Seed Treatment: progress
and prospects (Martin, T., ed.), pp. 237–246. British Crop
Protection Council, Farnham.
Weindling, R. (1934) Studies on a lethal principle effective
in the parasitic action of Trichoderma lignorum on
Rhizoctonia solani and other soil fungi. Phytopathology 24,
1153–1179.
Wood, D.W., Gong, F., Daykin, M.M., Williams, P.
& Pierson, L.S. (1997) N-acyl-homoserine lactonemediated regulation of gene expression by Pseudomonas
aureofaciens 30– 84 in the wheat rhizosphere. Journal of
Bacteriology 179, 7663–7670.

Chapter 13

Fungal symbiosis

This chapter is divided into the following major
sections:
•
•
•
•
•

the major types of symbiosis involving fungi
mycorrhizal associations
lichens
Geosiphon pyriforme – a remarkable “new” symbiosis
fungus–insect mutualisms

Fungi are involved in a wide range of intimate symbiotic associations with other organisms. Some of the
more important examples are discussed in this chapter, and it would be no exaggeration to say that they
have shaped the history of life on land. In several
cases the fungi and their partners have become so
intimately dependent on one another that they have
lost the ability to live alone. In other cases the fungi
can be cultured in laboratory media but they are,
in effect, ecologically obligate symbionts because they
seldom if ever grow as free-living organisms in nature.
The many thousands of species of lichen are classic
examples of this. They grow in some of the most inhospitable environments on earth, where no other organisms can grow, including cooled lava flows and arid
desert sands, where they literally hold the place in place!
Examples of new types of symbiotic association
continue to be discovered. In 1996 a unique association between a mycorrhizal fungus and a cyanobacterium was reported for the first time. In this case the

fungus engulfs cyanobacteria, which then provide the
fungus with its source of sugars (Gehrig et al. 1996).
This “dual organism,” Geosiphon pyriforme, is known
from only a few natural sites in Germany. Even more
recently, a nonphotosynthetic liverwort Cryptothallus
mirabilis (related to the mosses) was shown to
form a partnership with a species of Tulsanella
(Basidiomycota), a mycorrhizal fungus of birch trees.
When birch seedlings were supplied with radiolabeled
CO2 the label was translocated from the birch
seedlings to the liverwort, via the mycorrhizal hyphal
network, supplying the liverwort with organic carbon
nutrients (Bidartondo et al. 2003).
As we shall see in this chapter, the below-ground
networks of fungal hyphae provide potential links
between several different types of organism. There is
every reason to believe that further examples remain
to be discovered.
Symbiotic associations are also significant in economic
terms. The fungal endophytes of pasture grasses produce toxic alkaloids such as lolitrem B and ergovaline,
which are now known to be responsible for several
diseases of horses, sheep, and other grazing animals
(Chapter 14). These fungi have been found in over
60% of pastures in the USA. The many types of mycorrhizal fungi are exploited commercially in forestry and
cropping systems. And in a quite different context, fungi
form several mutualistic associations with insects,
some of which cause serious economic losses.

FUNGAL SYMBIOSIS

257

The major types of symbiosis involving fungi

Type of symbiosis

Fungi

Other partners

Mycorrhizas

Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, or
Glomeromycota
Ascomycota or sometimes
Basidiomycota
Glomerales-like fungus
Neotyphodium and Clavicipitaceous
fungi
Obligately anaerobic
Chytridiomycota
Various Basidiomycota, Ascomycota,
and mitosporic fungi
Amylostereum areolatum
(Basidiomycota)
Basidiomycota (Termitomyces;
Leucagaricus)

Land plants – bryophytes, pteridophytes,
gymnosperms, angiosperms
Green algae or cyanobacteria

Lichens
Geosiphon pyriforme
Fungal endophytes of grasses
(Chapter 14)
Rumen symbioses (Chapter 8)
Bark beetles and ambrosia fungi
Siricid wood wasps
Fungus gardens of leaf-cutting ants,
termites, and wood-boring
beetles

Mycorrhizas
Under agricultural field conditions, plants do
not, strictly speaking, have roots, they have
mycorrhizas. (Stephen Wilhelm)
The term mycorrhiza means, literally, “fungus root.”
It refers to the fact that fungi form many types of symbiotic association with the roots or other underground
organs of plants. These symbioses are extremely common. They are estimated to occur in at least 80% of
all vascular plants, including angiosperms (the flowering plants), gymnosperms (the cone-bearing plants),
many pteridophytes (ferns and their allies), and some
bryophytes (especially liverworts). Many of these associations are thought to be mutualistic, because the
fungus typically absorbs mineral nutrients from the
soil and channels these to the plant, while the plant
provides the fungus with sugars. However, there are
several different types of mycorrhiza, with different
properties and features.
We saw in Chapter 1 that fossils from the Rhynie
Chert deposits in Scotland (see Fig. 1.2) contain
fungal structures similar to those of the most common
mycorrhizal fungi today – the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. So, it seems that some of the earliest land
plants had already established mycorrhizal associations, and these might even have been a prerequisite
for life on land (Simon et al. 1993).

Nostoc (cyanobacterium)
Several grasses in the family Poaceae
Ruminant animals
Beetles (Scolitidae)
Trees
Attine ants, termites, beetles

The various types of mycorrhiza
Table 13.1 lists some of the main types of mycorrhiza
and their main ecological roles. In addition to the common arbuscular mycorrhizas, there are several other
types that have evolved independently of one another
(Harley & Smith 1983) and that serve different roles.
We will consider the commonest types in terms of
the plant–fungus interaction and their frunctional
significance.

Arbuscular mycorrhizas (AM)
Arbuscular mycorrhizas are the most common type of
mycorrhiza and are found world-wide on crop plants,
wild herbaceous plants, trees, many pteridophytes,
and some bryophytes. Until recently, the AM fungi
were classified as members of the Zygomycota. But
analysis of the genes encoding the small subunit (18S)
ribosomal RNA shows clearly that AM fungi are not
related to Zygomycota and probably share common
ancestry with Ascomycota and Basidiomycota. So they
have been assigned to a new monophyletic group, the
Glomeromycota (Scheussler et al. 2001; see Fig. 2.4).
Seven genera are recognized within this, based primarily
on features of the spores: Acaulospora, Entrophospora,
Archaeospora, Glomus, Paraglomus, Gigaspora, and
Scutellospora. None of these fungi can be grown in

258

CHAPTER 13

Table 13.1 The major types of mycorrhiza and their ecological significance.
Mycorrhizal type

Typical host plants

Fungi involved

Major significance

Arbucular mycorrhizas

Many

Glomeromycota

Ectomycorrhizas
Ectendomycorrhizas

Forest trees, mainly in
temperate and boreal regions
Mainly pines, spruce, and larch

Arbutoid mycorrhizas

Arctostaphylos, Arbutus, Pyrola

Monotropoid
mycorrhizas

Nonphotosynthetic plants, e.g.
Monotropa

Basidiomycota,
Ascomycota
Ascomycota of the
genus Wilcoxina
Basidiomycota, similar to
ectomycorrhizal fungi
Basidiomycota such as
Boletus edulis

Ericoid mycorrhizas

Heathland plants. Erica,
Calluna, etc.

Phosphorus uptake from
soil
Nitrogen uptake from
soil
Mineral nutrient uptake
from soil
Mineral nutrient uptake
from soil
Plants obtain sugars
from ectomycorrhizal
fungi attached to trees
Nitrogen uptake from
soil

Orchid mycorrhizas

Orchids

culture, away from their host plants, so they are
considered to be wholly dependent on plants for their
carbon and energy sources.
Roots containing arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi show
no outward signs of infection. Instead, they look like
normal roots, and the extent of colonization by fungal hyphae can only be seen by special techniques. One
method for this is to use differential interference contrast microscopy. But the more common method is to
treat roots with strong alkali, which destroys the plant
protoplasm, and then to stain the roots with a fungal
dye such as trypan blue. Fungal hyphae are seen to colonize the roots extensively by growing between the root
cortical cells, often producing large, swollen vesicles,
and by penetrating individual root cortical cells to
form tree-like branching structures termed arbuscules
(Fig. 13.1).
The AM fungi produce large spores, up to 400 µm
diameter, which are easily visible to the naked eye. These
spores can be extracted by washing soil through a
series of sieves with successively smaller mesh sizes, then
floating the spores to retrieve them from the sieves.
Single spores can then be used to initiate “pot cultures”
with seedlings in sterilized soil – the standard way of
maintaining different strains. The spores germinate
and infect the roots from an appressorium-like infection structure on the root surface, similar to the infection structures of plant pathogens discussed in
Chapter 5. From these initial entry points, the fungi
grow extensively between the cells of the root cortex
(Fig. 13.2), often producing large, swollen vesicles
within the root. These vesicles are thought to have a

Ascomycota and
mitosporic fungi;
Hymenoscyphus ericae
Rhizoctonia-like fungi
(basidiomycota)

Fungi supply the plant
with sugars

storage function. Other hyphae penetrate individual
root cells and branch repeatedly within these to form
dichotomous tree-like structures, termed arbuscules
(Fig. 13.3). These are thought to be the main sites of
nutrient exchange between the fungus and the root cells.
Consistent with this, the invaded cells remain alive
because the plant cell membrane invaginates to surround all the individual branches of the arbuscule – the
membrane itself is never penetrated. The individual
arbuscules live for a relatively short time (2–3 weeks)
and then degenerate, being replaced by new arbuscules
in other parts of the root.
Ecological significance of arbuscular mycorrhizas
Many studies have shown that the principal role of AM
fungi is to provide plants with mineral nutrients, and
especially phosphorus from the soil, while the plant
provides the fungus with sugars. In terms of plant nutrition, phosphorus is second only to nitrogen as the major
mineral nutrient that plants require, and yet phosphorus
is a highly immobile element. When added to soil in
the form of soluble phosphate fertilizers, the phosphate
ion readily combines with calcium and other divalent
cations, to form insoluble inorganic phosphates, or it
combines with organic matter to produce insoluble
organic phosphates. The natural rate of release of
phosphate is thus extremely slow and is often the
limiting factor for plant growth. The AM fungi produce
extensive hyphal networks in soil, providing a large
surface area for absorption of phosphorus. These fungi
also release acid phosphatases to cleave phosphate from

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Fig. 13.1 The principal features of arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi, observed by clearing the root tissues with strong
alkali and then staining roots with the fungal dye, trypan blue. (a) A root heavily colonized by AM fungi, with hyphae
that radiate into the soil. (b) When observed through the depth of the root cortex, AM fungal hyphae are often seen
to run parallel to the root axis, growing between the root cortical cells. These hyphae are irregular, with constrictions
and bulges, quite unlike the hyphae of most other fungi. They frequently produce large, swollen vesicles within the
root tissues. (c) Some of the external hyphae and hyphal aggregates produce clusters of spores in the soil. (d) Some
of the root cortical cells are penetrated by hyphae that branch repeatedly to produce intricately branched arbuscules,
often completely filling the root cells.

Fig. 13.2 Part of a clover root, partly
crushed and cleared of protoplasm
by treatment with strong alkali, then
stained with trypan blue to show the
distribution of fungal structures in the
root. The main features shown are
root hairs (rh), an entry point with a
characteristic diamond-shaped swelling equivalent to an appressorium,
large swollen vesicles, and “fuzzy”
arbuscules.

260

CHAPTER 13

Fig. 13.3 Single arbuscules of AM fungi growing within root cells. The arbuscules enter individual root cells from intercellular hyphae, then branch dichotomously and repeatedly so that most of the cell volume is filled with finely branched
AM hyphae, providing a large area of interface for potential nutrient exchange between the fungus and its plant host.

organic matter. They absorb phosphate in excess of
requirements and store it in the form of polyphosphates,
which can then be released to the plant.
Host ranges and communities of AM fungi
The AM fungi have astonishingly wide host ranges. At
least in artificial inoculations, an AM fungus obtained
from one type of plant can colonize the roots of many
unrelated plants. Nevertheless, a major experimental
study by Van den Heijden et al. (1998) strongly suggests that plants in natural communities are colonized
preferentially by different strains of AM fungi, and that
the diversity of AM fungi in a site can influence the
plant biodiversity in natural ecosystems.
One line of evidence leading to this conclusion is
shown in Fig. 13.4. Small field plots were established
with gamma-irradiated soil and sown with 100 seeds
of each of 15 plants typical of North American “old
field” systems. The plots received either no AM fungi
or mycorrhizal inoculum composed of different numbers of AM species (1, 2, 4, 8, or 14). After one season’s
growth the plots were harvested and assessed by
several different parameters. The results clearly show
that, as the number of AM species is increased in
the plots, so there is a corresponding increase in total
shoot biomass, total root biomass, total length of
AM fungal hyphae on the roots, an increase in plant
species diversity and plant phosphorus concentration.
In other words, with an increase in AM fungal diversity there is an increase in plant productivity and plant
biodiversity.

Another part of this study was a greenhouse experiment in containers of sterilized soil, using four strains
of AM fungi that had been isolated from a calcareous
grassland. There were six treatments: (1) soil with no
AM fungi, (2–5) soils with four separate strains of AM
fungi (labeled A, B, C and D), and (6) soil with all four
strains of AM fungi. Each soil container was sown with
a mixture of 70 seeds (of 11 different plant species) collected from the calcareous grassland. Over two growing
seasons the above-ground parts of each plant species
were harvested separately and the cumulative plant
biomass of each species was determined (Fig. 13.5).
The most striking feature in Fig. 13.5 is that different species in the plant community seem to respond
differently to different mycorrhizal fungi. For example,
the grass Brachypodium pinnatum grew poorly in the
absence of mycorrhizas and also poorly with mycorrhizal
fungus B, but better with mycorrhizal fungus C. The
grassland herb Prunella vulgaris (commonly known as
“self-heal”) also grew poorly in the absence of mycorrhizas but better in the presence of any mycorrhizal
fungus. The sedge Carex flacca grew best in the absence
of mycorrhizal fungi, and very poorly in the mixture
of all four AM fungi. This is not surprising because some
families of flowering plants, including sedges (Cyperaceae), rushes (Juncaceae), crucifers (Cruciferae), and
Chenopodiaceae, are typically nonmycorrhizal. They
tend to be plants of open habitats and are primary
colonizers of bare or frequently disturbed soils. They
were probably mycorrhizal at some stage but as typical open-habitat species they probably benefit from
being nonmycorrhizal.

FUNGAL SYMBIOSIS

7
Hyphal length (m g–1 soil)

Simpson’s diversity index

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

5
4
3

Soil P (mg kg–1 soil)

120
110
100
90
80

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

15
10
5
0

14

160

2,500

140

2,000

120
100
80

0

20

Plant P (mg m–2)

Shoot biomass (g m–2)
Root biomass (g m–2)

6

2

14

130

70

261

0

6
2
4
8
10
12
14
Number of mycorrhizal fungal species

1,500
1,000
500

0

6
2
4
8
10
12
14
Number of mycorrhizal fungal species

Fig. 13.4 An increase in the number of different arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi in a soil leads to an increase in plant productivity and plant biodiversity. (From van der Heijden et al. 1998, with permission from the publisher.)

Ectotrophic mycorrhizas
Ectotrophic mycorrhizas, or ectomycorrhizas, are
found mainly on woody plants, including many
species of coniferous and broad-leaved trees outside of
the tropics. For example, ectomycorrhizas are typically
found on trees such as pine, spruce, larch, oak, beech,
birch, and eucalypts. But tropical trees and even some
temperate trees (sycamore, ash, poplars) have arbuscular
mycorrhizas, and some trees (e.g. willows) can have both
types. The fungi involved in ectomycorrhizal associations are principally members of the Basidiomycota

that produce many of the common toadstools of the forest floor (e.g. Amanita, Boletus, Cortinarius, Hebeloma,
Lactarius spp.; Fig. 13.6) but ectomycorrhizas also are
formed by some Ascomycota, including the truffle
fungi. Given the range of plants and fungi involved in
this type of symbiosis, it is thought that ectomycorrhizal associations evolved independently on several
occasions in the last 130–180 million years.
The characteristic feature of ectomycorrhizas is the
presence of a substantial sheath of fungal tissue that
encases the terminal, nutrient-absorbing rootlets (see
Fig. 7.10), and the rootlets themselves are often short

262

CHAPTER 13

Total biomass

7.5 g

Prunella vulgaris
4.5 g

(a)

(b)
Brachypodium pinnatum
5g

0
(c)

A

B

C

D

A+B
+C+D

Carex flacca

16 g

0
(d)

A

B

C

D

A+B
+C+D

Fig. 13.5 Total biomass (a) and the biomass of three representative plant species (b–d) grown in soil with no mycorrhizal fungus (0) or with four separate AM fungal species (A, B, C, D) or a combination of all four AM species. Note
that the vertical scale of each histogram is different but the largest biomass is shown in each case. (Data from van der
Heijden et al. 1998, with permission from the publisher, but only some of the plant species are shown in this figure.)

and stumpy, with no root hairs. An extensive network
of individual hyphae or aggregated mycelial cords
(see Fig. 5.12) radiates from the surface of the root
sheath, while beneath the sheath the fungus invades
between the root cortical cells to form a “Hartig
net.” Although the fungus is in close contact with the
root cells in this region, there is no penetration of the
host cells, hence the name of these mycorrhizas –
ectotrophic (outside-feeding) mycorrhizas (Fig. 13.7).
Because of the lack of root hairs and the encasement
of the feeder roots by a fungal sheath, virtually all the
mineral nutrients that enter the root must be channelled
through the fungus. The uptake of mineral nutrients

from soil is facilitated by the mass of fungal hyphae
that radiate into the soil and transport nutrients back
to the mycorrhizal sheath. The fungus benefits from
these associations by obtaining sugars from the plant.
Trees invest a considerable amount of photosynthate
to support the fungal network – conservatively estimated
at 10% or more of the annual photosynthetic production of a tree.
Classic early experiments by Harley demonstrated the
transport of sugars from the plant leaves to the roots.
In these experiments the leaves of young trees were
exposed to 14C-labeled CO2, and the fate of the label
was followed through the plant tissues. Label was

FUNGAL SYMBIOSIS

263

(a)

(b)

Fig. 13.6 The fruitbodies (basidiocarps) of some representative fungi
that form ectomycorrhizas with forest
trees. (a) Hebeloma sp. growing on the
roots of an oak seedling in a plantpot.
(b) Amanita muscaria growing on pine
roots in a field site. (c) Lactarius sp.
(which, typical of the genus, secretes a
milky fluid when the gills are damaged) growing on birch roots.

found in the form of common plant sugars such as
sucrose and glucose in the stems and root tissues, but
when the label entered the fungal sheath it was found
in the form of 14C-labeled sugar alcohols such as mannitol, arabitol, and erythritol. Thus, there is effectively
a one-way flow of carbohydrates from the plant to the

(c)

fungus, because most plants cannot utilize these
“fungal sugars” (Harley & Smith 1983; Harley 1989).
Many ectomycorrhizal fungi can grow in laboratory
culture on simple organic media, but they have little
or no ability to degrade cellulose and lignin, unlike
the common decomposer fungi of the Ascomycota

264

CHAPTER 13

(a)

(b)

Fig. 13.7 (a) Scanning electron micrograph of a cross-section of part of a mycorrhizal root, showing the fungal sheath
that surrounds the root. (b) Thin section of part of an ectomycorrhizal root. The arrowheads show hyphae invading
between the root cortical cells, forming the Hartig net. Nutrient exchange between the fungus and the root is thought
to occur in this region.

and Basidiomycota. So, the ectomycorrhizal fungi
seem to be ecologically adapted to grow as symbionts.
They seldom show a high degree of host-specificity, so
it is quite common to find mycorrhizas of 10 or more
different fungi on a single mature tree. However, in
broad terms the ectomycorrhizal fungi can be grouped
into two types. Some are “generalists” with wide host
ranges, especially on young trees in newly afforested
sites (e.g. Laccaria spp., Hebeloma spp., Thelephora
terrestris, Paxillus involutus); others are more hostrestricted and tend to predominate on mature trees
(e.g. Suillus luteus on pines, Suillus grevillei on larch,
and the truffles, Tuber spp., on oak or beech). These
“mature” types have been shown to produce proteolytic
enzymes in culture, and this is thought to be significant
for their nitrogen nutrition. A few mycorrhizal fungi,
such as Laccaria and Hebeloma, can take up nitrate
from soil, but nitrate is readily leached out of soil by
rainwater. Most mycorrhizal fungi can take up ammonium or amino acids from soil, but in the cool, wet,
acidic conditions of many northern regions of the
globe the rates of decomposition of organic matter are
very slow, and this can significantly limit the rates of
plant growth. The release of proteases by these fungi
can therefore be important in providing ectomycorrhizal
plants with nitrogen in the form of amino acids.
Fungal networking
The ectomycorrhizal fungi play major roles in ecosystem functioning (Allen 1992). An extensive network of

hyphae and mycelial cords ramifies through the soil
from the mycorrhizal sheath (Fig. 13.8), and this network can link many different plants within a habitat
– even plants of different species because of the general
lack of host specificity of these fungi. For example, it
is known that young tree seedlings can be linked to a
“mother” tree or “nurse” tree by a common mycorrhizal
network, such that 14CO2 fed to the leaves of a larger
tree can be found as label in the roots and shoot tissues of nearby seedlings. The amounts of nutrients transferred in this way may not be large, but a seedling
that has tapped into an existing mycorrhizal network
might benefit from this (Smith & Read 1997).
There are at least two other potentially significant
functions of this subterranean network. An estimated
70–90% of ectomycorrhizal rootlets die and are
replaced each year. If these rootlets were not interconnected they would decompose and at least some
of the nutrients would be leached from the soil. The
mycelial connections could help to retain mineral
nutrients by withdrawing them from the degenerating
mycorrhizas to others that are still functioning.
Furthermore, as seen in Fig. 13.8, the system of
mycelial cords and fans of hyphae extends far beyond
the root zone. In observation chambers the peat substrate can be allowed to dry to the point where nonmycorrhizal seedlings die, but the mycorrhizal plants
remain healthy because the mycelial cords can transport water from deeper in the container, beyond the
reach of the roots themselves. This role can be particularly important in soils with poor water retention, such

FUNGAL SYMBIOSIS

265

Fig. 13.8 A young larch seedling,
about 3 cm high, growing in a peatbased substrate against a sloping
face of an observation chamber.
Mycorrhizas can be seen at the base
of the stem (arrow) but almost all the
visible growth is mycelial cords that
explore the soil for nutrients. (Courtesy
of D. Read.)

as former mining sites where trees are planted for land
reclamation. In fact, this role is not restricted to the
cord-forming fungi, because we noted in Chapter 8 that
all fungi can grow at water potentials beyond those that
plants can tolerate. For this reason even the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi can be significant in semiarid
environments, such as the deserts of southwestern
USA. The vast majority of plants in this type of environment (Fig. 13.9), including the giant cacti, have AM
fungi on their roots (Bethlenfalvay et al. 1984).

Ericoid mycorrhizas
The cold, nutrient-poor, acidic upland soils of the
northern hemisphere tend to be dominated by heathland plants of the family Ericaceae, such as Calluna
(ling), Erica (the bell heathers), and Vaccinium (bilberry,
cranberry, etc.). Equivalent soils in the southern hemisphere support a different family – the Epacridaceae.
All these heathland plants have a distinctive type of

mycorrhizal association with Ascomycota that produce
coils of hyphae in the thin lateral roots termed “hair
roots.” The coils develop within the root cells but
outside of the host plasma membrane, and nutrient
exchange is thought to occur primarily through this
interface. The fungi that produce ericoid mycorrhizas
are unusual because they seem to be free-living saprotrophs in soil. They grow in laboratory culture, producing septate hyphae with a fragmented, zigzag growth
form, but only one of them (Hymenoscyphus ericae) has
been studied in detail. DNA and RNA profiles indicate
that there is considerable genetic diversity between
isolates that are similar in colony appearance.
There is strong evidence that a primary role of the
ericoid mycorrhizas is to provide the host plants with
nitrogen. This was shown initially in laboratory conditions, by supplying plants with 15N-labeled ammonium,
when the label was taken up and incorporated into
the plants. But when 15N-ammonium was added to natural, acidic heathland soils the mycorrhizal plants
actually took up less label than the nonmycorrhizal

266

CHAPTER 13

Fig. 13.9 The giant saguaro cactus,
Carnegia gigantea, more than 7 meters
tall, and other large cacti (chollas and
prickly pear cacti) are heavily dependent on arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
because these plants have thick, fleshy
roots with few or no root hairs.

control plants, even though the mycorrhizal plants had
accumulated more total nitrogen. Evidently, in these
conditions the fungus was obtaining nitrogen and
supplying it to the host from a different (unlabeled)
source, while the uptake of ammonium was simultaneously suppressed. This led to the discovery that the
fungus secretes a proteinase with optimum activity at
about pH 3, releasing amino acids from the soil organic
matter. All members of the Ericaceae are strongly
mycorrhizal, consistent with a major role of the mycorrhizal fungi in supplying mineral nutrients in these
conditions.

Orchid mycorrhizas
Orchid mycorrhizas are entirely different from any of
those above, because orchids are parasitic on a fungus
for at least the early part of an orchid’s life. The seeds
of orchids are extremely small, consisting of an embryo
and only a few nutrient reserves. When orchid seeds
are triggered to germinate they produce a few root hairs,

and these must be colonized by a fungus at an early
stage or the seedling will die. The fungi in these cases
are species of Rhizoctonia (Basidiomycota) or closely
related fungi, which grow on soil organic matter,
degrading cellulose and other polysaccharides. The
fungus penetrates the orchid embryo and produces
hyphal coils, called peletons, which are surrounded by
the host cell membrane (Fig. 13.10). These coils last only
a few days, before they degenerate and are replaced by
further coils in other cells. Presumably, this repeated
production and degeneration of the coils provides
the main source of sugars to the developing orchid.
These sugars are likely to include trehalose or other
fungal carbohydrates (Chapter 7). Consistent with
this, orchid seedlings can be raised artificially in commercial conditions by supplying them with trehalose
in a culture medium. In natural conditions the mycorrhizal fungi provide orchids with their sole source
of carbohydrates during the early years of life. Most
orchids do not emerge above ground and produce
chlorophyll until they are 3–5 years old, and about 200
species do not produce chlorophyll at all throughout

FUNGAL SYMBIOSIS

267

example of the roles of mycorrhizal fungi in linking
different types of organism in plant communities.

Lichens

Fig. 13.10 Section through part of the protocorm (basal
stem region) of an orchid, Neottia, showing coils of
hyphae (peletons) within the orchid cells. The cells were
alive, as evidenced by the presence of nuclei (darker
structures) in two of the orchid cells.
their lives – they remain entirely dependent on the
mycorrhizal fungus.

Monotropoid mycorrhizas
Plants of the family Monotropaceae lack chlorophyll
throughout their lives and depend on mycorrhizal
fungi for all their nutrient requirements. These plants
are found in the deep shade beneath forest trees –
sometimes broadleaved trees such as oak and beech, but
more commonly coniferous trees such as pine, spruce,
and fir. The fungi involved in these associations are
Basidiomycota, such as Boletus edulis, that produce
typical ectomycorrhizas attached to the roots of forest
trees. From the tree host, these fungi radiate into the
soil as hyphal networks or mycelial cords, and they form
a hyphal sheath around the roots of Monotropa and
related genera. So, in effect, the monotropoid plants
are simply parasitic on ectomycorrhizal fungi, which
in turn draw their sugars from the tree. This transfer
of nutrients has been demonstrated by supplying
14
CO2 to the leaves of trees and following the label as
it moves down to the roots as sucrose before entering
the mycorrhizal sheath as labeled sugar alcohols or
trehalose, and thence through the mycelial cords and
ultimately into the flowering spikes of Monotropa. The
sheath that develops around the roots of Monotropa is
typical of an ectomycorrhizal sheath, with a Hartig net.
But the fungus also produces small pegs that project
into the root cells and then expand, surrounded by the
plant cell membrane.
This three-membered symbiosis, involving a direct
nutritional connection between a tree host, a mycorrhizal
fungus, and a parasitic higher plant, provides another

Lichens are remarkable organisms, unique in many
ways. They represent a symbiosis between at least two
separate organisms – a fungus and a photosynthetic
partner, which can be either a green alga or a
cyanobacterium. When the two (or more) partners
come together they produce an entirely different type
of organism, with a distinct morphology, leading to a
long-term symbiotic relationship. But sooner or later,
in many lichens, this relationship breaks down, and
then the partners have to re-establish the relationship
from the separately dispersed fungal spores and photosynthetic cells.
Lichens are extremely common and can even be the
dominant organisms in some environments, such as
arctic tundra and semiarid desert regions. Because of
their unique symbiotic relationship, lichens are able
to grow in conditions that no other organisms can
tolerate. In the following sections we will look at the
structure and physiology of lichens, and their environmental significance. Nash (1996) provides details
of many aspects of lichen biology. But, unfortunately,
lichenology has a lexicon of almost impenetrable
obscurity, which we will try to avoid as far as possible!

The lichen partners
There are estimated to be between 13,500 and 17,000
species of lichen, but we must begin with a note on
taxonomy. Because lichens are “dual organisms” composed of at least two separate species, there has always
been a difficulty in naming them. This issue was only
recently resolved by formally assigning lichens to
the fungal kingdom. So, for example, the common
orange-yellow coloured lichen Xanthoria parietina
(Fig. 13.11), which grows on rocks in coastal areas,
is classified as a fungus (Xanthoria) that contains a
photosynthetic partner – in this case, the green alga
Trebouxia.
In many lichens the fungus, termed the mycobiont
(the fungal symbiont), is a member of the Ascomycota
(cup fungi), but in a few cases it can be a member of
the Basidiomycota. The photosynthetic partner (the
photobiont) can be either a green alga or a cyanobacterium. However, a few lichens contain both a green
alga and a cyanobacterium, representing a symbiosis
of three kingdoms of organisms.
Almost all of the lichen fungi seem to be ecologically
specialized, because they are found only in lichen
partnerships and very rarely in a free-living state.

268

CHAPTER 13

(a)

(b)

Fig. 13.11 The lichen Xanthoria parietina, which commonly grows on rocky shores exposed to salt spray. (a) The lichen
thallus. (b) Close-up of part of the thallus, showing the disk-shaped apothecia which release ascospores.

Some have been grown in laboratory culture, but they
grow very slowly and they lack the enzymes necessary
for degrading organic polymers, so they are, effectively,
constrained to live in a symbiosis. Only about 100 green
algae have been found associated with lichens. The most
common are single-celled algae of the genus Trebouxia,
found in most lichens of temperate and cool regions.
Trebouxia species also seem to be ecologically specialized because they are found infrequently as free-living
species in nature. However, in Mediterranean and
tropical regions the green alga Trentepohlia (and other
genera) is often found instead of Trebouxia, and
Trentepolia can often be found growing independently
in nature, so it is not as ecologically specialized as
Trebouxia.
About 10% of lichens have cyanobacteria as their
main or only photosynthetic partner. The most common examples in Northern Europe and Scandinavia
are lichens of the genus Peltigera, which have Nostoc as
their photobiont. However, some lichens that contain
green algae can also have cyanobacteria in special
wart-like structures (cephalodia) on the lichen surface.
These structures are found in about 3–4% of lichens
and their role is probably to exploit the nitrogenfixing abilities of the cyanobacteria.
The fact that lichens can be formed by more than
one type of fungus (Ascomycota or Basidiomycota)
and more than one type of photosynthetic partner
(green algae or cyanobacteria) suggests that this type

of symbiosis has evolved independently on several
occasions. It is impossible to trace the evolutionary history of lichens, because they are not single organisms,
but the lichen symbiosis is unlikely to have evolved
until the Ascomycota developed, more than 300 million years ago.

The range of forms in lichens
Lichens exhibit a variety of forms, ranging from
almost casual associations of fungi and photosynthetic cells in some of the desert crusts (discussed
later) to highly differentiated structures with a clear
zonation of tissues. Germinating ascospores can produce
typical fungal colonies on normal culture media, but
a suitable photobiont is required to trigger morphogenetic changes leading to several different forms of the
lichen thallus (the “body” of the lichen) which are
commonly grouped into four categories (Figs 13.12–
13.15):
1 Foliose lichens, which have a flat, leaf-like structure.
2 Fruticose lichens, which have an erect or pendulous
structure.
3 Squamulose lichens, which produce small, scale-like
plates.
4 Crustose lichens, which produce flat crusts on rock,
soil or tree surfaces.

FUNGAL SYMBIOSIS

(a)

269

(b)

Fig. 13.12 Two foliose lichens. (a) Lobaria pulmonaria (lungwort), which grows on tree trunks in unpolluted parts of
Britain. The lobes are bright green, about 1–2 cm diameter, and can have brown fungal fruiting bodies (apothecia) on
the ridges. (b) Peltigera canina (the “dog lichen”) is a common lichen that produces flat, gray lobes about 2–3 cm diameter on mossy banks. (Note the conspicuous root-like projections – rhizinae – on the lower surface.)

(a)

(b)

Fig. 13.13 Two fruticose lichens. (a) Cladonia rangiferina (“reindeer moss”) which produces a gray-green, brittle,
multiple-branched thallus. There are several Cladonia spp. similar to this in upland heathland habitats. They provide a
major source of winter food for reindeer in Scandinavia. (b) Long, pendulous, bright green strands of the lichen Usnea
sp. attached to the branches of trees.

Structural organization of lichens
Many of the larger lichens have a well-defined structure, with a clear zonation, as shown in a cross section
of Xanthoria parietina (Fig. 13.16) and in the “tissues”
of Peltigera (Fig. 13.17). Typically, there is an upper
cortex of tightly packed fungal cells, which progressively merges into a medulla of more loosely arranged
hyphae. The cells of the photobiont often occur at the
junction of the cortex and medulla. In many lichens,

including Xanthoria, there is often a lower cortex
which sometimes has anchoring projections termed
rhizinae. The significant feature of this zonation is that
the photosynthetic cells are protected from desiccation
and exposure to intense sunlight by the tightly packed
cells of the upper cortex. But the algal cells also need
gas exchange for photosynthesis, so they are associated
with a loose network of fungal hyphae which are
probably coated with hydrophobins, providing air
spaces for gas exchange (Fig. 13.16).

(a)

(b)

Fig. 13.14 Squamulose lichens, commonly found on peaty soils. The squamules of Cladonia spp (a) are small, green,
scale-like structures, about 1–2 mm diameter, like flakes of skin (hence the name squamulose). These lichens are very
variable because they can grow in different forms, including goblet-shaped and candle-shaped structures (b) with
squamules at their base.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 13.15 Crustose lichens, which usually grow on bare rock surfaces, often produce a patchwork of colonies with
apothecia. (a) A rock surface, about 15 × 10 cm, colonized predominantly by a green-coloured lichen, Rhizocarpon
geographicum (the “map lichen”). (b) A gray, crustose lichen that has covered a rock surface and produced conspicuous red-brown apothecia, up to 5 mm diameter.

Fig. 13.16 Cross-section of Xanthoria
parietina, showing the zonation of tissues.

FUNGAL SYMBIOSIS

(a)

271

(b)

Fig. 13.17 (a) Tightly packed tissue of the upper cortex of the lichen Peltigera canina. (b) Thick-walled, hydrophobic
hyphae of the medulla of Peltigera.

Physiology of lichens: water relations and
nutrient exchange
Many lichens will tolerate prolonged drought and
resume activity rapidly after rewetting. Lichens that contain green algae can recover by absorbing water from
humid air and then begin to photosynthesize within
a short time. However, lichens that contain cyanobacteria can only resume photosynthesis after absorbing
free (liquid) water. In all cases the drought tolerance
of lichens is likely to be conferred by water-repellent
hydrophobins that coat the hyphal walls of the
medulla.The hydrophobins seem to be produced only
by the fungus, because cells of Trebouxia, which have
a naturally hydrophilic surface, become covered with
a hydrophobic material when grown in the presence
of a lichen fungus.
The principal roles of the lichen fungi are to provide
physical protection for the photosynthetic cells and
to absorb mineral nutrients from the underlying substrate or from rainwater. Lichen fungi are especially
adept at accumulating nutrients from trace amounts in
the environment. They are so efficient in this respect
that they tend to accumulate atmospheric pollutants,
particularly sulphur dioxide, to levels that are toxic. This
is why many lichens are rarely seen in major towns and
cities. Only a few species, such as Hypogymnia and
Xanthoria parietina, are found commonly in towns,
and even then they grow poorly, compared with their
growth in nonpolluted environments.

The principal role of the photosynthetic partner
is to provide sugars for growth of the lichen.
Radiolabeling studies have shown that green algae
and cyanobacteria can release up to 90% of their
photosynthate to the fungal partner. In lichens with
Trebouxia as the photobiont, and presumably with
other green algae, the fungal hyphae can produce
short branches that penetrate through the algal wall
to act as nutrient-absorbing structures (haustoria;
Fig. 13.18). In lichens with cyanobacterial symbionts
the hyphae similarly can form protrusions that penetrate the hydrophilic gelatinous sheaths around the
cyanobacterial cells (Fig. 13.18).
The major soluble carbohydrates in lichens are
sugar alcohols (polyols). These are present in the
form of mannitol and, to a lesser degree, arabitol in
the fungal hyphae. The green algae also produce sugar
alcohols as their main photosynthetic products – for
example, ribitol in the case of Trebouxia. However, the
cyanobacteria seem to release glucose to the fungal
partner, apparently through a glucose carrier in the cell
membrane after intracellular glucans have been enzymatically degraded. It is notable that the maximum
rates of nutrient release from the photobionts occur in
optimal moisture conditions, whereas the photobionts
retain most of their carbohydrate in conditions of
water stress. On this basis it has been suggested that
periodic cycles of wetting and drying might be advantageous in maintaining a lichen symbiosis, each
partner gaining carbohydrate at different stages of the
wetting–drying cycle.

272

CHAPTER 13

(a)

(b)

Fig. 13.18 Sites of potential nutrient exchange in lichens of the soil crust community of semiarid desert soils. (a) Three
green algal cells (labeled a) firmly attached to a hypha in the medulla of the lichen Peltula (see Fig. 13.22 for an image
of Peltula). The arrowhead shows a hyphal projection into an algal cell. (b) A cyanobacterial lichen (Collema sp., which
is one of the gelatinous lichens); fungal pegs are closely associated with depressions in the cyanobacterial cells, which
are surrounded by a gelatinous sheath.

Reproduction and dispersal mechanisms
The only way that a lichen can maintain itself
indefinitely is by vegetative propagation, and this can
be achieved in several ways. In some lichens, such
as Cladonia spp., the dry lichen thallus is brittle, so
fragments can be broken off and transported to new

(a)

sites by wind or by animals. Some other lichens produce special stalk-like structures termed isidia, which
are brittle, so they might be broken off and dispersed
(Fig. 13.19). Other lichens produce masses of powdery
propagules called soredia. These consist of a few photosynthetic cells enveloped in fungal hyphae, and they
are readily dispersed by wind (Fig. 13.19).

(b)

Fig. 13.19 Isidia (a) and soredia (b): two methods of vegetative dispersal of lichens.

FUNGAL SYMBIOSIS

(a)

273

(b)

Fig. 13.20 Part of a thallus of Xanthoria parietina, sectioned through an apothecium. (a) Many asci are seen just beneath
the upper surface of the apothecium. (b) Part of a crushed apothecium, composed of packing hyphae (paraphyses)
and asci containing ascospores.

A large number of lichens produce apothecia to
disperse their sexual spores (ascospores), as shown in
Fig. 13.20. When these spores germinate they must
contact the cells of a suitable photosynthetic partner
to establish a new lichen thallus. This process of
“reassembly” can be demonstrated in experimental
conditions, and evidence suggests that it also occurs in
nature. But its frequency may vary between different
types of lichen. For example, the separate dispersal
(and subsequent reassociation) of fungal and algal
(Trebouxia) cells might be the major means of dispersal
for the common lichen Xanthoria parietina (Fig. 13.20)
because this species does not produce soredia or other
specialized vegetative propagules.

Lichen ecology and significance
Lichens are classic “pioneer” colonizers in a wide range
of environments. They grow on the bark of temperate
trees or as epiphytes on the leaves of tropical rain
forest trees. Some lichens occupy the most inhospitable
environments on earth, growing on cooled lava flows
and bare rock surfaces. Other types grow abundantly
on tundra soils, providing a winter food source for
reindeer and caribou in arctic and subarctic regions.
Yet other lichens grow on or in the perennial leaves
of economically important tropical plants such as
coffee, cacao, and rubber. In all these respects, lichens
are significant components of ecosystems. But perhaps
their most significant role lies in their contribution to

soil formation, and in many cases this is brought about
by inconspicuous lichens that are so rudimentary that
they represent little more than a juxtaposition of
fungal and photosynthetic cells. For example, in the
soil crusts that cover many semiarid regions of the
world the microbial population consists of mats of
cyanobacteria interspersed with fungal hyphae and
a few small lichens just visible to the naked eye
(Figs 13.21–13.23).

Summary of the lichen symbiosis
The great diversity of lichens and the many environments in which they occur attest to the fact that
lichen symbioses are highly successful. Lichens are
slow-growing organisms, so they do not necessarily
contribute greatly to biomass production. But their
unique symbiosis enables them to grow in a range
of environments that no other organism can tolerate
and, importantly, in conditions that none of the constituent partners could tolerate alone.

Geosiphon pyriforme
Geosiphon pyriforme is a remarkable organism that was
first reported in 1996 and is known from only very few
sites in Germany. It is a soil fungus, closely related to
the arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi, but it incorporates
a cyanobacterium (Nostoc punctiforme) into its cells as

274

CHAPTER 13

Fig. 13.21 A dried soil crust community
of lichens, cyanobacteria and fungal
hyphae that form a thin covering
which binds the surfaces of semiarid
soils. Such a community would be
more than 100 years old and represents
a relatively early stage in soil formation.

Fig. 13.22 A small fragment of a desert
crust community when remoistened,
showing several small lichen thalli
(Peltula sp.) and one small cyanobacterial lichen (Collema). Most of the soil
surface is covered with filaments of the
cyanobacterium Scytonema.

an endosymbiont. In the mature stage, Geosiphon produces transparent bladder-like structures on the soil surface, each about 1 mm high, with the cyanobacteria
located towards the top of the bladders (Fig. 13.24).
Hyphae radiate into the soil from the base of the
bladders, and it is possible (but as yet unproven) that
these hyphae interact with plant roots to form arbus-

cular mycorrhizas. When the partnership is fully
established, the cyanobacteria are photosynthetically
active, and the cyanobacteria produce heterocysts,
which can fix atmospheric nitrogen.
Experimental studies have revealed several stages
in the development of this unique symbiosis. The two
partners initially live independently on the soil surface,

FUNGAL SYMBIOSIS

(a)

Fig. 13.23 (a) The desert crust lichen,
Peltula, which typically grows as a
thallus composed of several squamules. (b) The same lichen seen from
below, showing a mass of branched
rhizinae that “root” into the desert
sand. (c) Part of Fig. 13.22, enlarged
to show the mass of cyanobacterial
filaments (Scytonema sp.). (d) A single
filament of Scytonema encased in a
mucilaginous sheath with soil particles.

(c)

Fig. 13.24 Bladders of Geosiphon pyriforme growing on
the surface of soil. Scale bar = 1 mm. (Courtesy of A.
Schuessler.)

and the partnership is only established when the
cyanobacteria are present in a specific stage of their life
cycle, termed the primordium stage. When cyanobacteria in this stage make contact with the fungus, the
tip of the hypha bulges and surrounds some of the

275

(b)

(d)

cyanobacterial cells, which are then incorporated into
the fungus by endocytosis. This leads eventually to the
development of a symbiosome – a membrane-bound
structure containing the cyanobacteria but separating
them from the rest of the cell contents (Fig. 13.25). It
is notable that each bladder represents the result of a
single incorporation of cyanobacteria, so this would
have to happen many times in the colony. Once
formed, the individual bladders can live for more than
half a year.
The cyanobacterial symbiont in these associations
(Nostoc punctiforme) can be grown quite easily in
laboratory conditions, and several strains of this
cyanobacterium can be used to establish the Geosiphon
symbiosis – even cyanobacterial strains from other
symbiotic associations such as the liverwort Blasia and
the higher plant, Gunnera.
There is strong evidence that Geosiphon represents
a symbiotic and mutualistic association. The fungus
benefits primarily from a supply of photosynthate
from the cyanobacterium, while the cyanobacterium
probably depends on the fungus for a supply of phosphate. Consistent with this, the Geosiphon bladders
have been shown to be impermeable to even small
organic compounds such as sugars, so the fungus

276

CHAPTER 13

V

NC

N

M
BLO

V

vacuole
Nostoc

SM

heterocyst
symbiosome
membrane
plasma
membrane
cell wall
lipid droplet

V
CW

hypha

PM

(a)

(b)

Fig. 13.25 Drawings of the Geosiphon bladder compartmentation. (a) Cells of Nostoc are located in membrane-bound
symbiosomes towards the periphery of the fungal cell. (b) Detail showing a bacteria-like organism (BLO), cell wall (CW),
mitochondrion (M), nucleus (N), Nostoc cell (NC), plasma membrane (PM), symbiosome membrane (SM), and vacuole
(V). (Image courtesy of A. Scheussler & M. Kluge; from Schuessler & Kluge 2001.)

would need to be supplied with these by the photosynthetic partner. This astonishing newly discovered
type of symbiosis should spur renewed interest in the
study of rudimentary associations among the microscopic organisms in soil.

source. The likely driving force for this is the inability
of insects (or other animals) to degrade cellulose.
Instead, the insect has to harness the cellulolytic
activities of fungi to obtain food. In the more highly
evolved associations of this type, the insect ensures the
perpetuation of the mutualism by:

Fungus–insect mutualisms

• carrying and transmitting the fungus in specially
adapted organs, called mycangia;
• inoculating a suitable substrate with spores of the
fungus;

Several insects have developed mutualistic associations
with fungi, to provide the insect with a suitable food

FUNGAL SYMBIOSIS

Fig. 13.26 The wood wasp, Sirex noctilio, boring a hole
in a weakened tree to deposit eggs and fungal spores.
(Courtesy of M.P. Coutts, J.E. Dolezal and the University
of Tasmania; see Madden & Coutts 1979.)

• tending or “gardening” the substrate to promote the
growth of the fungus which will be used as a food
source by the insects.

The Sirex wood wasp associations
Female wood wasps of the genus Sirex inject their eggs
into the wood of weakened or damaged trees by means
of an auger-like ovipositor (Fig. 13.26). Then, using the
same entrance hole, the wasp produces two or three
further tunnels at different angles, and she deposits
further eggs in these. But in the final tunnel the wasp
injects spores of a wood-rotting fungus Amylostereum
areolatum (Basidiomycota) from pouches termed
mycangia that are located at the base of the ovipositor. The mucus containing the fungal spores is toxic
and causes the foliage to wilt, while the growth of the
fungus causes the wood to dry out locally and disrupts
water movement in the trunk. This combination of
factors provides ideal nutritional conditions for the
development of the wasp larvae, which feed on the
fungus and the cellulolytic breakdown products of
the wood. After pupation, the larvae produce a new
batch of adults, and as the females emerge they collect spores from the rotting wood and store them in
the mycangia, to repeat the cycle of inoculation in other
trees.
Several types of wood wasp oviposit in dead trees,
but the most significant damage to living trees is
caused by Sirex noctilio. This wasp can be an economically significant pest in pine plantations and can also
attack several other conifers. Sirex noctilio occurs naturally in the northern hemisphere, including Britain and
several Asian countries, but in the past century it has

277

spread to many countries in the southern hemisphere,
including parts of Africa, South America, Australia,
and New Zealand.
Slippers et al. (2002) analyzed the population structure of Amylostereum strains associated with different
wood wasp species, as a potential basis for implementing pest control and quarantine measures. Using
PCR-RFLP (polymerase chain reaction–restriction fragment length polymorphisms) and analysis of nuclear
intergenic spacer DNA, it was possible to match different
isolates of the fungus to recent geographical movements
of S. noctilio. The results indicate that, since the introduction of S. noctilio into the southern hemisphere from
the northern hemisphere, around 1900, all subsequent
movement of this pest has been between countries in
the southern hemisphere and not by further introductions from the north. This provides the potential
basis of a management strategy: local quarantine measures could be applied to prevent further spread of the
pest.

Leaf-cutting ants, “gardening” termites,
and ambrosia fungi
Several insects and arthropods have co-evolved with
fungi in mutualistic associations. Three classic examples
of this are exhibited by the leaf-cutting ants of Central
and South America, the “garden-tending” termites of
Africa and South-east Asia, and wood-boring beetles
in several parts of the world (Mueller & Gerardo
2002).
The leaf-cutting ants, commonly termed attine ants,
produce large nests with many subterranean chambers.
The nests are started by a single winged female – the
future queen – who carries inoculum of a fungus in a
pouch at the back of her mouth. She deposits the
fungus on suitable plant material, and as the fungus
grows she begins to lay eggs. Worker ants bring leaf
pieces back to the nest, lick them, chew them and
defecate on them, then inoculate them with tufts
of the fungus and pack the inoculated material into
chambers. Remarkably, these “fungus gardens” consist
almost exclusively of one fungus – often a species
of the mushroom-forming genus Leucoagaricus. The
mycelium of the fungus develops a distinctive growth
form within the gardens, producing hyphae with
balloon-like swollen tips, called gongylidia or bromatia, which are fed to the larvae and provide their
food source. In addition, the gongylidia are foraged by
the ants, to supplement their diet of plant sap. Recent
evidence (Ronhede et al. 2004) suggests that the fungi
in these associations provide many of the enzymes,
including proteases, laccases, pectinases, and carboxymethylcellulases, for degrading the leaf material.
These enzymes seem to be protected and possibly

278

CHAPTER 13

concentrated during passage through the ant gut,
and are deposited in the fecal droplets. By cladistic
analysis of both the ants and their fungal associates,
Mueller & Gerardo have shown that the ability of ants
to cultivate fungi arose only once, about 50–60 million years ago, but has given rise to about 200 species
of fungus-growing ants, matched to their specific fungal associates.
An essentially similar type of behavior is found in a
subfamily (Macrotermitinae) of termites in Africa and
southeast Asia. Unlike most termites, this subfamily cannot digest wood, because they do not have cellulolytic
protozoa in their guts. Instead they have evolved a symbiosis with the fungus Termitomyces (Basidiomycota)
which is cultured in fungus gardens, using plant debris
that is continually added to the colony. The termites
tend these gardens by weeding out any contaminant
fungi. After periods of heavy rainfall the fungus produces large, mushroom fruitbodies with long tapering
underground stalks. This association is highly specialized because Termitomyces species are only ever found
associated with termite nests.
A third association of this type is found in some woodboring beetles that produce tunnels in damaged or dead
trees. The beetles deposit eggs in these tunnels and
smear the tunnel walls with spores of fungi, collectively
known as ambrosia fungi. The spores of these fungi
are stored in special sacs (mycangia) on the beetle’s body
to provide inoculum for establishment in new sites.
The developing beetle larvae create extensive galleries
beneath the bark and feed predominantly, if not
exclusively, on the fungus. These “gardens” typically
contain only one type of fungus, because contaminant
fungi are weeded out.
There is a remarkable parallel in the evolution of these
three types of “fungus-farming” systems, because
about 40–60 million years ago the termites, ants, and
beetles independently evolved the ability to culture
fungi as their source of food. In ants and termites the
ability to culture fungi originated only once in each
group, but in ambrosia beetles it originated at least seven
times. Now all of these fungus-cultivating insects and
their fungal partners are mutually dependent on one
another. There is no evidence that they have ever
reverted to an independent existence.

Cited references
Allen, M.F. (ed.) (1992) Mycorrhizal Functioning. Chapman
& Hall, New York.
Bethlenfalvay, G.J., Dakessian, S. & Pacovsky, R.S. (1984)
Mycorrhizae in a southern California desert: ecological
implications. Canadian Journal of Botany 62, 519–524.
Bidartondo, M.I., Bruns, T.D., Weiss, M., Sèrgio, & Read,
D.J. (2003) Specialized cheating of the ectomycorrhizal
symbiosis by an epiparasitic liverwort. Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, B 270, 835–842.
Gehrig, H., Scheussler, A. & Kluge, M. (1996) Geosiphon
pyriforme, a fungus forming endocytosymbiosis with
Nostoc (Cyanobacteria) is an ancestral member of the
Glomales: evidence by SSU rRNA analysis. Journal of
Molecular Evolution 43, 71–81.
Harley, J.L. (1989) The significance of mycorrhiza.
Mycological Research 92, 129–139.
Harley, J.L. & Smith, S.E. (1983) Mycorrhizal Symbiosis.
Academic Press, London.
Madden, J.L. & Coutts, M.P. (1979) The role of fungi in
the biology and ecology of woodwasps (Hymenoptera
Siricidae). In: Insect–Fungus Symbiosis (Batra, L.R., ed.),
p. 165. Allanheld, Osmun & Co., New Jersey.
Mueller, U.G. & Gerardo, N. (2002) Fungus-farming
insects: multiple origins and diverse evolutionary histories. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA 99, 15247–15249.
Nash, T.H. (1996) Lichen Symbiosis. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
Ronhede, S., Boomsma, J.J. & Rosendahl S. (2004) Fungal
enzymes transferred by leaf-cutting ants in their fungus
gardens. Mycological Research 108, 101–106.
Scheussler, A. & Kluge, M. (2001) Geosiphon pyriforme, an
endocytosymbiosis between fungus and cyanobacteria,
and its meaning as a model system for AM research. In:
The Mycota, vol. IX. Fungal Associations (Hoch, B., ed.),
pp. 151–161. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Scheussler, A., Schwarzott, D. & Walker, C. (2001) A new
fungal phylum, the Glomeromycota: phylogeny and evolution. Mycological Research 105, 1413–1421.
Simon, L., Bousquet, J., Levesque, R.C. & Lalonde, M.
(1993) Origin and diversification of endomycorrhizal
fungi and coincidence with vascular land plants. Nature
363, 67–69.
Slippers, B., Wingfield, M.J., Coutinho, T.A. & Wingfield,
B.D. (2002) Population structure and possible origin of
Amylostereum areolatum in South Africa. Plant Pathology
50, 206–210.
Smith, S.E. & Read, D.J. (1997) Mycorrhizal Symbiosis, 2nd
edn. Academic Press, San Diego.
van der Heijden, M.G.A., Wiemken, A. & Sanders, I.R. (1998)
Mycorrhizal fungal diversity determines plant diversity,
ecosystem variability and productivity. Nature 396, 69–72.

Chapter 14

Fungi as plant pathogens

This chapter is divided into the following major sections:
• the major types of plant-pathogenic fungi
• necrotrophic pathogens of immature or compromised
hosts
• pathogens of fruits: the roles of pectic enzymes
• host-specialized necrotrophic pathogens
• vascular wilt diseases
• the smut fungi
• fungal endophytes and their toxins
• Phytophthora diseases
• biotrophic pathogens
Fungi are pre-eminent as plant pathogens. Roughly
70% of all the major crop diseases are caused by
fungi, or the fungus-like Oomycota. One of the most
notorious examples is potato late blight caused by
Phytophthora infestans (Oomycota), which devastated
potato crops in Ireland in the 1840s leading to
widespread famine. It is estimated that more than half
a million people died of starvation in that period, and
a similar number emigrated to the rest of Europe and
North America. Potato blight is still a potentially serious disease wherever potatoes are grown, despite
many attempts to control it by plant breeding and
fungicides (Chapter 17). A more recent example is the
Great Bengal Famine of 1943, which is estimated
to have cost the lives of some 2 million people due
to failure of the rice crops caused by a leaf-spot
pathogen, Helminthosporium oryzae (now variously
known as Bipolaris oryzae or Cochliobolus miyabeanus).

Fungi also cause many serious diseases of landscape
and amenity trees. Dutch elm disease, caused by
Ophiostoma ulmi and the related species O. novo-ulmi,
swept repeatedly across North America, Britain, and
continental Europe over the last century, decimating
the elm populations. Similarly, chestnut blight,
caused by Cryphonectria parasitica, has devastated
the native American chestnut tree, Castanea dentata.
This disease swept across much of the eastern part of
the USA, after it was first recorded in the New York
Zoological Garden in 1904. The magnificent American
chestnut forests have now virtually disappeared and
are represented only by a shrub-like understorey
layer. Cinnamomi root rot, caused by Phytophthora
cinnamomi, is another example of an introduced
pathogen, currently threatening large tracts of natural
eucalypt forest in Australia. And, at the time of writing,
sudden oak death caused by Phytophthora ramorum
is ravaging the natural oak woodlands in the coastal
fog belt of northern California and southern Oregon.
This “new disease,” first recorded in 1996, has now
spread to many parts of Europe and is causing serious
alarm. It has the potential to destroy many of Britain’s
ancient woodlands. These are just a few examples
of many that could be cited. Taken together, the
epidemics in crop plants, plantations, and natural
woodlands have caused inestimable damage. In this
chapter we focus on the activities of plant-pathogenic
fungi and their several adaptations for causing disease.
In Chapter 17 we will consider how these diseases can
be controlled.

280

CHAPTER 14

The major types of plant-pathogenic fungi:
setting the scene
It is helpful to begin with some definitions:
1 A parasite can be defined as an organism that gains
all or part of its nutritional requirements from the
living tissues of another organism – the host. In
other words, parasitism describes a nutritional
relationship.
2 A pathogen can be defined as an organism that
causes disease. It is almost always a parasite, but the
distinction between a parasite and a pathogen is
important because parasites do not always cause
obvious or serious disease.
There are many thousands of plant-pathogenic fungi,
so we need to group them in some way that reflects
their fundamental biology. The system we will use is
based on two principal features: (i) the type of nutritional relationship between the pathogen and the
host, and (ii) whether the pathogen has a broad host
range or is host-specialized.
In terms of the nutritional relationship, we distinguish between necrotrophic pathogens and
biotrophic pathogens. Nectrotrophs kill the host
tissues, usually by directly invading them, or by producing toxins or degradative enzymes, and then feed
on the tissues that they kill (Greek: nekros = dead; trophos
= a feeder). By contrast, biotrophic pathogens feed on
living host tissues (Gr. bios = life), often by producing
special nutrient-absorbing structures that tap into
the host’s tissues. A third group – hemibiotrophic
pathogens – initially grow as biotrophs but then
invade and kill the tissues. Some of the Phytophthora
species such as P. infestans behave in this way.
The secondary distinction is between pathogens of
broad host range and those that are host-specialized,
with a narrow host range. Pathogens of broad
host range usually attack immature or senescing
tissues, or plants whose resistance is compromised by
environmental factors. By contrast, host-specialized
pathogens are adapted to overcome the specific
defense mechanisms of plants, such as the fungitoxic
compounds that many plants produce to ward off
infection. The biotrophic pathogens are necessarily
host-specialized.
So, we can categorize almost all pathogens in the
following simple scheme, which will form the basis for
the rest of this chapter. We will discuss representative
examples of the major types of plant disease, to build
up a picture of the diversity of plant-pathogenic fungi
and their activities.

Pathogen

Necrotroph

Host-specialized

Non-specialized

Biotroph

Host-specialized

Necrotrophic pathogens of immature or
compromised hosts
A large number of fungi attack the tissues of young
plants, causing seed rots or seedling diseases. Other fungi
typically attack the older, senescing tissues of plants,
and yet others attack plants that are compromised by
drought or other stress factors. Although these fungi
do not have a very sophisticated mode of parasitism,
they can cause serious economic damage. Several examples are discussed below.

Seed rots and seedling pathogens
A characteristic range of fungi cause seed rots or
seedling diseases – sometimes called damping-off
diseases because they are often associated with wet
soil conditions. For example, many Pythium spp.
(Oomycota) attack the root tips of seedlings, and
strains of Rhizoctonia solani often attack the young
shoot base, just above or below the soil level. Other
fungi with similar behavior include Fusarium spp.
which cause seed-rots and seedling diseases of cereals.
All these fungi respond rapidly to the presence of seed
or seedling exudates, and invade the young tissues that
have little inherent host resistance. To help counteract this problem, seeds are usually coated with broadspectrum fungicides such as maneb, thiram, or
dinocap (Chapter 17) which interfere with several
basic metabolic processes of fungi. But there is an
increasing trend to replace fungicidal seed coatings
with biological control agents. Several of these are
now available commercially. They include antibioticproducing bacteria such as Bacillus subtilis, used widely
in the USA for cotton and several other field crops, and
Pseudomonas chlororaphis, used widely in Scandinavia
to protect against seedling diseases of cereals. Several
fungi are marketed for biocontrol of seedling diseases,
including Trichoderma spp. and Clonostachys rosea
(under its former name Gliocladium catenulatum).
All these products work well in appropriate conditions; but seedling pathogens can infect rapidly, before

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

a biological control agent can become established. For
example, soil-borne sporangia of the common seedling
pathogen Pythium ultimum can germinate within 1–2
hours in response to volatile metabolites released from
germinating seeds (probably ethanol but possibly also
acetaldehyde), and the seed tissues can be heavily colonized within 6–12 hours of planting in Pythiuminfested soil. Biocontrol agents are unlikely to act fast
enough to control such pathogens (Nelson 1987, 1992).
Athelia rolfsii
The sclerotium-forming fungus Athelia (Sclerotium)
rolfsii (Basidiomycota) is one of the most devastating
seedling pathogens in the warmer parts of the world
where rainfall is seasonal. The sclerotia of A. rolfsii
(Fig. 14.1) survive in soil during the dry season and are
triggered to germinate after the first rains. Then the
fungus grows on the re-wetted crop residues from the
previous season and uses these residues as a food base
to attack the newly sown crop, typically rotting the basal
stem tissues within 3–4 weeks. Large areas of cereals,
and other crops, can be destroyed by this fungus.
The key to understanding A. rolfsii lies in the behavior of its sclerotia, as shown by the experiment in

(a)

281

Fig. 14.2 and Table 14.1. If sclerotia are harvested from
laboratory cultures they exhibit hyphal germination,
whereby only a few hyphae emerge and these can infect
plants at only a short distance from the sclerotia
(0.5 cm). But sclerotia that have been air-dried show
eruptive germination when remoistened – all the
sclerotial reserves are used to produce a mass of
hyphae, which are organized into mycelial cords
and can infect a plant at up to 3.5 cm distance. The
sclerotia of this fungus are even more effective in the
presence of freshly decomposing organic matter (e.g.
crop residues from the previous season, which start to
decompose after the first rains). Volatile compounds,
especially methanol, are released from these freshly
decomposing residues, due to the actions of pectic
enzymes that persisted in the residues. These volatile
compounds trigger the sclerotia to germinate eruptively and also serve as nutrients, orientating growth
towards the source of methanol. In these conditions,
the sclerotia can infect seedlings even 6 cm away.
These experiments seem to parallel closely the behavior of the fungus in cropping systems, where A. rolfsii
characteristically colonizes the crop residues and uses
these as a food base to support infection of the basal
stem tissues of young plants. It has an extremely

(b)

Fig. 14.1 (a) Colony of Athelia rolfsii on an agar plate. The sclerotia (some indicated by arrowheads) develop near the
colony margin. The white mycelium is aggregated into mycelial cords. (b) Young wheat plants rotted by A. rolfsii just
below soil level.

282

CHAPTER 14

Fig. 14.2 Experimental system to study
infection of leaf petioles (living plant tissue)
from sclerotia of Athelia rolfsii placed at different distances on natural soil.

Distance (cm) of sclerotia from leaf petiole
0
Nondried sclerotia
Volatiles absent
Per cent germination
Per cent infection
Volatiles present
Per cent germination
Per cent infection
Dried sclerotia
Volatiles absent
Per cent germination
Per cent infection
Volatiles present
Per cent germination
Per cent infection

1

2

3

4

5

6

19
12

16
0

11
0

11
0

19
0

14
0

15
0

90
90

73
71

67
54

51
39

17
0

14
0

9
0

78
78

75
75

71
60

63
56

74
0

68
0

73
0

100
100

100
100

96
91

95
87

100
100

98
82

87
16

aggressive mode of attack, producing pectic enzymes
to degrade the plant tissues, aided by the production
of copious amounts of oxalic acid (see later).
Rhizoctonia solani
Rhizoctonia solani (sexual stage Thanatephorus cucumeris;
Basidiomycota) is another common seedling pathogen
that attacks the basal stem tissues of plants. It is a
taxonomically complex fungus – a species-aggregate consisting of strains that are differentiated by molecular
fingerprinting, by host range, and by their ability to
anastomose (fuse) with one another when colonies are
opposed on agar plates (see Fig. 9.6). Some of these
strains cause stunting diseases of cereals, such as
crater disease of wheat on the heavy, black clay soils
of Northern Transvaal, South Africa (Fig. 14.3). In this
disease the plants grow normally at first, but large

Table 14.1 Germination of sclerotia
of Athelia rolfsii and infection of leaf
petioles when sclerotia were placed at
different distances from the petioles
in the experiment shown in Fig. 14.2.
(Data from Punja & Grogan 1981.)

patches of stunted plants start to appear about 3–4
weeks after sowing, and from this time onwards the
stunted plants make little further growth, while the rest
of the crop grows normally. The roots of the stunted
plants bear bead-like masses of hyphae at about 7–
10 cm below the soil surface, where the loose cultivated
soil meets the underlying clay soil that has not been
ploughed. From these hyphal beads the fungus penetrates and kills the roots, leading to the stunting syndrome. Similar stunting diseases of cereals are found
in the compacted sandy soils of parts of Australia,
where the roots have brown, spear-pointed ends,
caused by rotting of the root tips.
Diseases of this type have a common cause: the
compacted soil layer impedes root growth, which is
likely to increase nutrient exudation from the root
tips, promoting invasion by Rhizoctonia. In addition
to this, Rhizoctonia grows as an extensive mycelial

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

(a)

(c)

283

(b)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 14.3 Crater disease of wheat caused by Rhizoctonia solani in Northern Transvaal, South Africa (Deacon & Scott
1985). (a) Aerial view showing extensive areas of stunted plants. (b) A disease crater, showing the sharp boundary
between the healthy crop and a stunted patch. (c) The boundary between the loose surface soil and the heavily compacted clay soil occurs at about 5–8 cm depth. (d) Beads of Rhizoctonia on the first-formed seminal roots; these roots
are important because they would normally penetrate deep into a soil profile, so that water can be tapped from a
depth when the surface soil layers have dried. (e) Comparison of normal healthy plants and plants within a crater.

network in the lower, undisturbed soil layer. The
disease patches represent the areas where this fungal
network is present beneath the soil surface, and these
patches are spread progressively along the plough
lines (Fig. 14.3), increasing in extent from year to
year. The most effective way of controlling these
diseases is by deep-ploughing, although this is seldom
economic on heavy clay soils. However, on the sandy
soils of Australia the use of a tine that rips the soil about
10–12 cm below the level at which the seed is sown
can allow the roots to penetrate deeply and greatly
improve crop yields.

Decline and replant diseases
Several perennial fruit crops, including strawberry,
apple, cherry, and avocado, show a progressive decline
in yield as the plants age, until production is no
longer economic. If the declining plants are removed
and replaced by others the new plants often grow
poorly or die. These decline and replant diseases are
closely related, indicating a common cause. As we saw
in Chapter 10, the young “feeder roots” of plants
often have a short life span before they senesce and

284

CHAPTER 14

are replaced by others (see Figs 11.14, 11.15). In the
decline or replant diseases this balance between the rates
of root production and root decay is altered, so that
root tip decay exceeds the rate of root tip production,
and eventually the crop dies. Species of Pythium (e.g.
P. sylvaticum) are strongly implicated in the decline
of orchard crops such as apples. Similarly, Phytophthora
cinnamomi (Oomycota) is one of the principal causes
of decline in avocado orchards and it also causes
a dieback disease of native eucalypt vegetation in
Australia, raising serious concerns for the future of
this unique assemblage of plant species.
One of the major lines of evidence that implicates
Pythium and Phytophthora spp. as the cause of decline
and replant diseases is that the acylalanine fungicides
(Chapter 17) act specifically against Oomycota, and
when these fungicides are applied to field crops experimentally (but at uneconomic levels) they can cause
spectacular improvements in plant growth. Similar
studies suggest that Pythium spp. cause up to 10% yield
reduction in wheat crops in the Pacific Northwest of
the USA, even though the crops are apparently healthy.
These examples illustrate two important points.
First, the root tips and young tissues remain susceptible to infection throughout the life of a plant. So,
even mature trees can decline if the rate of pathogeninduced root decay exceeds the rate of root-tip production. Second, many of these pathogens show
some degree of host-adaptation. For example, Pythium
graminicola and P. arrhenomanes are characteristically,
but not exclusively, associated with graminaceous
hosts (the grass family), and are implicated in the progressive decline of sugar-cane crops. Experimental
studies comparing “host” with “nonhost” (nongrass)
plants strongly suggest that the host adaptation of
these two fungi is linked to their efficient zoospore
encystment on host plants. Similarly, Phytophthora
sojae is a host-adapted pathogen of soybean crops, and
its zoospores show strong attraction to the flavonoids
released from soybean roots (Chapter 10).

disease in only some sites or growing seasons, whereas
in other sites or seasons they cause little or no damage. The reason is that they respond to the plant’s physiology, and particularly to any stress conditions that
predispose the plants to infection. These stress factors
are many and varied. They include temporary drought
stress, poor light conditions (overcast weather), mineral nutrient deficiency, or insect (stem-borer) damage.
Even an exceptionally high level of grain-setting can
lead to stalk-rotting by creating a heavy demand on the
plant’s nutrient reserves. If any of these conditions
occurs at a critical stage in the crop’s growth, during
grain-filling, then the whole crop can be infected by
stalk-rot pathogens, resulting in premature death and
collapse, with heavy loss of yield (Fig. 14.4).
A unifying hypothesis to explain this type of disease
was developed early in the 1900s and was refined by
Dodd (1980). The filling of the grain in maize and
sorghum places a heavy demand on plant sugars, and
only about 80% of this sugar demand can be supplied
by “current” photosynthesis in the leaves. The other
20% is supplied from sugar storage reserves, principally
in the base of the stem. As the plant approaches maturity its reserve sugars are progressively depleted, and
any stress conditions that temporarily reduce the rate
of photosynthesis at this stage cause more sugars to be
removed from the stem tissues, leading to premature
senescence. Then, the weakly parasitic stalk-rot fungi
that were already present but were held in check are
able to invade and destroy the stalk base. This is easy
to demonstrate experimentally, because stalk rot never
occurs if the developing grain is removed to eliminate
the sugar stress, but this is hardly a practical solution!
Instead, growers must use their experience to predict
the likelihood of stress conditions on their farms and
adjust the fertilizer and plant spacing accordingly. All
the fungi that cause diseases of this type are specialized, natural invaders of senescing plant tissues.

Pathogens of fruits: the roles of pectic
enzymes
Diseases of senescence: the stalk-rot
pathogens
Some fungi that damage seedlings can also grow on
senescing plant tissues, exploiting the declining host
resistance. Important examples include the stalk-rot
pathogens of maize, some of which (e.g. Macrophomina phaseolina) attack many crops whereas others
are quite host-specialized towards maize (Diplodia
maydis, Gibberella zeae, Colletotrichum graminicola). In any
case, their similar behavior with respect to senescence
allows them to be considered as a group.
Stalk-rot pathogens are extremely common where
maize and sorghum are grown, but they cause serious

Ripening fruits and other sugar-rich or starch-rich
plant tissues are often rotted by fungi (Figs 14.5, 14.6).
One common example is Botryotinia fuckeliana (better
known by its asexual stage, Botrytis cinerea) which
causes gray mould of soft fruits such as strawberries,
raspberries, and grapes (see Fig. 5.20). This fungus
often initiates infection by growing on the senescing
flower remains (it is also a problem in the commercial
cut flower industry) and then invades the living tissues
of the ripening fruit. By contrast, several other fruit-rot
fungi infect through minor wounds in the fruit surface,
caused by insects or by damage during harvesting and
packing. Examples of these fungi include the “green

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 14.4 Stalk rot of maize caused by Phialophora zeicola in South Africa (Deacon & Scott 1983). (a) Premature senescence caused by drought stress, typical of thousands of hectares in the year when this photograph was taken. (b) Comparison
of a healthy maize stalk (upper) with a shredded, dead maize stalk (lower). (c) Invasion and rotting of the stalk base
and roots.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 14.5 (a) Apple inoculated with Penicillium expansum, which causes a soft, watery, pale-colored rot (photographed
7 days after wound inoculation). When the apple skin was cut with a scalpel at the margin of the rot, the whole
rotted area fell away, leaving uninfected tissue. This type of rot is indicative of polygalacturonase activity. (b) Apple
inoculated with Sclerotinia fructigena, which produces a firm, irregular, dark brown rot that cannot be separated from
the underlying healthy tissue. This might be explained by the “browning reaction” in which phenolic compounds in
plant tissues are oxidized when exposed to air. Oxidized phenolics are known to be enzyme inhibitors.

286

CHAPTER 14

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 14.6 (a,b) Wounded apple naturally contaminated by airborne spores of Rhizopus (mucorales), producing a fastspreading, watery rot that collapses and liquefies the tissues. Dark, spreading hyphae and sporangiophores are seen on
the fruit surface. (c) Apple infected by Sclerotinia fructigena in field conditions, showing pustules of spores on the fruit
surface. The fruit progressively dries out and mummifies.

moulds” Penicillium italicum and P. digitatum which
commonly cause the rotting of oranges, P. expansum
which commonly rots apples in storage (Fig. 14.5),
Sclerotinia fructigena which rots apples, peaches, and
some other fruits, often through wounds caused by
birds and wasps before the fruit is harvested (Figs 14.5,
14.6), and species of Rhizopus which rot many types of
fruit, including pears (Fig. 14.6).
The interesting feature of these fungi is that they cause
different types of rot, ranging from fast-spreading
watery rots to firm, dry rots. In all cases they are
unable to rot the fruit until it passes through the
phase termed climacteric, when the fruit begins to
ripen. This is the stage at which the acid content
declines and sugar levels start to rise.

The roles of pectic enzymes in
pathogenesis
The common feature of all fruit-rot diseases is that the
tissues are rotted by pectic enzymes that degrade the
middle lamella (the cementing layer) between adjacent plant cell walls (Fig. 14.7). The pectin of the middle
lamella consists of chains of α-linked galacturonic acid
residues, some of which are methylated, and mixed
polymers of galacturonic acid, mannose, and lesser
amounts of other sugars. The pectic enzymes are of
three major types.
1 Pectin methyl esterase (PME) is often produced by
the plant itself and it demethylates pectin. PME
seems to play little role in the breakdown of pectin,

but the methanol released by this enzyme can act
as a germination trigger and potential carbon source
for Athelia rolfsii (see earlier).
2 Pectic lyase (PL) is a chain-splitting enzyme with
both endo- and exo-acting forms. It cleaves the
bonds between the sugar residues in a characteristic
way, eliminating water during the process.
3 Polygalacturonase (PG) is another chain-splitting
enzyme with both endo- and exo-forms. Unlike PL,
this enzyme is a hydrolase – it uses water to add H+
to one sugar residue and OH− to the adjacent residue
during cleavage of the bond.
Fungi are induced to synthesize pectic enzymes in
the presence of pectic compounds, and the enzymes
probably act in concert. This was shown when the genes
encoding the equivalent enzymes of the bacterium
Erwinia carotovora (the cause of potato black-leg disease)
were engineered separately into E. coli. The recipient
cells required a minimum of one exo-PL, two endo-PLs,
and one endo-PG in order to rot the potato tissues.
Pectic enzymes of fungi exist as a range of isomers which
separate according to size and net charge during gel
electrophoresis. The resulting pectic zymograms can be
used to distinguish population subgroups of fungi (see
Fig. 9.8), but the isomers may not differ significantly
in function.
Initially it was thought that the principal role of
pectic enzymes in pathogenesis was to separate cells,
causing disruption of the fine protoplasmic bridges
(plasmodesmata) that link cells through their walls.
More recent studies suggest other roles. Pectic enzymes
can be directly toxic to plant protoplasts in vitro, and

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

287

Fig. 14.7 Organization of the middle lamella (cementing layer) between plant cell walls, and summary of the pectic
compounds and pectic enzymes that degrade them.

some of the partial breakdown products of pectin –
the oligomers composed of 4 or 5 galacturonic acid
residues that are generated by endo-PG – are especially
toxic, causing rapid cell death.
Plant cells also contain a PG-inhibiting protein,
perhaps as a general resistance mechanism. As the
plant tissues age, the pectic compounds are increasingly cross-linked with calcium, which renders them
more resistant to degradation, perhaps by restricting
access by the endo-acting enzymes. For example,
the hypocotyls (basal stem tissues) of bean seedlings
(Phaseolus vulgaris) show a marked increase in resistance
to infection by Rhizoctonia solani about 2 weeks after
seed germination, coinciding with calcification of the
middle lamella. The pathogens that rot older plant
tissues (Athelia rolfsii, and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum which

rots the seed heads of crops such as sunflower) overcome this by producing large amounts of oxalic acid,
which they also produce in laboratory culture. Oxalic
acid can combine with calcium, removing it from
association with the pectic compounds and rendering
these susceptible to enzymatic attack.

Host-specialized necrotrophic pathogens
In contrast to the pathogens of immature or compromised hosts, many necrotrophic pathogens are
host-specialized. They have evolved mechanisms for
invading the normal healthy tissues of plants by
overcoming the specific defense mechanisms of their
hosts. These defense mechanisms can include physical

288

CHAPTER 14

barriers to penetration or fungitoxic chemicals, and
they can either be preformed or formed in response
to infection. In the following sections we discuss
the characteristic features of these host-specialized
pathogens.

The role of inoculum: a comparison of
Botrytis fabae and B. cinerea
Botrytis cinerea and B. fabae are closely related fungi,
but B. cinerea invades the compromised tissues of
many plants, whereas B. fabae is a host-specialized
pathogen of broad bean (Vicia faba). Both fungi produce ovoid conidia, but those of B. fabae are larger
(20–25 µm long) than those of B. cinerea (10 –15 µm),
representing a roughly sixfold difference in spore
volume. As we saw in Chapter 10, larger spores have
a higher efficiency of impaction onto leaves, especially
onto wide leaves such as those of broad bean plants.
Large spores also have more endogenous food reserves
to support infection.
The spores of both B. fabae and B. cinerea germinate
when placed in water drops on the surface of broad
bean leaves, but B. cinerea often fails to penetrate the
leaf cuticle whereas B. fabae penetrates and causes a
rapid host response – the death of the penetrated cells
and their immediate neighbors, giving a large necrotic
spot (Fig. 14.8). This reaction to infection is termed the
hypersensitive response, and it is associated with an
accumulation of fungitoxic metabolites in the dead cells,
often sufficient to prevent further infection.
The difference in initial penetration by the Botrytis
species is largely explained by their nutrient reserves.
B. cinerea will penetrate and cause a necrotic spot if
sugars are added to the inoculum drop, or sometimes
even if the normal leaf surface microorganisms are killed
by antibiotics so that B. cinerea can use the leaf-surface

exudates. Conversely, aged spores of B. fabae, taken from
old parts of agar colonies, can fail to penetrate because
their endogenous reserves have been depleted, but they
penetrate if supplied with exogenous sugars. Thus, B.
cinerea has evolved a strategy as a general invader of
senescent tissues: it produces many more spores from
a given amount of resource but these spores depend
on nutrients released from compromised host tissues.
B. fabae produces fewer spores from the same amount
of resource, but each of them has a significant chance
of initiating infection of the healthy host.
Such differences in the infectivity of pathogens can
be quantified, to predict the likelihood of infection in
different conditions. Fig. 14.9 shows this for B. cinerea
and B. fabae when water drops containing different
numbers of spores were placed on broad bean leaves.
Infection was scored as the presence of absence of a
necrotic spot beneath each water drop. The results are
plotted as the logarithm of spore dose (spore number)
against the percentage response (infection, expressed
as a probit value, where the probit of 5 = 50%). This
type of plot converts a skewed sigmoid curve into a
straight line, and the estimated dose of spores that gives
50% probability of infection (the ED50 value) can be
read from the graphs. The same type of plot is used
widely in plant and animal experiments to obtain
LD50 values for lethal toxicity of chemicals, etc. The hostspecialized fungus B. fabae was found to have an ED50
of 4 in water drops, corresponding to a 16% chance
of any single spore being able to initiate infection. By
contrast, B. cinerea had an ED50 of about 500, corresponding to a 0.14% chance of a single spore initiating
infection.
Experiments of this type provide information relevant to field conditions. For example, several different
Colletotrichum spp. produce leaf spots on rubber leaves
in Malaysia. By inoculating spores in droplets it was
possible to predict: (i) the species most likely to infect
from low spore numbers and (ii) the age at which the
leaves are most infectible, before the development of
a thick leaf cuticle prevents any further infection.

The roles of tissue-degrading enzymes

Fig. 14.8 Broad bean leaflets inoculated with water
drops containing spores of different Botrytis spp. Only B.
fabae is a host-specialized pathogen of broad bean plants;
the other Botrytis spp. have different hosts, but B. cinerea
is a weak pathogen. (Courtesy of J. Mansfield.)

Many necrotrophic fungi produce tissue-degrading
enzymes as a primary mechanism of pathogenesis,
like the pectic enzymes discussed earlier. But the grass
family, Gramineae, seems to be unusual because grasses
have different wall matrix components compared with
many other plants. Instead of pectin in the middle
lamella they have mixed polymers of β-1,4-xylan and
α-1,3-arabinose, with lesser amounts of noncellulosic
β-1,4- and β-1,3-linked glucans. Cooper et al. (1988)
investigated the enzymes produced by three stem-base
pathogens of cereals – Rhizoctonia cerealis which causes

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

289

Fig. 14.9 Log dose/probit response plots of infection of broad bean leaves by Botrytis fabae and B. cinerea. See text for
details. (Based on Wastie 1960.)
sharp eyespot disease, Fusarium culmorum which causes
fusarium foot rot, and Tapesia yallundae which causes
“true” eyespot disease. When these fungi were grown
on cereal cell walls in laboratory culture, all three fungi
produced arabinase, xylanase, and β-1,3-glucanase, but
only small amounts of pectic enzymes. By contrast, when
pathogens of nongrass plants (Fusarium oxysporum,
Verticillium albo-atrum) were grown on walls of their
hosts they produced large amounts of pectic enzymes.
So, the cereal pathogens seem to be adapted to
degrade the typical wall components of their hosts. But
the surprising feature in this study was that the cereal
pathogens produced arabinase and glucanase constitutively, in the absence of host wall material, and the
production of these enzymes was not repressed by
sugars. These are unusual features because polymerdegrading enzymes in general are both inducible and
repressible. The likely explanation is that these hostspecialized fungi grow only on cereals, so they have
adapted to produce the necessary wall-degrading
enzymes constitutively.

Plant defense against host-specialized
necrotrophic pathogens
Plants have several potential lines of defense against
invading pathogens. These defenses include both
physical barriers and fungitoxic compounds in the
plant tissues.

The main physical barrier to infection of many
plants is the cuticle on the leaf or stem surface, and in
this regard the enzyme cutinase has been thought to
be important for fungal infection. There is circumstantial
and correlative evidence for this. However, when targeted
gene disruption was used to block cutinase production
by three leaf pathogens, there was no reduction in
pathogenicity of two of the fungi and only a partial
reduction in a third fungus (VanEtten et al. 1995). A
possible explanation is that some of the pathogenicity
genes might only be expressed during infection and
not in laboratory culture. Alternatively, there might
be multiple forms of these genes, some of which
are expressed in vitro and others only in the host
environment. This example illustrates the difficulty of
unravelling the often-complex host defense systems
of plants.
In addition to preformed physical barriers, plants
can respond to infection by developing a papilla – a
localized thickening of the cell wall at the point of
attempted invasion. In extreme cases the papilla continues to develop as the hypha grows (Fig. 14.10),
so that it encases the penetrating hypha. In electron
micrographs, papillae are seen as massive localized
accumulations of wall material in which membranes
and other degenerate cytoplasmic components have
been trapped. Cytochemical stains usually reveal the
presence of callose in papillae, but in the Gramineae
the papillae often show staining reactions for lignin and
suberin.

290

CHAPTER 14

(a)

(b)

Fig. 14.10 (a,b) Lignified papillae produced in response to invasion of wheat root cells by the take-all fungus,
Gaeumannomyces graminis. Narrow penetration hyphae are seen growing through the cell walls, but they have been
stopped by the developing papillae.

The significance of papillae in plant resistance might
be to delay invading hyphae while other defenses are
activated. The lignin-like precursors in papillae of the
Gramineae may be particularly important, because
lignin can form complexes with the wall polymers,
preventing their enzymatic degradation. Ride & Pearce
(1979) demonstrated this for cereal leaves inoculated
with Botrytis cinerea (not a pathogen of cereals) and
several other fungi that induced the production of
lignified papillae during attempted penetration. The
normal leaf cell walls were digested easily by commercial
wall-degrading enzymes, but the papillae and the
surrounding “haloes” of lignified wall material were
not digested. Thus, lignification and the development
of papillae could have three resistance-related functions:
to increase the wall thickness that a fungus must
penetrate while depending on its endogenous energy
reserves; to render the wall resistant to digestion by the
fungal enzymes; and to confer a locally toxic environment caused by the phenolic precursors of lignin and
suberin.

The oxidative burst
One of the earliest events in the attempted penetration
of leaves and other above-ground parts of plants is
an oxidative burst, equivalent to the oxidative burst
in phagocytes. It has been studied mainly in relation
to the hypersensitive response – the rapid death of
a group of cells in response to localized invasion
(e.g. Fig. 14.8) – but it seems to be a general reaction
of plant cells to trauma caused by attempted parasitic
invasion or chemical factors. Lamb et al. (1994)

have shown that it involves an extremely rapid (2–3
minute) production of H2O2 at or near the plant cell
surface, by the reaction of oxygen with NADPH to
produce superoxide:
O2 + NADPH → O2− + NADP +
Then O2− is transmuted to H2O2 by a plasma membrane
oxidase. H2O2 causes cross-linking of the plant cell
wall proteins, which could strengthen the wall against
attack by wall-degrading enzymes.

Chemical defenses
Plants produce a wide range of secondary metabolites
for defense against invading organisms. Some of
these are preformed compounds, collectively termed
phytoanticipins. They are present either as active
compounds or as precursors that are rapidly converted
to active compounds in response to infection. A
second category of defense compounds are termed
phytoalexins. Again, they are secondary metabolites
but they are synthesized de novo in response to infection. However, there is not always a clear difference
between these two groups of compounds.
The phytoanticipins and phytoalexins are widely
believed to be significant components of plant defense
systems – at least in the sense that they can prevent
most potential invaders from causing progressive
disease of plants. But host-specialized pathogens can
sometimes overcome the defenses of their specific
hosts, and we consider some representative examples
of this below.

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

Phytoanticipins
Some of the best evidence for a role of phytoanticipins has come from studies of the take-all fungus of
cereals Gaeumannomyces graminis, and related studies on
the tomato pathogen Septoria lycopersici. As discussed
in Chapter 9 (see Fig. 9.12), these host-specialized
fungi can overcome the phytoanticipins of their
host plants by producing enzymes (avenacinase and
α-tomatinase) that detoxify the phytoanticipins,
whereas fungi that are not specifically adapted to
these host plants are killed by these compounds.
Phytoanticipins may be involved in several other
plant–fungus interactions. A classic example is the
resistance of red- and yellow-skinned onions to
Colletotrichum circinans, the cause of “onion smudge”
disease, whereas white-skinned onions are susceptible.
The pigments themselves are not important but they
are associated with high levels of the phenolic phytoanticipins, catechol and protocatechuic acid.
Phytoalexins (warding-off compounds)
Phytoalexins are distinct from phytoanticipins because
they are low-molecular-weight compounds produced
in response to infection. More than 350 phytoalexins
have been reported across a range of crop plants,
especially dicotyledonous plants such as beans, potatoes, peas, and cotton. Most of them are flavonoids,
phenolics, or terpenoids, synthesized by three major
secondary metabolic pathways: the acetate-malonate
route, the acetate-mevalonate route, and the shikimic

291

acid route, similar to the secondary metabolic pathways of fungi (Chapter 7). The structures of four
phytoalexins are shown in Fig. 14.11.
A substantial body of evidence suggests that phytoalexins act as defense compounds – at least in
protecting plants against general attack by fungi. These
compounds accumulate rapidly during the hypersensitive response, and at growth-inhibitory levels in
or around the dead or dying tissues. However, they can
also be detoxified by pathogens that are specific to individual plant species, so there is a dynamic interaction
between the speed of host response and the ability of
a fungus to detoxify the defense compounds.
A similar localized accumulation of phytoalexins
can often be induced by artificial wounding or application of a toxic chemical to the plant surface. It is
always preceded by an oxidative burst, and H2O2 is
thought to be one of the initial signals that activates
the defense genes involved in phytoalexin production.
The sequence of events leading to phytoalexin accumulation has been studied by exploiting the discovery
that low-molecular-weight compounds consisting of a
few β-linked sugar residues can act as powerful elicitors
of the hypersensitive response. These oligosaccharides
are released from the extracellular polysaccharides of
fungal hyphae, probably by the actions of β-glucanase
enzymes that reside in plant cell walls. When applied
to plant cells or tissues in vitro, the elicitors cause
an early oxidative burst and the induction of plant
enzymes of the phenylpropanoid pathway, including
phenylalanine ammonia lyase which is involved in
phytoalexin production, and synthesis by the plant

O

CH3O

O

O

OH
O
O

O

Pisatin (isoflavonoid)

CHO

OH

OH

OH

O
Wyerone acid (acetylene)

CHO

HO

OH

HO

HO

OH

HO
CH3

Gossypol (dimeric sesquiterpene)

CH2

Rishitin (bicyclic sesquiterpene)

Fig. 14.11 Structures of four phytoalexins: pisatin from peas; wyerone acid from broad bean; gossypol from cotton;
rishitin from potato.

292

CHAPTER 14

of chitinase and β-1,3-glucanase which can degrade
fungal walls.
Clearly, this cascade of cellular responses creates a
hostile environment for a potential pathogen. So how
do host-adapted necrotrophic pathogens overcome or
avoid these defenses? Studies on the Botrytis–broad
bean interaction have shown that both B. fabae and B.
cinerea can cause a hypersensitive response in appropriate conditions (see earlier) and the phytoalexin
wyerone acid accumulates in the dead cells. But B. fabae
is more tolerant of wyerone acid than is B. cinerea in
vitro, and B. fabae also causes less wyerone acid to accumulate in the lesion, perhaps by detoxifying it. Thus,
B. cinerea never spreads further from the necrotic spot,
whereas B. fabae is checked temporarily but then can
spread through the surrounding tissues, killing them
progressively. The resulting large brown lesions give
rise to the name for this disease – chocolate spot (see
Fig. 14.8).
The mechanisms of detoxification of phytoalexins
have been reported for some other fungi. The pathogen
of pea plants, Nectria haematococca, detoxifies pisatin
by demethylation (Fig. 14.12). Other strains of this
pathogen that infect bean plants detoxify one of the
bean phytoalexins kievitone by hydration (Fig. 14.12).
In both cases the ability of the pathogen to infect

the plant is correlated with the ability to detoxify the
phytoalexin. Moreover, when the pisatin demethylase
gene from N. haematococca was transformed into
Cochliobolus heterostrophus, a maize pathogen, this
fungus became a pathogen of pea leaves. So, there is
strong evidence that host-adapted pathogens have
evolved mechanisms for overcoming the inhibitory
effects of their hosts’ phytoalexins, and even the
acquisition of a single phytoalexin-detoxifying gene can
change the host range of a fungus. There is, however,
a twist to this story. In the Nectria–bean interaction,
all strains of N. haematococca were found to produce
the hydrating enzyme, kievitone hydratase, but some
strains did not secrete it from the hyphae. These
strains were nonpathogenic, in contrast to strains that
secreted the enzyme. In the Nectria–pea interaction
the relationship between pathogenicity and production
of the detoxifying enzyme was supported by many lines
of evidence, but targeted disruption of the gene for
pisatin demethylase led to strains that were still
pathogenic. Reviewing all the work on detoxification
of phytoanticipins and phytoalexins, VanEtten et al.
(1995) suggested that pathogens may have evolved
several mechanisms for overcoming the host defenses,
so that some of these mechanisms, although still
expressed, may be redundant.

Fig. 14.12 Two examples of detoxification of phytoalexins (at the position marked *).

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

293

OH
O

C
H2C

HO

C

O

H

H
CH3

OH
Fig. 14.13 Salicylic acid and jasmonic acid – two
key signalling compounds that enhance the
resistance of plants to pathogenic attack.

CH2
O

Salicylic acid

Systemic acquired resistance and induced
systemic resistance
Earlier in this chapter, we noted that plants can
respond to attack from necrotrophic pathogens by
mounting a hypersensitive response, in which the
infected cells and their immediate neighbors die
rapidly and accumulate fungitoxic compounds.
Although this response is localized, it leads to the
production of signalling molecules that are mobilized
throughout the plant, so that the plant is, in effect,
immunized. Any subsequent infection will lead to
increased resistance or reduced expression of disease.
This phenomenon is termed systemic acquired resistance (SAR). It involves the activation of a set of genes
that synthesize pathogenesis-related proteins, including β-glucanases and chitinase which can attack the cell
walls of invading fungi. The aspirin-like compound
salicylic acid (Fig. 14.13) has been identified as the
signal molecule involved in SAR, and this is supported
by the finding that salicylic acid can be applied exogenously and will induce the synthesis of pathogenesisrelated proteins, leading to enhanced plant resistance.
In fact, salicylic acid is marketed commercially for this
purpose. The remarkable point is that SAR confers a
generalized resistance to a wide range of pathogens,
including fungi, bacteria, and viruses.
A second type of induced resistance develops in
response to colonization of plant roots by specific
nonpathogenic strains of rhizosphere bacteria, such as
Pseudomonas fluorescens. But this defense system is
mediated by a different set of signalling compounds,
including jasmonic acid and ethylene. This type of
induced resistance is termed rhizobacteria-mediated
induced systemic resistance (ISR). Like SAR, induced
systemic resistance acts against several different types
of pathogen, including strains of Fusarium oxysporum,
the downy mildew pathogen Peronospora parasitica
(Oomycota), and the bacterial pathogens Xanthomonas
campestris and Pseudomonas syringae. Thus, there are
two distinct signalling pathways, one mediated by
salicylic acid and one by jasmonic acid/ethylene, and

CH2
C

H

C
H

Jasmonic acid

both confer resistance to pathogenic attack. Recent
studies suggest that both of these pathways can act
simultaneously, because there is no significant crosstalk between them. Therefore, the combination of
SAR and ISR could confer an enhanced level of plant
resistance.

Vascular wilt diseases
Vascular wilt pathogens cause some of the most
devastating plant diseases. Their characteristic mode
of infection is to enter the water-conducting xylem
vessels, either by means of vectors such as bark beetles
in the case of Dutch elm disease (Ophiostoma ulmi and
O. novo-ulmi – see Chapter 10) or via wounds, or by
invasion of the young root tips. Then these fungi proliferate in the xylem as spores or yeast-like budding cells
and are carried upwards in the water flow. The spores
become trapped on the perforated end walls of the
xylem vessels, where they germinate, grow through the
pores, and produce further spores that are carried
progressively upwards (Fig. 14.14).
Plants respond to invasion by the vascular wilt
fungi in several ways (Fig. 14.14):
• Balloon-like swellings (called tyloses) can bulge into
the xylem from parenchyma cells adjacent to the
xylem vessels; this seems to be an initial response
before other defense mechanisms come into play.
• Pectic gels are extruded into the xylem, through
bordered pits where the vessel wall is thin because
it consists only of the primary wall, not overlaid by
the secondary cellulosic wall.
• Phenolic compounds are released into the vessels from
phenol store cells. The phenolic compounds are
then oxidized and polymerize, helping to stabilize the
gels and to create a fungitoxic environment.
• Phytoalexins accumulate in the vessels, presumably
as part of a general stress response.
If the host responds fast enough to invasion of the
xylem vessels, the infection will be contained and the

294

CHAPTER 14

strains look identical, and all survive by producing
chlamydospores (spores derived from individual
hyphal compartments by accumulating nutrients and
developing a thick, resistant cell wall). These spores
can survive in soil for many years, but probably also
germinate and maintain their population by growing
in a saprotrophic mode in the rhizosphere. Verticillium
albo-atrum and V. dahliae also cause serious wilt diseases,
such as verticillium wilt of hops and many other
plants. However, they seem to be less host-specific
than F. oxysporum, because strains isolated from one
host will often infect several other unrelated hosts in
artificial inoculations.

Pathogenicity determinants

Fig. 14.14 Diagrammatic representation of pathogen
spread and occlusion of the xylem vessels in vascular wilt
diseases. Spores or yeast-like cells are carried upwards in
the water flow and become trapped on the perforated
vessel end walls. They germinate, grow through the pores,
and produce further cells that are carried upwards to the
next vessel end wall, and so on. (Based on Beckman &
Talboys 1981.)

plant will suffer no significant damage. But if the host
response is slow the fungus can progressively colonize
the vessels, causing rapid wilting and plant death
(Figs. 14.15, 14.16).
The interesting feature of vascular wilt fungi is that
they remain confined to the nonliving xylem vessels
until the plant is heavily diseased, and only then do
they invade the living parenchyma cells, producing
thick-walled resting structures which eventually return
to the soil when the tissues decompose.

The typical symptoms of vascular wilt diseases usually
include the progressive yellowing and death of leaves,
accompanied by early collapse of the petioles (leaf
stalks) so that the leaves hang down – a feature termed
epinasty. These symptoms strongly suggest a role of
toxins in the disease syndrome. Fusaric acid was
one of the first potential toxins to be identified. It is
known to be produced by F. oxysporum in laboratory
culture. It has also been detected in diseased plants, and
when applied to plant protoplasts in vitro it increases
their permeability to ions. However, there is still
doubt about the role of fusaric acid in vivo because
its concentrations in xylem fluid are often low. A
more convincing role has been established for a toxin
termed cerato-ulmin, produced by Ophiostoma ulmi (the
cause of Dutch elm disease). When the bases of cut elm
shoots are immersed in solutions of cerato-ulmin they
develop the typical leaf symptoms of Dutch elm disease. Cerato-ulmin is a hydrophobin (see Chapter 5),
and hydrophobin molecules spontaneously assemble
into water-repellent layers at an air–water interface.
Therefore they could have a significant role in restricting water flow in xylem vessels.

Role of environmental factors
Vascular wilt fungi
The three main fungi that cause vascular wilt diseases
are Fusarium oxysporum, Verticillium albo-atrum, and
V. dahliae. Of these, F. oxysporum is the most important because it consists of more than 80 strains that
show specific pathogenicity to particular crop species
(Armstrong & Armstrong 1981). These strains are
termed “special forms” ( formae speciales), abbreviated
to ff. ssp (plural) or f. sp (singular). For example,
the vascular wilt pathogen of bananas is termed F.
oxysporum f. sp. cubense, and the vascular wilt pathogen
of tomato is F. oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici. All these

Environmental factors play a major role in vascular wilt
diseases. Early evidence of this was found in the major
banana plantations of Central America, where soils could
be categorized as either “long-life” or “short-life.” In
long-life soils, banana plantations could remain productive for many years, with little evidence of disease,
whereas short-life soils became nonproductive within
a few years of establishing the crop. Chemical analyses
revealed a general correlation between the different
types of clay mineral and the life of banana plantations.
Long-life soils tend to have a higher proportion of
montmorillonite clays, as opposed to the kaolinite

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

(a)

295

(b)

Fig. 14.15 Panama disease of banana plants, caused by Fusarium oxysporum forma specialis (“special form”) cubense.
(a) A young banana plant in an advanced stage of disease; most of the leaves have died and collapsed as a “skirt”
around the stem base, and the erect leaves show progressive yellowing and necrosis. (b) Older, fruit-bearing banana
plants infected by F. oxysporum, showing extensive collapse of the leaves.

clays of short-life soils. This has been linked to a
higher population of antagonistic bacteria, because
montmorillonite clays hold more nutrients and create
a more favorable pH for bacteria.
At one stage the progressive decline of banana
plantations in Central America threatened the entire
future of banana production in that region, which
was based on a single cultivar, “Gros Michel,” that is
highly susceptible to Panama disease. The threat
was averted by the chance discovery of a more wiltresistant cultivar of the “Cavendish” type. Owing to
its value as a disease-resistant cultivar, “Cavendish”
bananas were only planted on the more favorable sites
in Central America, and they have remained disease-

free for more than 50 years. However, the situation
is different in the subtropics (South Africa, Taiwan,
Canary Islands, and Northeast Queensland) where
the Cavendish cultivars have been introduced. Many
of these plants have now died from Panama disease,
coinciding with the emergence of a new pathotype
(race 4) of F. oxysporum f. sp. cubense. The conditions
in these countries are marginal for banana production
because the winter temperatures drop to 12°C or
lower. Bananas stop growing at this temperature
(evidenced by their failure to make any further leaf
growth), but F. oxysporum f. sp. cubense can still grow
at 12°C in vitro. This could have facilitated the emergence of the new pathotype.

296

CHAPTER 14

(a)

(b)

Fig. 14.16 Sections through the base of a diseased banana plant. (a) Heavily discolored vascular strands (single
arrowheads) where the fungus entered the base of the corm from roots, and (double arrowhead) where the infection
is spreading up the vascular strands in the leaf sheaths. (b) An older corm producing “suckers” (S) that will produce
the next banana plant. Vascular disease (V) is already spreading into the new plant.

Fusarium wilt-suppressive soils
The terms “long-life” and “short-life” for Fusarium
wilt-suppressive soils have now been replaced by
the terms disease-suppressive and disease-conducive
soils. Many examples of disease-suppressive soils have
now been reported for vascular wilt diseases and
other pathogens across the world (Schneider 1982).
In almost all cases there is clear evidence that microorganisms contribute to suppressiveness, because suppressive soils can be made conducive by pasteurization,
and conversely the introduction of a relatively small
amount of suppressive soil (10% or less) to pasteurized soil or even to normal field soil can make a soil
suppressive.
Some of the most interesting examples of disease suppression are found in sites such as the Chateaurenard
region of France, where vegetables have been grown
for centuries with little or no disease. In these sites
there is strong evidence that nonpathogenic strains
of Fusarium oxysporum compete with the pathogenic
strains for organic substrates. Also, in these suppressive
soils the chlamydospores germinate poorly, the germtubes grow poorly, the pathogen population in the soil
declines more rapidly, and a much higher inoculum
level is needed to cause disease. These soils are found
to be suppressive to a wide range of formae speciales
of F. oxysporum, but are not suppressive to other, unrelated pathogens such as Verticillium dahliae. Attempts

are now being made to exploit nonpathogenic strains
of F. oxysporum as commercial biological control agents
of the pathogenic fusarium wilt fungi. This is not
without its dangers, because we still know little about
the factors that govern the host ranges – or the pathogenicity – of vascular wilt fusaria (Fravel et al. 2003).
The enigma of vascular wilt fusaria
The vascular wilt fusaria are enigmatic because, on the
one hand, they cause some of the most devastating
plant diseases and show a very high degree of hostspecificity, yet on the other hand they grow only in
the nonliving xylem tissues (after entry through the
immature root tips or through wounds) and only
invade the living plant tissues when the plant begins
to senesce. In effect, these fungi behave as weak parasites which, for most of their life in the plant, depend
on the very low levels of organic nutrients that leak
into the xylem vessels. In some respects this behavior
is similar to the mode of growth of the nonpathogenic
fungal endophytes which grow sparsely in the wall
spaces and intercellular fluids of plants without
causing obvious harm to the host (discussed below).
Endophytism is characterized by a basic compatibility
between the colonizing fungus and the host cells.
Consistent with this, some of the interactions between
vascular wilt fusaria and their host plants – for example,
F. oxysporum f. sp. pisi on peas – are governed by a

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

gene-for-gene relationship typical of biotrophic plant
pathogens, discussed later in this chapter.

Smut fungi
The smut fungi are members of the Basidiomycota
and gain their name from the fact that they produce
millions of black, sooty spores, known as teliospores.
Over 1000 species of smut fungi are known to parasitize plants, but the species of most economic importance are those that attack cereal crops, including loose
smut of wheat (Ustilago nuda; Fig. 14.17), maize smut
(Ustilago maydis), and stinking smut of wheat (Tilletia
caries), so-named because the spores have a fishy smell
due to the presence of trimethylamine. The characteristic feature of smut fungi is that they develop
slowly within the plant tissues, often producing only
small amounts of hyphal growth, but later in the
growing season they produce large numbers of diploid
teliospores, which develop in place of the cereal grain
or other reproductive structures. For example, in loose
smut of cereals (Fig. 14.17) the whole flowering spike
is replaced by a mass of spores, which are exposed
when a thin sheath which contains these spores
breaks down at maturity. Stinking smut is similar, but
the grains appear to be normal because they are surrounded by the seed coat (pericarp) and the spores are
only released when the grain is threshed.

(a)

(b)

297

Plants become infected by loose smut when germinating spores penetrate the developing ovary, so that
the resulting seeds already contain the mycelium.
Then, when the seeds germinate the fungus progressively colonizes the stem tissues and eventually enters
the flowering spike where it replaces the grain with a
spore mass. Infection by stinking smut is somewhat
different: the spores can survive for up to 15 years,
and they germinate at the same time as the grain,
penetrate the base of the shoot (coleoptile), and then
progressively colonize the tissues, leading finally to
the production of a spore mass. In other smuts the
process of development is different again. For example,
in Uromyces anemones (a smut fungus that grows on
anemone and buttercup) the spore masses develop
beneath the surface of the stem or leaf before they
mature and erupt through the plant epidermis.
When the teliospores germinate they undergo
meiosis to produce a haploid phase termed the
promycelium. This produces uninucleate sporidia,
equivalent to basidiospores. Then plasmogamy (cell
fusion) of sporidia of compatible mating types gives rise
to a dikaryon, and this will eventually produce the mass
of teliospores. An interesting feature of smut fungi
is that the dikaryotic phase seems to be obligately
parasitic on plants, but the monokaryotic, uninucleate
sporidia multiply as yeast-like budding cells. These are
nonpathogenic and can be cultured on standard laboratory media.

(c)

Fig. 14.17 (a,b) Loose smut of wheat caused by Ustilago nuda. At maturity the flowering spikes produce a mass of
black spores in place of the seeds. The image in the center compares a smutted flowering spike with a normal spike.
(c) Warty, ornamented spores (smut spores) about 8 µm diameter.

298

CHAPTER 14

Fungal endophytes and their toxins
In recent years the leaves and roots of many types of
plant have been shown to harbor fungi that grow as
symptomless endophytes. These fungi do not penetrate the plant cells; instead they grow as relatively sparse
hyphae in the spaces between the cells or within the
walls of the plant cells, utilizing low levels of nutrients
in the intercellular fluids and causing no obvious
damage. In many ways, this behavior is similar to the
way in which the vascular wilt fusaria colonize the low
levels of nutrients in the xylem fluids, discussed earlier.
The significance of fungal endophytes lies in the fact
that they produce a wide range of secondary metabolites of potential commercial importance. In addition,
some of the endophytes confer abiotic stress tolerance
on their plant hosts, or act as insect antifeedants.
In the discussion that follows we will focus on one
particular group of fungal endophytes – those that grow
in some pasture grasses and have repeatedly been
shown to reduce insect damage (Bony et al. 2001).
The grass-associated endophytes grow very slowly in
laboratory culture and do not produce sporing stages.
In fact, some of them have probably lost this ability
altogether because they always grow within a plant and
are transferred from generation to generation by growing into the seed coat. This makes it easy to compare
the behavior of endophyte-infected and endophyte-free
populations of grasses. The few isolates that have been
induced to sporulate in culture produce a simple conidial stage classified as Neotyphodium (previously called
Acremonium) and resembling the conidial stage of the
ergot fungus Claviceps purpurea. These “clavicipitaceous endophytes” (so-named because they are related to
the ergot fungus) are found in several important pasture grasses such as Lolium (ryegrass), Festuca (fescue),
and Dactylis glomerata (cocksfoot) in the USA, Europe,
and New Zealand. They grow within the leaf tissues but
their growth seems to be tightly regulated because it
is synchronized with growth of the leaves, and often
ceases when the leaves mature (Clay 1989).
Endophyte-infested perennial ryegrass has been
shown to contain several mycotoxins, including three
that are particularly important:
1 The saturated aminopyrrolizidine alkaloids such as
lolitrem B, a compound that has been shown to be
responsible for the damaging “ryegrass staggers”
disease of grazing sheep and cattle in New Zealand.
These alkaloids can reach levels of up to 2% in the
grass biomass.
2 Ergovaline, which causes diseases such as “fescue
foot” and “fescue toxicosis” in grazing animals.
3 Peramine, a tripeptide that is repellant and toxic to
insects, but not to mammals.

The production of these compounds is probably
favored by the slow, substrate-limited growth of
endophytes within plant tissues, because secondary
metabolites characteristically accumulate in conditions
that restrict normal growth (Chapter 7). The multiple
effects of these mycotoxins raise dilemmas. On the one
hand, endophyte-infected grass varieties can pose serious threats to grazing livestock. On the other hand,
there are many reports that endophytes increase the
stress-tolerance of grasses, and confer a competitive
advantage over endophyte-free grasses by deterring
insect damage.
The endophyte Neotyphodium coenophialum is found
in tall fescue grassland and produces ergovaline in the
plant tissues. Ergovaline causes a range of symptoms
in grazing animals, including hyperthermia, weight
loss, reduced rates of pregnancy, decreased milk production, and (in horses) birth defects and abortion.
The endophyte N. lolii in perennial ryegrass produces
lolitrem B as its major toxin. This neurotoxin is
responsible for a condition called ryegrass staggers,
where animals experience tremors and loss of coordination. The potential extent of these problems
in the USA was revealed by a survey of horse pastures
(Fig. 14.18; USDA 2000). Nationally, 61.6% of sampled
pastures tested positive for endophytes, and a total
28.5% tested positive for toxin. Without intervention, the infection rates would increase with time
because infected grasses can outcompete noninfected
grasses.
Because the clavicipitaceous endophytes never
leave the host plant, pasture and turf managers have
options. For grazing animals, a pasture can be reestablished with certified endophyte-free seed, whereas
managers of ornamental or recreational turf can elect
to sow endophyte-infected seed for improved grass
vigor and insect resistance. This has spawned a niche
market in the USA, where “endophyte-enhanced
grasses” are available through garden centers and
seed stores for use in amenity grasslands, golf-courses,
sports turf, etc.

Phytophthora diseases
The genus Phytophthora contains more than 50
described species, most or all of which are plant
pathogens (Erwin & Ribeiro 1996). In fact the name
Phytophthora, derived from Greek, means literally plant
destroyer. Among the many species of Phytophthora,
the potato blight pathogen, P. infestans, has become
notorious, even though it has a narrow host range –
essentially potato plants and, to a lesser extent, tomato
(another member of the potato family). But several other
species have very broad host ranges and cause various
types of disease, including:

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

299

56.3%
61.9%
Northeast

Central

Western

61.2%
Shaded states =
participating states

Southern

76.4%
Fig. 14.18 Percentage of pastures testing positive for Neotyphodium endophytes in a survey conducted by United States
Department of Agriculture in 1998. (Source: http://www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/ceah/Equine/eq98endoph.htm)

• root rots (e.g. P. cinnamomi, a major pathogen of the
root tips of avocado trees, and of Eucalyptus vegetation in Australia);
• cankers, which develop near the base of trees (e.g.
P. ramorum which is currently devastating the native
oak woodlands of the coastal mist belt of California
and southern Oregon, causing sudden oak death);
• collar rots and crown rots, which develop at the base
of the stems of woody and herbaceous plants (e.g.
P. capsici, which attacks tomatoes, cucumber, watermelon, squash, and pumpkins);
• aerial blights (e.g. P. nicotianae on poinsettias and
many other plants);
• fruit rots of many plants (e.g. P. palmivora on
Capsicum peppers, papaya, citrus, etc.).
Apart from the economic damage caused by these
organisms, Phytophthora spp. are notable because
they are not fungi at all. Instead, as we have noted
repeatedly, they are members of the Oomycota, within
the Kingdom Straminipila (which includes the orangecolored algae) and they have several distinctive features,
such as cellulosic cell walls, diploid vegetative stages,

motile flagellate spores, and biochemical features that
make them insensitive to many conventional fungicides.
Here we will consider two species of Phytophthora that
cause very different types of disease – P. infestans and
P. ramorum. However, they also have several features
in common, including the fact that they are spreading
globally and causing serious damage to wild plants and
crop plants. They demonstrate the continuing threat
posed by members of this genus.

Phytophthora infestans
The centre of origin of wild potatoes is central Mexico,
and this is almost certainly the centre of origin of P.
infestans, because this fungus is heterothallic, requiring
two mating types for sexual reproduction (mating
types A1 and A2) and both of these are found commonly in central Mexico. The fungus is known to have
reached Europe, including Britain, before the 1840s
when it caused devastating losses of potato crops. But
until the early 1980s only the A1 mating type was found
commonly outside of Mexico. Then the A2 mating type

300

CHAPTER 14

began to spread across most potato-growing regions
of the world, presumably as a result of international
trade, and this has led to an increased diversity of the
P. infestans population, which was already diverse as
evidenced by the existence of many different isozyme
profiles.
In field conditions, potato blight is first seen as
black, spreading lesions on the foliage, and in cool
humid conditions these lesions produce masses of
sporangiophores that emerge from the leaf stomata.
Potato tubers become infected later in the growing
season, perhaps by the spread of motile zoospores
(Chapter 10), then the tubers start to rot and are
destroyed by secondary bacterial invaders. The main way
in which P. infestans is disseminated is by the production of detachable sporangia which can be wind-borne
or splashed onto foliage (see Fig. 5.17). These sporangia can germinate in two ways, depending on the
climatic conditions, and this can be mimicked in
laboratory conditions. At temperatures of around
20°C or higher, the detached sporangia germinate by
forming a hyphal outgrowth (Fig. 14.19), whereas at
temperatures of 12°C or lower the sporangia undergo
cytoplasmic cleavage to produce motile zoospores.
The production of zoospores at low temperatures
could be especially significant in early-season spread of
the disease, whereas “direct” germination of sporangia
could be more important later in the season – for
example, in the infection of tubers. This dual strategy,

(a)

also shared by P. erythroseptica which causes pink rot
of potatoes, is part of the formidable arsenal of P.
infestans.
However, the major weapon of this pathogen is,
undoubtedly, its ability to overcome the “major” racespecific resistance genes that have been bred into
potato cultivars over the years. P. infestans is a
hemibiotrophic plant pathogen: in its early stages of
colonizing a leaf it feeds by means of haustoria which
tap into the host cells and draw nutrients from them,
but at a later stage it switches to a necrotrophic mode
and causes generalized tissue breakdown. Every new
major resistance gene introduced into potatoes was
soon overcome by a mutation in the pathogen, leading to a new “race” of P. infestans that could not be
controlled by the existing single major genes. Now a
new breeding strategy is in place, to try to exploit general resistance (also termed horizontal, rate-limiting or
multigenic resistance) coupled with the use of fungicides and cultural practices.

Phytophthora ramorum: sudden oak death
A new species of Phytophthora was discovered in
Germany and the Netherlands from 1993 onwards, and
was described formally in 2001 as P. ramorum. It
causes damage to the branches of Rhododendron and,
less often, Viburnum bushes, sometimes leading to

(b)

Fig. 14.19 Phytophthora infestans. (a) A sporangiophore, with attached sporangia, emerging
from a stoma on the underside of a potato leaf.
(b) Two detached sporangia, producing germtube outgrowths from near the apical papilla.
Note the characteristic broken “stalk” at the
base of the sporangia.

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

death of these shrubs. This disease is now spreading
on ornamental rhododendrons and viburnums in tree
nurseries across Europe. Meanwhile, in the coastal fog
belt of northern California and southern Oregon, a
sudden death of oak trees was occurring, and this disease was also found to be caused by P. ramorum. It attacks
several types of oak, but mainly the “live oaks” and
“tan oaks” which are part of the natural vegetation of
the coastal shrub/tree community. The fungus attacks
the plants in two ways – either by producing lesions
on the leaves and terminal shoots of a wide range of
shrubs, leading to shoot dieback, or by producing
cankers near the bases of the trees, where the cambium
(which lies just beneath the bark and produces the
annual rings of new wood) is progressively destroyed.
The symptoms of this include cracking of the bark and
seepage of dark, viscous sap from the bark near the base
of the tree – a symptom termed gummosis (Fig. 14.20).
In advanced stages of the disease the trees die suddenly
and dramatically – hence the name, sudden oak

(a)

(c)

301

death. However, although the death of the trees
occurs suddenly it is preceded by a slow, progressive
build up of infection beneath the bark. This can
often go unnoticed until the trees suddenly develop
advanced symptoms.
There is a close parallel between P. infestans and
P. ramorum, because both have been introduced into
parts of the world where they did not occur before
and both have caused widespread damage. Current
evidence suggests that the European population of P.
ramorum consists only of the A1 mating type, whereas
the North American population is of the A2 mating
type. This strongly indicates separate sources of origin
of the two populations, but the natural geographical
origin of the fungus remains unknown. Here there
is a parallel with the spread of another aggressive
Phytophthora species, P. cinnamomi, which attacks
many plants across the world, but the geographical
origin of this fungus is unknown. It is causing
serious damage to the eucalypt vegetation of Australia.

(b)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 14.20 Sudden oak death caused by Phytophthora ramorum. (a) Dead and dying trees of coast live oak (Quercus
agrifolia) in the mixed oak community of the coastal fog belt of southwestern USA. Dead or dying trees are indicated.
(b) Dark viscous sap is exuded from the bark at the base of a heavily infected coast live oak. (c) Removal of the bark
reveals the presence of dark zone lines. (d) Terminal die-back and wilting of the shoot tip of tan oak (Lithocarpus densiflorus)
is one of the characteristic features of the disease. (e) Necrotic, spreading leaf spots are a further symptom of sudden
oak death – in this case on leaves of Azalea or Rhododendron. (Images courtesy of Joseph O’Brien, USDA Forest Service,
www.invasive.org; accessed 22 March 2004.)

302

CHAPTER 14

Whenever a fungus invades an area of natural vegetation it is likely that the fungus has been introduced
from elsewhere, because plants in natural communities
co-evolve with the resident pathogens.

Biotrophic plant pathogens
Biotrophic plant pathogens are characterized by the fact
that they have an extended nutritional relationship
with living host cells, in contrast to necrotrophic
pathogens which kill the plant tissues. The success of
this type of parasitism depends on two essential features:
(i) the ability to avoid eliciting host cell death and
(ii) a means of securing a continuous nutrient supply
from the living host tissues. Thus, biotrophs are in many
ways the epitome of successful parasites – they feed from
the host cells without killing them.
There are many types of biotrophic fungus and
fungus-like organisms, because this mode of parasitism has evolved independently on several occasions.
The major groups of biotrophs include the rust
fungi (Basidiomycota), the powdery mildew fungi
(Ascomycota), the downy mildews (Oomycota), and
the intracellular plasmodiophorids (protists of uncertain taxonomic affinity, but clearly distinct from
fungi). In addition to these, the endophytic fungi
grow essentially as biotrophs. A classic example is the
fungus Fulvia (Cladosporium) fulvum which causes blue
mould disease of tomato plants. Unlike the ubiquitous
Cladosporium spp. that grow as epiphytes on leaves
(Chapter 11), F. fulvum enters the host stomata from
a germinating spore and forms an extensive intercellular network in the leaf, before emerging from the
stomata as conidiophores which release further spores.
It has no obvious means of feeding from the living host
cells except by scavenging leachates; but it might
enhance the rate of leakage and also use some of the
cell wall polymers. A strain of F. fulvum can only feed
from the host if it avoids inducing a hypersensitive
response, and this is governed by “avirulence” genes
of the pathogen and corresponding resistance genes
in the host. This gene-for-gene relationship with the
host plant (Honee et al. 1994) is commonly found in
biotrophic plant pathogens, and is discussed later.
In the following sections we consider several examples of biotrophic plant pathogens.

Haustorial biotrophs
Many biotrophic fungi initiate infection from spores
that land on the host surface and then germinate and
enter through the stomata. The initial events involve
the precise orientation of germ-tube growth, using
cues such as plant surface topography and nutrient gra-

dients, discussed in Chapter 5. The hyphae then grow
between the host cells, and attach to individual cells
by producing a haustorial mother cell. From this, a
narrow penetration hypha grows through the host cell
wall but it does not penetrate the membrane. Instead,
the host cell membrane invaginates to accommodate
the invading fungus, which develops into a haustorium
that is always separated from the host cytoplasm by
an extrahaustorial membrane (see Fig. 5.7).
As shown in Fig. 14.21, the mature haustorium is surrounded by a fluid matrix, and there is a tight “seal”
in the neck region to prevent the fluid from escaping.
One of the consequences of this in experimental
work is that the whole haustorial complex (enveloping membrane, fluid matrix, and the haustorium itself)
can be isolated by digesting the host cell wall with
enzymes. From studies on these isolated haustorial
complexes of rust and powdery mildew fungi it has been
shown that the extrahaustorial membrane allows the
free passage of sugars and amino acids. The wall and
membrane of the plant cell can also be expected to allow
the passage of nutrients through appropriate membrane
transporters. So, the crucial interface for nutrient
uptake by the fungus is likely to be the haustorial membrane (Fig. 14.21).
In a model proposed by Voegele & Mendgen (2003),
sugars and amino acids are believed to be taken
into the haustorium in association with H+ ions by
membrane symporters, using the proton motive force
generated by ATPase. The sugars are then used for
biosynthetic reactions within the haustorium. Fructose
(derived by hydrolysis of sucrose to glucose and fructose
in the extrahaustorial matrix) is converted to mannitol,
which is translocated into the fungal hyphae and ultimately into the developing spores. The net result is that
nutrients are continuously withdrawn from the living
plant cells, to support repeated cycles of sporulation on
the host surface. Much of the economic importance
of rust and powdery mildew fungi stems from this
continuous withdrawal of nutrients from the plant
to support sporulation of the fungus.

Rust fungi
Rust fungi gain their name from the distinctive rustcolored spores, termed uredospores, which are produced
in abundance for dispersal during the summer months.
Over 4000 rust species have been described on crop or
wild plants. Many rust fungi need two separate hosts
to complete their life cycle. For example, Puccinia
graminis (black stem rust of wheat) requires both a cereal
and an alternate host (barberry). But other rust fungi,
such as mint rust (Puccinia menthae), complete their life
cycle on a single host. Below, we will consider the
life cycle of P. graminis because it is one of the most

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

EXTRAHAUSTORIAL MEMBRANE

303

PLANT CELL MEMBRANE

Glycolysis
Frc SPORE

PLANT CELL

HYPHA

D

H+

ATP
ATP+P
AA

H+

ATP
ATP+P

H+

FLUID
MATRIX
HAUSTORIUM

H+
C AA
Glycolysis

Glc

Frc
B Glc

Frc

Frc
B H+

A

Suc

Suc

D
Man

Man
AA

C

H+
AA

AA

Fig. 14.21 Model for amino acid and sugar uptake and redistribution in rust fungi. Sucrose (Suc) and amino acids (AA)
pass between plant cells and through the extrahaustorial membrane, into the fluid-filled matrix that surrounds the haustorium. Invertase (shown as A) cleaves sucrose to glucose (Glc) and fructose (Frc) in the matrix. Then these sugars, and
amino acids cross the haustorial membrane by symport proteins (shown as B) in the membrane. Energy for nutrient
uptake is supplied by the H+ gradient generated across the membrane by conversion of ATP to ADP + Pi (shown as C).
Within the haustorium, fructose is converted to mannitol (Man) by the enzyme, major alcohol dehydrogenase (shown
as D). Mannitol is then translocated into the fungal hyphae and provides the nutrients for fungal sporulation. (Based
on a diagram in Voegele & Mendgen 2003.)

economically important species, especially in North
America. It also displays all of the typical sporing
stages of rust fungi.
Black stem rust of wheat ( Puccinia graminis)
The disease cycle of black stem rust is shown in
Fig. 14.22. We will begin this cycle at the dispersal phase,
when rust pustules burst through the epidermis of
cereal or grass leaves in early spring and release large
numbers of the characteristic rust-colored uredospores,
from structures called uredinia (see Fig. 14.23b).
Each uredospore is single-celled but contains two
nuclei, one of each mating compatibility type, so the
spores are dikaryotic as explained in Chapter 1. The
uredospores are dispersed by wind and can undergo
several cycles of infection in the course of a season,
resulting in major epidemics. Towards the end of the
season the production of uredospores ceases, and
instead the pustules (now termed telia) produce two-

celled teliospores (Fig. 14.23c). These also are dikaryotic,
with two nuclei in each cell, but the nuclei fuse to form
diploid cells, and the fungus overwinters in this form.
Early in the spring each cell of the teliospore germinates to produce a short mycelium. The diploid nucleus
migrates into this and undergoes meiosis, leading to
the production of four monokaryotic basidiospores
(spores with only one haploid nucleus). These spores
will only develop further if they land on a barberry leaf.
Then they penetrate the leaf and, a few days later, produce flask-shaped spermogonia. These have receptive
hyphae and also release many small spermatia (Fig.
14.23,d,f).
Each spermogonium produces spermatia of a single
mating type and they are exuded from the neck of
the spermogonium in a sugary fluid. Flies and other
insects are attracted to this, and when they visit a spermogonium of a different mating type they transfer
the spermatia. The spermatia of one mating type then
fuse with receptive hyphae of the opposite mating

Repeatedly
infect wheat

Uredospores
(dikaryotic)

Wheat

Aeciospores

Teliospores
Spermogonia
Spermatia

Nuclear fusion

Barberry

Basidiospores
haploid stage

Meiosis

Fig. 14.22 Outline of the disease cycle of Puccinia
graminis, which alternates between phases of
growth on wheat and on barberry.

Fig. 14.23 Black stem rust of wheat caused by Puccinia graminis. (a) Elongated stem lesions bearing uredospores.
(b) Stained section of a wheat stem with a pustule of uredospores breaking though the plant epidermis. (c) Section
of a pustule with teliospores.

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

type and transfer the nucleus through a pore in the wall.
This nucleus then divides and migrates through the
monokaryotic hyphae that grew from the basidiospores, producing a dikaryotic mycelium. By this
time, the mycelium has grown through the thickness
of the leaf and produces a further sporing structure
that erupts through the lower epidermis – an aecium
containing aeciospores (Fig. 14.23e,g). The dikaryotic
aeciospores can only infect wheat, and they give
rise to infections on which uredospores will develop,
thereby completing the cycle.
A potential solution to breaking the cycle of black stem
rust would be to eradicate barberry bushes so that the
fungus cannot infect its alternate host. A major barberry
eradication program was attempted in North America
in the last century, but was unsuccessful because the
epidemic spreads progressively northwards from the
early-sown crops in Mexico to successively later-sown
crops in the more northerly regions of the USA.

305

Powdery mildew fungi
The powdery mildew fungi (Ascomycota) cause significant epidemics in most seasons if they are not
treated with fungicides, and can be particularly serious
in dry, hot summers. Several crop and wild plants
are infected by these fungi, which in general are hostspecific. Common examples include powdery mildew
of roses (Sphaerotheca pannosa), of gooseberries (S.
mors-uvae), and of hawthorn bushes (Podosphaera clandestina). Most people will have seen one or more of these
fungi because they produce white, powdery disease
pustules on the surfaces of many leaves and fruits. But
the most economically damaging species is Blumeria
graminis (previously called Erysiphe graminis), which
causes powdery mildew of cereals (Fig. 14.24). Like
the rust fungi, B. graminis undergoes multiple cycles of
infection in a single season and can cause serious

Fig. 14.23 (continued) (d) Lesions containing spermogonia on the upper surface of a barberry leaf. (e) Aecia erupting
through the lower epidermis of a barberry leaf. (f) A spermogonium, showing the tiny spermatia and receptive hyphae.
(g) Cross-section of an aecium.

306

CHAPTER 14

damage to a range of cereal crops. A single “stategically”
positioned lesion at the base of a cereal leaf can effectively prevent that leaf from being a net exporter of
nutrients. This can affect root growth as well as shoot
growth, because roots are relatively poor competitors
for plant assimilates, and so the effects of this fungus
are exacerbated in dry soil conditions. Yet, interestingly,
the spores of powdery mildew fungi cannot infect
in wet leaf conditions, only in drier conditions. Some
other features of these fungi are shown in the legend
to Fig. 14.24.

Downy mildews (Oomycota)
The downy mildew pathogens are haustorial biotrophs
with similar behavior to the rust and powdery mildew
fungi although they require more humid conditions for
infection and sporulation. Examples include Bremia
lactucae on lettuce, Plasmopara viticola on grape vine,
and Pseudoperonospora humuli on hops. However, there
is a gradation of behavior in the Oomycota, because
some Phytophthora spp. which are closely related to
the downy mildews begin their parasitic phase as

(a)

(c)

(b)

(d)

Fig. 14.24 Powdery mildew of cereals, caused by Blumeria graminis (Ascomycota). (a) Wheat leaves with typical mildew
symptoms. (b) Spore chains which develop from a bulbous basal cell and mature progressively from the base to the
top. (c) Haustorium with multiple finger-like projections within a host cell, typical of many powdery mildew fungi. Note
the host nucleus in the cell, indicating that the cell is alive despite the presence of a haustorium. (d) Two cleistothecia
(closed, sexual fruiting bodies containing asci) ornamented with dark projections. The cleistothecia commonly develop
on mildewed leaves towards the end of the growing season. They break down to release the ascospores, which serve
for dormant survival.

FUNGI AS PLANT PATHOGENS

haustorial biotrophs but then kill the host tissues and
spread within them as necrotrophs (e.g. P. infestans on
potato and P. sojae on soybean).

Pathogen recognition: the gene-for-gene
hypothesis
In many cropping systems, large areas of land are
sown with a single crop variety (cultivar) that has
been bred for resistance to all known races of the
pathogen. Selection pressure then operates on the
pathogen to overcome this resistance by mutation.
Since many billions of spores are released by the
major pathogens each year – even in a single field –
there is a strong likelihood of the resistance breaking
down. This is especially true for crops that have been
bred for single major gene resistance (R gene resistance)
as opposed to “field resistance” that is based on the combined activities of several “minor” genes. The eminent
plant pathologist H.H. Flor, working with flax rust
(Melampsora lini) in the 1940s and 1950s, proposed a
simple scheme to explain the relationship between
major gene resistance and the occurrence of disease –
the gene-for-gene hypothesis. Based on extensive
research of the genetics of both the host plant and the
pathogen, he showed that for every gene that confers
resistance (R, a genetically dominant trait) in flax
plants, there is a complementary gene that confers
avirulence (AVR, again a genetically dominant trait)
in the pathogen. So, the outcome of a host–pathogen
interaction can be summarized in the following table:
HOST GENOTYPE
RR or Rr
rr

PATHOGEN
GENOTYPE

AVR avr
or
AVR AVR

Diseaseresistant

Susceptible
to disease

avr avr

Susceptible
to disease

Susceptible
to disease

307

prevent a biotroph from developing. In effect, the R
gene product of the host would be like a receptor,
interacting with the AVR gene product (an elicitor) of
the fungus.
Recent research has provided a deeper understanding of this system, and shown that gene-for-gene relationships are common across a range of host–parasite
combinations, including interactions of plants with
pathogenic fungi, bacteria, viruses, and nematodes,
and even in some plant–insect interactions. A direct
protein–protein interaction governed by R genes and
AVR genes, and leading to the hypersensitive response,
has been demonstrated in two pathosystems: infection
of tomato by Pseudomonas syringae (pathovar syringae)
and infection of rice by Magnaporthe grisea (rice blast
disease). In these cases the interaction probably involves
the recognition of surface-located proteins. However,
a direct protein–protein interaction has not been found
in any other host–pathogen systems to date. Instead,
there is mounting evidence that at least a third (plant)
protein is involved in most gene-for gene interactions,
and this third protein (or further proteins) mediates the
defense response. There are several lines of evidence for
this (reviewed by Luderer & Joosten 2001; Bogdanova
2002). For example, the proteins involved in these
interactions seem to be cytoplasmic proteins, not cell
surface receptors involved directly in pathogen recognition, as was once thought. The cytoplasmic proteins
constitute a family, or families, of related proteins
with similar properties. For example, the “model”
plant Arabidopsis thaliana (which is widely used for
molecular genetic studies) contains a gene that codes
for resistance to two bacterial pathogens. The product
of this gene is similar to the resistance gene products
of several other organisms – a gene from tobacco conferring resistance to a virus, a gene from flax conferring
resistance to flax rust, a gene from tomato conferring
resistance to the fungus Fulvia fulvum, and a gene
from sugar beet conferring resistance to a nematode.
All these resistance gene products have a region of
leucine-rich repeats, and all have a nucleotide-binding
site that could initiate a signalling cascade leading to
activation of the plant’s defense response.

Online resources
where RR = homozygous resistant, Rr = heterozygous
resistant, rr = homozygous susceptible, AVR AVR =
homozygous avirulent, AVR avr = heterozygous avirulent, avr avr = homozygous virulent. From this table
we can see that resistance occurs only in combinations
involving the dominant R allele and the dominant
AVR allele. The simplest explanation would be that
the protein product of the R gene interacts with
the protein product of the AVR gene, leading to the
hypersensitive response – a rapid cell death that would

Endophytes in US Horse Pastures (Aphis Info Sheet;
Veterinary
Services;
April
2000).
http://
www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/ceah/Equine/eq98endoph.htm
Sudden Oak Death. USDA Forest Service. www.invasive.org

General texts
Agrios, G.N. (1998) Plant Pathology, 4th edn. Academic Press,
San Diego.

308

CHAPTER 14

Lucas, J.A. (1998) Plant Pathology and Plant Pathogens, 3rd
edn. Blackwell Science, Oxford.
Manners, J.G. (1993) Principles of Plant Pathology, 2nd edn.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Cited references
Armstrong, G.M. & Armstrong, J.K. (1981) Formae speciales
and races of Fusarium oxysporum causing wilt diseases.
In: Fusarium: diseases, biology and taxonomy (Nelson,
P.E., Toussoun, T.A. & Cook, R.J., eds), pp. 391–399.
Pennsylvania State University Press, University Park,
PA.
Beckman, C.H. & Talboys, P.W. (1981) Anatomy of resistance. In: Fungal Wilt Diseases of Plants (Mace, C.E., Bell,
A.A. & Beckman, C.H., eds), pp. 487–521. Academic
Press, New York.
Bogdanove, A.J. (2002) Protein–protein interactions in
pathogen recognition by plants. Plant Molecular Biology
50, 981–989.
Bony, S., Pichon, N., Ravel, C., Durix, A., Balfourier, F.
& Guillaumin, J.-J. (2001) The relationship between
mycotoxin synthesis and isolate morphology in fungal
endophytes of Lolium perenne. New Phytologist 152, 125.
Clay, K. (1989) Clavicipitaceous endophytes of grasses: their
potential as biocontrol agents. Mycological Research 92,
1–12.
Cooper, R.M., Longman, D., Campbell, A., Henry, M.
& Lees, P.E. (1988) Enzymatic adaptations of cereal
pathogens to the monocotyledonous primary wall.
Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology 32, 33–47.
Deacon, J.W. & Scott, D.B. (1983) Phialophora zeicola sp.
nov., and its role in the root rot-stalk rot complex
of maize. Transactions of the British Mycological Society
81, 247–262.
Deacon, J.W. & Scott, D.B. (1985) Rhizoctonia solani associated with crater disease (stunting) of wheat in South
Africa. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 85,
319–327.
Dodd, J.L. (1980) The role of plant stresses in development
of corn stalk rots. Plant Disease 64, 533–537.
Erwin, D.C. & Ribeiro, O.K. (1996) Phytophthora Diseases
Worldwide. APS Press, St Paul, Minnesota.

Fravel, D., Olivain, C. & Alabouvette, C. (2003) Fusarium
oxysporum and its biocontrol. New Phytologist 157,
493–502.
Honee, G. and 10 others (1994) Molecular characterization of the interaction between the fungal pathogen
Cladosporium fulvum and tomato. In: Advances in
Molecular Genetics of Plant–Microbe Interactions (Daniels,
M.J., Downie, J.A. & Osbourne, A.E., eds), pp. 199–206.
Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht.
Lamb, C.J., Brisson, L.F., Levine, A. & Tenhaken, R. (1994)
H2O2-mediated oxidative cross-linking of cell wall
structural proteins. In: Advances in Molecular Genetics
of Plant–Microbe Interactions (Daniels, M.J., Downie, J.A.
& Osbourne, A.E., eds), pp. 355–360. Kluwer Academic,
Dordrecht.
Luderer, R. & Joosten, M.H.A.J. (2001) Avirulence proteins
of plant pathogens: determinants of victory and defeat.
Molecular Plant Pathology 2, 355–364.
Nelson, E.B. (1987) Rapid germination of sporangia of
Pythium species in response to volatiles from germinating seeds. Phytopathology 77, 1108–1112.
Nelson, E.B. (1992) Bacterial metabolism of propagule germination stimulants as an important trait in the biological
control of Pythium seed infections. In: Biological Control
of Plant Diseases (Tjamos, E.C., Papavizas, G.C. & Cook,
R.J., eds), pp. 353–357. Plenum Press, New York.
Punja, Z.K. & Grogan, R.G. (1981) Mycelial growth and
infection without a food base by eruptively germinating
sclerotia of Sclerotium rolfsii. Phytopathology 71, 1099–
1103.
Ride, J.P. & Pearce, R.B. (1979) Lignification and papilla
formation at sites of attempted penetration of wheat
leaves by nonpathogenic fungi. Physiological Plant
Pathology 15, 79–92.
Schneider, R.W. (1982) Suppressive Soils and Plant Disease.
American Phytopathological Society, St Paul, Minnesota.
VanEtten, H.D., Sandrock, R.W., Wasmann, C.C., Soby,
S.D., McCluskey, K. & Wang P. (1995) Detoxification of
phytoanticipins and phytoalexins by phytopathogenic
fungi. Canadian Journal of Botany 73, S518–S525.
Voegele, R.T. & Mendgen, K. (2003) Rust haustoria: nutrient uptake and beyond. New Phytologist 159, 93–100.
Wastie, R.L. (1960) Mechanism of action of an infective
dose of Botrytis spores on bean leaves. Transactions of the
British Mycological Society 45, 465–473.

Chapter 15

Fungal parasites of insects
and nematodes

This chapter is divided into the following major sections:

The insect-pathogenic fungi

• insect-pathogenic fungi
• nematode-destroying fungi

Examples of some common insect-pathogenic fungi
(entomopathogens) are listed in Table 15.1. All these
fungi are specifically adapted to parasitize insects, and
depend on insects for their survival in nature. In the
following sections we will deal first with the general
aspects of their mode of parasitism and then focus on
specific issues, including the potential for exploiting
insect-pathogenic fungi as biocontrol agents. Many
aspects of this subject are covered in Butt et al. (2001)
and Butt (2002).
Among the many insect-pathogenic fungi, the
species of Beauveria and Metarhizium (Fig. 15.1) are
commonly found in natural environments and are
considered to have strong potential for practical control of insect pests, especially in glasshouses and other
protected cropping systems. These two genera produce
abundant conidia in laboratory culture and on insect
hosts, but are not known to have a sexual stage.
Beauveria spp. produce their conidia in a sympodial
fashion, by first producing a terminal spore and
then the conidiophore elongates and produces further
spores below this spore, arranged in a zig-zag manner
(Figs 15.1a, 15.2). The conidia are white, and so these
fungal infections are colloquially termed “white muscardine.” By contrast, the Metarhizium spp. produce
chains of green conidia from phialides (Fig. 15.1b) and
these fungal infections are termed “green muscardine.”
Another common insect-pathogenic fungus, Lecanicillium lecanii (formerly known as Verticillium lecanii),
produces clusters of moist conidia at the ends of long
phialides (Fig. 15.1c). This fungus occurs commonly as
a parasite of scale insects in subtropical and tropical

Fungi commonly attack insects, nematodes and other
invertebrates in natural environments. In doing so
they act as natural population regulators, helping to
keep insect and nematode pests in check. Some
insect-pathogenic and nematode-destroying fungi
can also be exploited as biocontrol agents, and some
are available commercially as alternatives to chemical
pesticides.
In this chapter we consider the specific adaptations
of fungi for this mode of parasitism. It is an important
topic not only because it extends our coverage of
parasitic interactions, but also because the control
of insect pests and nematodes is currently achieved
by highly toxic chemicals, with known or potential
adverse effects on humans and the environment. For
example, aldicarb is a systemic insecticide, nematicide
and acaricide (mite-control agent) of the carbamate
type, currently registered for restricted use on selected
crops in the USA. It is one of the most acutely toxic
pesticides to mammals, aquatic invertebrates, fish, and
birds; it accumulates in groundwater, and it poisons
through either oral or dermal contact. The antidote to
aldicarb is atropine (from the plant Atropa belladonna),
traditionally used on the poison darts of African bushmen! The development of effective biocontrol agents
could provide at least a partial solution to some of these
environmental problems.

Table 15.1 Some common fungi that parasitize insects and other arthropods.
Parasitic fungus

Hosts

Metarhizium anisopliae
Beauveria bassiana
Hirsutella thompsonii
Cordyceps militaris
Nomuraea rileyi
Paecilomyces farinosus
Lecanicillium lecanii
Entomophthora, Erynia and
similar zygomycota
Coelomomyces spp.

Many: Lepidoptera, Coleoptera, Orthoptera, Hemiptera, Hymenoptera
Most/all
Arachnida (mites)
Many larvae and pupae of Lepidoptera, some Coleoptera and Hymenoptera
Larvae and pupae of Lepidoptera, Coleoptera
Many (Lepidoptera, Diptera, Homoptera, Coleoptera, Hymenoptera, Arachnida)
Several, especially scale insects, thrips, and aphids
Various, often host-specific, e.g. Entomophthora muscae on flies, Erynia
neoaphidis on aphids
Mosquitoes and midges; often host-specific

Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths); Diptera (flies); Homoptera (bugs); Coleoptera (beetles); Hymenoptera (wasps and bees); Orthoptera
(grasshoppers and locusts); Hemiptera (sucking bugs); Arachnida (spiders and mites).

Fig. 15.1 Spore-bearing structures of some
common insect-pathogenic fungi. (a) Beauveria
bassiana, which produces cream-white conidia
alternately on an extending tip of a conidiophore.
(b) Metarhizium anisopliae, which produces green
conidia in chains from phialides. (c) Lecanicillium
lecanii, which produces clusters of conidia in
moisture drops at the tips of phialides. (d) Entomophthora spp. (Zygomycota), which produce
single terminal sporangia that are released at
maturity and function as spores.

FUNGAL PARASITES OF INSECTS AND NEMATODES

311

Fig. 15.2 Beauveria bassiana and examples of the diseases that it causes.
(a) Spore-bearing structures of Beauveria
bassiana in laboratory culture. The
conidia typically develop in zigzag-like
chains on long conidiophores. (b) An
adult cicada beetle densely covered
with white sporulating pustules of B.
bassiana that have emerged through the
intersegmental plates of the insect
cuticle. (c) Sporulation of Beauveria
from between the cuticular plates of a
naturally infected green cockchafer
beetle. (d) Heavy infection of an adult
pecan weevil by Beauveria. (e) Grubs
of pecan weevil at different stages of
infection by Beauveria; healthy grubs are
shown at left. ((a),(b) Courtesy of G.L.
Barron. (c) Courtesy of Shirley Kerr;
http://www.kaimaibush.co.nz/. (d),(e)
Courtesy of Louis Tedders (photographer) and USDA, Agricultural Research
Service.)
environments, but it has a relatively high temperature
optimum for growth, so its use as a biological control
agent is restricted to glasshouse environments in the
cooler parts of the world. In addition to these conidial
fungi, several species of Zygomycota commonly cause
insect diseases in natural environments and also in field
crops. These fungi belong to a subgroup of Zygomycota
termed the Entomophthorales (see Fig. 2.11). They
include genera such as Entomophthora and Pandora (previously called Erynia). They produce large sporangia at
the tips of their hyphae, and the sporangia are released
intact, functioning as dispersal spores (Fig. 15.1d). The
Entomophthorales often cause natural epizootics in
humid conditions, and attempts are being made to
develop them as commercial biocontrol agents.

The infection cycle
The general infection cycle of insect-pathogenic fungi
is summarized in Fig. 15.3. In almost all cases these fungi
initiate infection from spores that land on, and adhere
to, the insect cuticle. If the relative humidity is high
enough, the spore then germinates and usually forms
an appressorium, equivalent to the appressoria produced
by many plant-pathogenic fungi (see Fig. 5.2). The
appressorium often develops over an intersegmental
region of the cuticle, and in one of the common insect
pathogens, Metarhizium anisopliae, this behavior closely
parallels the behavior of the rust fungi (Chapter 5),
because the germ-tube recognizes the host surface
topography, or artificial surfaces with appropriate

312

CHAPTER 15

Fig. 15.3 General infection sequence of an
insect-pathogenic fungus. (Based on Charnley
1989.)

spacing of ridges and grooves. Penetration of the
cuticle is achieved by means of a narrow penetration
peg beneath the appressorium, and this involves the
actions of cuticle-degrading enzymes, such as lipases,
proteases, and chitinase, all of which are known to be
produced by the insect-pathogenic fungi in laboratory
culture. The penetration peg either penetrates through
both layers of the cuticle – the epicuticle and procuticle – or it penetrates only the hard epicuticle and
then forms plates of hyphae between the lamellae of
the procuticle, exploiting zones of mechanical weakness. Further penetration hyphae develop from these
fungal plates.
Up to this stage, the infection will be aborted if
the insect moults. Otherwise, the fungus invades the
epidermis and hypodermis, causing localized defense
reactions. If these are overcome, then the hyphae
either ramify in the insect tissues or, most frequently,
produce swollen blastospores (yeast-like budded cells),
hyphal bodies (short lengths of hypha), or protoplasts (Entomophthora and related Zygomycota) that
proliferate in the haemolymph (insect blood). This
“unicellular” phase of growth and dissemination

usually leads to insect death, either by depletion of
the blood sugar levels or by production of toxins (see
below). Then the fungus reverts to a mycelial, saprotrophic phase and extensively colonizes the body
tissues. Usually, at least some of the tissues are colonized before the insect dies – the fat body in particular. Finally, the fungus converts to either a resting stage
in the cadaver or, in humid conditions, grows out
through the intersegmental regions of the cuticle to
produce conidiophores that bear numerous asexual
conidia for dispersal to new insect hosts.
In aphids infected by Lecanicillium lecanii the conidiophores can develop on many parts of the body
while the insect is still moving. In other host–parasite
interactions the insect is killed more rapidly, before the
body tissues are extensively invaded, indicating the
involvement of toxins. Both Beauveria bassiana and
M. anisopliae produce depsipeptide toxins in laboratory
culture, and these are active on injection into insects.
The toxins of M. anisopliae are termed destruxins
(Fig. 15.4) and are thought to be significant in pathogenesis because infected insects die rapidly before
there is extensive tissue invasion. The role of the toxin

FUNGAL PARASITES OF INSECTS AND NEMATODES

313

Fig. 15.4 Destruxin B and beauvericin,
two cyclic peptides produced by insectpathogenic fungi.

of B. bassiana (termed beauvericin, Fig. 15.4) is less clear
because this fungus invades the tissues more extensively
before the host dies, and the pathogenicity of strains
is not always correlated with their in vitro toxin production. Several other potential toxins are also produced
by Beauveria spp. Another insect-pathogenic fungus,
Hirsutella thompsonii, produces an extracellular insecticidal protein, hirsutellin A, which is lethal to the adult
citrus rust mite – the natural host of H. thompsonii.
These are among a wide range of insecticidal and
nematicidal metabolites produced by fungi (Anke &
Sterner 2002).
In addition to these toxins and potential toxins,
Beauveria spp. produce an antibiotic, oosporein, after
the insects have died. This compound has no effect
on fungi but is active against Gram-positive bacteria
and could help to suppress bacterial invasion of the
cadaver, enabling the fungus to exploit the dead host
tissues.

Insect host ranges
Several common species of Beauveria and Metarhizium
have very wide host ranges, including hundreds of
insects in the Orthoptera (grasshoppers), Coleoptera
(beetles), Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths),
Hemiptera (bugs), and Hymenoptera (wasps). These
fungi can be grown easily in laboratory culture and
they produce large numbers of asexual spores, making
them attractive candidates for applied biological control of insect pests. Similarly, Lecanicillium lecanii can
be grown easily in laboratory culture and it is used
commercially to control aphids and whitefly in greenhouse cropping systems (see later).
In contrast to these examples, the entomopathogenic
Zygomycota can be either host-specific (e.g. Entomophthora muscae on houseflies) or can have broad host
ranges. All of these species depend on insect hosts,
because they do not grow naturally in the absence

of a host. However, techniques have been developed
to culture several of these fungi in artificial conditions,
providing inoculum for applied insect-control programs. We return to this subject later.
One other insect-pathogenic organism is of considerable interest because of its unusual biology. Coelomomyces psorophiae is a member of the Lagenidales
(Oomycota) and it has an unusual life cycle, shown in
Fig. 15.5. In its diploid phase it parasitizes mosquito
larvae, and releases thick-walled resting spores when
the larval host dies. The resting spores germinate and
undergo meiosis, releasing motile, haploid gametes, and
these can only infect a copepod host, such as Cyclops.
After passage through this host, the motile spores
fuse in pairs and then initiate infection of another
mosquito larva. So, Coelomomyces displays an obligate
alternation of generations.
Coelomomyces cannot be grown in culture, so this
limits its potential use as a biological control agent.
But there could be a possibility of manipulating the
Coelomomyces population indirectly, by promoting the
populations of copepods so that there is an abundant
source of inoculum for infection of mosquito larvae.

Natural epizootics caused by
entomopathogenic fungi
Insect-pathogenic fungi can cause natural and spectacular population crashes of their hosts. An example
is shown in Figure 15.6, where the population of the
broad bean aphid, Aphis fabae, in a field crop reached
a peak in mid-July but was then dramatically reduced
by a natural epizootic caused by the fungi Pandora
neoaphidis and Neozygites fresenii (both obligate parasites
in the Zygomycota). This pattern is typical of obligate
parasites: their population level always lags behind that
of the host because the relationship is host-densitydependent. This means that there is always some
degree of crop damage.

314

CHAPTER 15

Fig. 15.5 Proposed life cycle of Coelomomyces
psorophorae, which has an obligate alternation
of generations. Diploid phase in a mosquito
larva: a motile zygote attaches to the larva,
encysts, produces an appressorium, then
penetrates the host and produces a weakly
branched mycelium. This gives rise to thickwalled resting spores that are released when
the mosquito host dies. Haploid phase in a
copepod (Cyclops vernalis): meiosis occurs in
the resting sporangia and haploid zoospores
of different mating types are released. These
infect the copepod and produce a thallus
that eventually gives rise to gametangia. The
gametangia release motile gametes that fuse
either inside or outside the host. The resulting
diploid zygote can only infect a mosquito
larva. (Adapted from Whisler et al. 1975.)

Fig. 15.6 Numbers of aphids (Aphis fabae)
in a broad bean crop during a growing
season in Britain (broken line) and percentage infection by the pathogenic fungus
Pandora neoaphidis (solid line). (Based on
data in Wilding & Perry 1980.)

Even more important is the fact that epizootics caused
by insect-pathogenic fungi are strongly influenced
by environmental factors. Insect-pathogenic fungi in
general require a high humidity for spore germination and also for sporulation on the dead insect
hosts. Thus, natural epizootics are unpredictable, and
even commercially applied inocula of these fungi are
prone to fail unless the environmental conditions are
favorable.

Developments in practical biocontrol
Some of the limitations in natural biocontrol can be
overcome by using commercially produced inocula if
these are formulated to high standards. Feng et al. (1994)
reviewed the technology for producing B. bassiana,
which is commercially attractive as a biocontrol agent
because of its wide host range. These authors reported
that about 10,000 tons of spore powder containing

FUNGAL PARASITES OF INSECTS AND NEMATODES

B. bassiana are produced annually in China for treatment
of 0.8–1.3 million hectares of forest and agricultural
land. Several other medium- to large-scale field trials
or field releases have been conducted with selected
species/strains of Metarhizium. Unfortunately, many
of the reports of successful biocontrol in these field
programs are anecdotal; the experimental data are not
published, nor supported by statistical analysis.
One of the most comprehensive, field-scale, insectbiocontrol programs to date was termed LUBILOSA
– a French acronym, Lutte Biologique contre les
Locustes et Sauteriaux (biological control of locusts and
grasshoppers). This program was funded by international
development agencies, with the aim of developing a
biocontrol agent that could be used in Central African
countries to control grasshoppers and locusts (see
On-line resouces). The strain used was characterized
as M. anisopliae var acridum, based on ribosomal DNA
sequence analysis, and it was developed as an oilbased formulation that could be dried to less than
5% moisture content and sealed hermetically for longterm storage below 20°C.
The results of field trials with this strain are
reported to have been successful, but – at least for the
LUBILOSA strain – the only economical production
method seems to be large-scale solid-state fermentation,
which requires the expertise of commercial production
companies rather than medium-technology facilities that
could operate locally. The LUBILOSA product has now
been transferred to private sector companies under
trade names that include “Green Muscle.”
Several interesting features emerged from the field
trials of the LUBILOSA program:
1 The initial small-scale field trials proved to be
unsatisfactory because too many treated insects
left the trial area, and untreated insects moved in.
But when large-scale field plots of 800 hectares were
used there was clear evidence of grasshopper mortality within 10 days of spraying, and grasshoppers
continued to die until the end of the season.
2 A comparison between plots treated with Metarhizium and a commercial insecticide, fenitrothion,
showed that the insecticide killed the grasshoppers
rapidly but the insects soon recolonized the plots.
By contrast, grasshoppers did not recolonize the
Metarhizium-treated plots. The consequence of this
was that, 10 days after spraying, the grasshopper
populations in the two types of plot were roughly
the same, and from that time onwards the Metarhizium
treatment provided better control than did the
insecticide.
3 Grasshoppers and locusts can raise their body temperature in response to fungal infection – a “fever”
response that can help the insect to overcome the
infection. Locusts do this naturally, but grasshoppers

315

need to expose themselves to sun in order to raise
their body temperature. This knowledge could be
incorporated into a geographical information system
(GIS) that could predict the best conditions for
using Metarhizium in field situations.
The development of Lecanicillium lecanii as a
commercial biocontrol agent
Lecanicillium lecanii is one of the most successful commercial biocontrol agents of insects. It was developed
in the late 1970s and is used primarily in glasshouses
for the control of aphids on potted chrysanthemums
and (using a different strain) for control of whitefly on
cucumbers and other indoor-grown crops. For these
purposes the fungus is produced as fermenter-grown
conidia because it is one of the relatively few fungi that
produce conidia readily in submerged liquid culture.
L. lecanii occurs naturally as a parasite of aphids
and scale insects in the subtropics, but requires relatively warm conditions (>15°C) for infection. Like all
the entomopathogenic fungi, it needs a high relative
humidity during the germination and penetration
phases, but then the humidity can be reduced without
affecting its parasitism. All these factors make this
fungus an ideal control agent for use on potted chrysanthemums – one of the most important year-round
horticultural crops – because chrysanthemums have
to be “blacked-out” with polythene sheeting for part
of each day to produce the short daylengths that are
necessary to initiate flowering. The blackout sheeting
raises the humidity for infection by L. lecanii, so that
a single spray of conidia just before blacking-out can
be sufficient to give season-long control of the important aphid pest, Myzus persicae. However, experimental
trials showed that treatment with L. lecanii (under
blackout conditions) was less effective for two minor
aphid pests of chrysanthemum, Macrosiphoniella sanborni
and Brachycaudus helichrysi. Hall & Burges (1979)
showed that this was not related to inherent differences
in susceptibility of the three aphid species. Instead, it
is explained by their behavioral differences. M. persicae
tends to feed on the undersides of leaves where the
humidity is higher, and it is more mobile than the other
aphids on chrysanthemum, feeding for short times
and then moving on, because chrysanthemum is not
its preferred host plant. L. lecanii often sporulates on
the body while an aphid is still alive, so the infected
individuals of M. persicae can spread the infection to
other individuals of this species feeding in the same
locations on the crop.
L. lecanii is currently marketed as two products,
Mycotal® and Vertalec®, by the Dutch-based company, Koppert BV. The product Mycotal is used primarily
to control whitefly and thrips in protected crops
such as cucumbers, tomatoes, sweet peppers, beans,

316

CHAPTER 15

Table 15.2 Some examples of currently registered mycoinsecticides.
Country

Registered product name

Fungus

Target pest

Crop

USA

Mycotrol, Botanigard

Beauveria bassiana

Whitefly, aphids, thrips

USA
USA
USA/Europe

Naturalis
BioBlast
PFR-97™

Sucking insects
Termites
Whitefly, thrips

UK, Europe
UK, Europe
South Africa
Reunion
Switzerland
Switzerland
France
Australia

Vertalec
Mycotal
Green Muscle
Betel
Engerlingspilz
Beauveria Schweizer
Ostrinol
BioGreen

B. bassiana
Metarhizium anisopliae
Paecilomyces
fumosoroseus
Lecanicillium lecanii
L. lecanii
M. anisopliae
B. bassiana
Beauveria brogniartii
B. brogniartii
B. bassiana
Metarhizium flavoviride

Glasshouse tomatoes
and ornamentals
Cotton, glasshouse crops
Domestic houses
Glasshouse crops

Aphids
Whitefly, thrips
Locusts
Scarab beetle larvae
Scarab beetle larvae
Scarab beetle larvae
Corn borer
Cockchafer

Glasshouse crops
Glasshouse crops
Natural bushland
Sugar cane
Pasture
Pasture
Maize
Pasture, turf

aubergine, lettuce, ornamentals, and cut flowers. The
Vertalec formulation contains a different strain of L.
lecanii that controls many aphid species. Both products
have a long history of successful usage, but according
to the manufacturer’s technical data sheets, the best
results require a temperature of 18–28°C and a minimum relative humidity of 80% for 10–12 hours a day.
Several other mycoinsecticides have been registered
commercially, and some of these are shown in Table
15.2. Many are based on different strains or species of
Beauveria or Metarhizium. In this respect it is important
to note that different strains or species can have quite
different host ranges, so the activity of any one strain

(a)

cannot be used to predict the activities of other stains
within this highly variable group of fungi.
It is interesting to note that B. bassiana is reported
to colonize some maize cultivars in the USA. It does
so by growing as an endophyte in the maize tissues,
similar to the endophytes of plants discussed in
Chapter 14. When granular formulations of B. bassiana
conidia were sprayed on the maize foliage the fungus
grew into the plant and persisted throughout the
growing season, significantly suppressing the damage
caused by larvae of the European corn borer, Ostrinia
nubilaris – the most important insect pest of maize
(Fig. 15.7).

(b)

Fig. 15.7 European corn borer (Ostrinia nubilaris) in the stalk of a maize plant. (a) Healthy insect. (b) Insect killed
by Beauveria bassiana, showing profuse development of spores and hyphae on the insect cadaver. (Courtesy of Marlin.
E. Rice, University of Ohio.)

FUNGAL PARASITES OF INSECTS AND NEMATODES

The nematode-destroying fungi
Nematodes (eelworms or roundworms) are small animals,
usually 1–2 mm long. They are extremely common in
soil, animal dung, and decomposing organic matter. For
example, the nematode population in European grasslands is estimated to range from 1.8 to 120 million
per square meter. Most nematodes are saprotrophs
that feed on bacteria or other small organic particles,
but some are parasites of animals, including humans
(e.g. Trichinella spiralis which invades human muscle
tissue), and some are parasites of crop plants. The
important nematodes of crop plants include the rootknot nematodes (Meloidogyne spp.), the cyst nematodes (e.g. Heterodera and Globodera spp.), and various
ectoparasitic and burrowing nematodes. The chemicals
that can be used to control parasitic nematodes in
living plants or organic matter are extremely toxic
and thus environmentally undesirable. For this reason

317

interest has focused on nematophagous (nematodeeating) fungi and other parasites of nematodes that
might be exploited as biological control agents.
Nematophagous fungi are common in organic-rich
environments, and they include representatives of
almost all the major fungal groups (Table 15.3). Here
we will consider the three major types that have
different adaptations for feeding on nematodes – the
nematode-trapping fungi, the endoparasitic fungi,
and the parasites of nematode eggs or cysts. Barron
(1977) gives an extensive account of all these fungi.

The nematode-trapping fungi
The nematode-trapping fungi are predatory species
which capture nematodes by specialized devices of
various types: adhesive hyphae (Stylopage and Cystopage;
Zygomycota), adhesive nets (e.g. Arthrobotrys oligospora,

Table 15.3 Examples of the major types of nematophagous fungi.
Fungus

Behavioral group

Infective unit

Chytridiomycota
Catenaria anguillulae

Endoparasite

Zoospore

Oomycota
Nematophthora gynophila
Myzocytium humicola

Endoparasite
Endoparasite

Zoospore
Adhesive zoospore cyst

Zygomycota
Stylopage and Cystopage spp.

Predator

Adhesive hyphae

Mitosporic fungi (but some of these have sexual
stages in the ascomycota – see below)
Arthrobotrys oligospora
Monacrosporium cionopagum
Dactylella brochopage
Drechmeria coniospora
Hirsutella rhossiliensis
Verticillium chlamydosporium
Dactylaria candida

Predator
Predator
Predator
Endoparasite
Endoparasite
Egg parasite
Predator

Adhesive nets
Adhesive branches
Constricting rings
Adhesive conidia
Adhesive conidia
Hyphal invasion
Adhesive knobs and
nonconstricting rings

Endoparasite

Nonadhesive conidia

Predator

Adhesive conidia

Predator and toxin producer

Adhesive traps and
toxic droplets

Ascomycota
Atricordyceps (sexual stage of Harposporium oxycoracum)
Orbilia spp (sexual stages of some Dactylella,
Arthrobotrys, and Monacrosporium spp.)
Basidiomycota
Hohenbuehelia (gilled mushroom – the sexual stage of
several Nematoctonus species)
Pleurotus ostreatus

318

CHAPTER 15

(a)

(b)

Fig. 15.8 (a) Adhesive network of Arthrobotrys oligospora. (b) Adhesive knobs of Monacrosporium ellipsosporum on hyphae
growing from a parasitized nematode (seen at the top left of the image). (Courtesy of B.A. Jeffee; from Jaffee 1992.)
Fig. 15.8), short adhesive branches (e.g. Monacrosporium
cionopagum), adhesive knobs (e.g. M. ellipsosporum,
Fig. 15.8), nonconstricting rings, and constricting
rings that are triggered to contract when a nematode
enters them (e.g. Dactylella brochopaga). More than
one type of mechanism can be found in different
species of a genus.
All these fungi are considered to be essentially
saprotrophic because they grow on a range of organic
substrates, including cellulose, in laboratory culture,
and some are wood-degrading members of the
Basidiomycota. Also, some of them (e.g. A. oligospora)
coil round the hyphae of other fungi in culture,
indicative of mycoparasitic behavior (Chapter 12).
However, their specialized trapping devices clearly
indicate that they are adapted to exploit nematodes.
In some cases they produce the traps during normal
growth in culture, but in other cases (e.g. A. oligospora)
the traps are produced only in the presence of nematodes
or nematode diffusates. This can be mimicked by
supplying small peptides or combinations of amino
acids such as phenylalanine and valine. It seems likely
that the nematode-trapping fungi exploit nematodes
mainly as a source of nitrogen, which could often be

in short supply in the habitats where the nematodetrapping fungi grow, especially in woody materials.
Several details of the fungus–nematode interactions
have been established in recent years. For example,
the initial adhesion is almost instantaneous and effectively irreversible. Even when the nematode thrashes to
free itself from the fungus, the trapping organ will break
from the hyphae and remain attached to the nematode,
then initiate infection. Yet, the trapping organs are
not “sticky” in the general sense, because they do
not accumulate soil debris, etc. Instead, the adhesive
could be a lectin-like material that binds to specific sugar
components of the nematode surface. This has been
studied in the interaction between A. oligospora and the
saprotrophic nematode Panagrellus redivivus, where
the ability of the fungus to bind to the nematode was
annulled in the presence of N-acetylgalactosamine
(Tunlid et al. 1992).
Presumably, this sugar derivative binds to the fungal lectin, blocking the adhesion process. Panagrellus
is known to have N-acetylgalactosamine components
on its surface, because it binds to commercially available lectins (e.g. wheat-germ agglutinin) that recognize
this sugar derivative. A glycoprotein with this binding

FUNGAL PARASITES OF INSECTS AND NEMATODES

319

Fig. 15.9 Hirsutella rhossiliensis, an
endoparasitic fungus on a nematode
host. Infection occurred from a spore
(S) that adhered near the nematode’s
mouth and then germinated and
penetrated the cuticle to produce a
bulb (B). A thin infection hypha (H)
has started to colonize the host. (The
nematode’s piercing stylet (St) is
shown; this is used for feeding.)
(Courtesy of B.A. Jaffee; from Jaffee
1992.)

property has been isolated from A. oligospora, but it is
found only on the surface of the traps, not on the
normal hyphae, so presumably it is the product of a
differentiation-specific gene. Other fungus–nematode
combinations have also been investigated for binding
specificity by using sugars to try to block adhesion. These
studies indicate that Arthrobotrys conioides has a lectin
that recognizes α-d-glucose or α-d-mannose residues,
Monacrosporium eudermatum has a lectin that binds to
l-fucose, and Drechmeria coniospora has a lectin that
binds to sialic acid. So the adhesion can be to some
degree nematode-specific. For example, Monacrosporium
ellipsosporum does not capture Xiphinema spp. (which
feed on the root tips of many plants) but these nematodes are captured by other species of Monacrosporium,
Arthrobotrys, and Dactylaria. However, Tunlid et al.
(1992) cautioned against simple interpretations based
on lectin-binding, because ultrastructural studies suggest that the adhesive on fungal traps might change
when nematodes become attached to it: more adhesive
material might be released or there might be a rearrangement of the adhesive so that different binding sites are
exposed in it.
The trapping of nematodes by some wood-decay
fungi has focused attention on the role that nematodes
might have as supplementary nitrogen sources, overcoming the critically low nitrogen content of wood
(Chapter 11). The wood-rotting “oyster fungus” Pleurotus
ostreatus (Basidiomycota; see Fig. 2.30) not only forms
adhesive traps but also produces droplets of toxin
from specialized cells. Nematodes immobilized by this
toxin are then invaded and digested by the fungus.

The endoparasitic fungi
In contrast to the nematode-trapping fungi, endoparasitic fungi initiate infections from spores that adhere

to a nematode surface, and then germinate to infect
the host. Again, lectins seem to be involved in the
initial adhesion process, but the endoparasitic fungi
only produce detachable, adhesive spores, and when
they have colonized and absorbed the host contents
they grow out into soil and produce further spores to
repeat the infection cycle. Hirsutella rhossiliensis is a good
example of this (Figs 15.9, 15.10).
The endoparasitic fungi differ from the trapping
fungi because they seem to depend on nematodes as
their main or only food source in nature, even though
many of them can be grown in laboratory culture
media. Consistent with this, they show a strong
density dependence on their hosts ( Jaffee 1992); in
other words, the population density of these fungi is
dependent on the population density of the nematode.
In contrast to this, the zoosporic fungus Catenaria
anguillulae (Chytridiomycota), which also can attack
nematodes, is one of the least specialized examples
of a nematode-control agent because it grows on
several types of organic material in nature, including
liver fluke eggs. Also, its zoospores do not settle easily
on moving nematodes in water films, and instead
it accumulates at the body orifices of immobilized
or dying nematodes (see Fig. 2.2). This contrasts with
Myzocytium humicola (Oomycota) which also produces
zoospores but these spores encyst soon after release and
then germinate to produce an adhesive bud which
attaches to a passing nematode.
Some endoparasitic fungi – for example, Hirsutella
rhossiliensis (Fig. 15.10) and Drechmeria coniospora –
seem to attract nematodes by means of a chemical
gradient, helping to ensure that attachment occurs. Then
the adhered spores germinate rapidly and the hyphae
fill the host, killing it within a few days. Finally, the
hyphae grow out through the host wall and produce
a further batch of spores. From a single parasitized
nematode, Hirsutella can produce up to 700 spores, while

320

CHAPTER 15

Fig. 15.10 Hirsutella rhossiliensis at a
later stage than that in Fig. 15.9,
when the body contents have been
completely colonized by the fungus.
Hyphae have grown out from the
dead nematode and produced adhesive
conidia (C). (Courtesy of B.A. Jaffee;
from Jaffee 1992.)

Drechmeria is reported to produce up to 10,000 spores
from a single parasitized nematode.

Parasites of nematode eggs and cysts
Cyst nematodes are important pests of several crops,
including cereals, potato and sugar beet in Europe. They
are characterized by the fact that the female nematode
penetrates the root just behind the root tip and lodges
with her head inside. The host cells respond by
swelling into nutrient-rich “giant cells” from which the
nematode taps the host nutrients. As the female grows
her body distends into a lemon shape which ruptures
the root cortex so that her rear protrudes from the root.
Then she is fertilized by wandering males, and her uterus
fills with eggs which develop into larvae (Fig. 15.11a).
At this stage the larval development is arrested, the
female dies and her body wall is transformed into a
tough, leathery cyst which can persist in soil for many
years, making these nematodes difficult to eradicate.
A classic example of biocontrol of plant-parasitic
nematodes was reported by Kerry & Crump (1980).
When oat crops were grown repeatedly on field sites
in Britain, the population of cereal cyst nematodes
(Heterodera avenae) was found to increase progressively,
but then spontaneously declined to a level at which
it no longer caused economic damage. Investigation
of these cyst-nematode decline sites revealed a high
incidence of parasitism of the females by a zoosporic
fungus, Nematophthora gynophila (Oomycota), coupled
with parasitism of the eggs (i.e. the sacs containing
the individual arrested larvae) by another fungus,
Verticillium chlamydosporium (a mitosporic fungus).
Nematophthora infects the females and fills most of the
body cavity with thick-walled resting spores (oospores)
so that the cyst, if formed at all, contains relatively few

Fig. 15.11 A female cereal cyst nematode, Heterodera
avenae, and the cyst-parasitic fungus Nematophthora
gynophila (Oomycota). (a) Mature healthy nematode
containing embryonated eggs. The body wall of the
female will subsequently develop a leathery cuticle and
become a cyst that persists in soil. (b) A ruptured cyst
filled with oospores of N. gynophila. Most of the eggs are
not infected, but the absence of a cyst wall enables egg
parasites such as Verticillium chlamydosporium to infect and
destroy many of the eggs. (Drawn from photographs in
Kerry & Crump 1980.)

FUNGAL PARASITES OF INSECTS AND NEMATODES

eggs but a large number of fungal spores (Fig. 15.11b).
Verticillium has a different role from this – it is a facultative parasite of nematode eggs, destroying the eggs
after they have been released into soil.
The parasitic efficiency of these two fungi – the cyst
parasite and the egg parasite – is so high that they bring
the level of damage to oat crops below the “economic
threshold” at which fungicides or other control agents
would be justified. However, although this natural
control is highly effective, it has not led to the
widespread use of N. gynophila for biological control.
Part of the reason is that N. gynophila cannot be grown
in culture – it is an obligate parasite of nematodes.
And in any case it is effective only in soils wet enough
to favor zoospore activity. The egg parasite V. chlamydosporum can be cultured easily but is less effective as
a biocontrol agent, especially when acting alone.

Online resources
LUBILOSA (biological control of locusts and grasshoppers).
http://www.lubilosa.org/exsumm.htm

Cited references
Anke, H. & Sterner, O. (2002) Insecticidal and nematicidal
metabolites from fungi. In: The Mycota X. Industrial
Applications (Osiewacz, H.D., ed.), pp. 109–127. SpringerVerlag, Berlin.
Barron, G.L. (1977) The Nematode-destroying Fungi. Canadian Biological Publications, Guelph, Ontario.
Butt, T.M. (2002) Use of entomogenous fungi for the
control of insect pests. In: The Mycota XI. Agricultural
Applications (Kempken, F., ed.), pp. 111–134. SpringerVerlag, Berlin.

321

Butt, T.M., Jackson, C.W. & Magan, N., eds (2001) Fungi as
Biocontrol Agents, Problems, Progress and Potential. CABI
Publishing, Wallingford, Oxon.
Charnley, A.K. (1989) Mechanisms of fungal pathogenesis
in insects. In: Biotechnology of Fungi for Improving Plant
Growth (Whipps, J.M. & Lumsden, R.D., eds), pp. 85–
125. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Feng, M.G., Poprawski, T.J. & Khachatourians, G.G.
(1994) Production, formulation and application of the
entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana for insect
control: current status. Biocontrol Science and Technology
4, 3–34.
Hall, R.A. & Burges, H.D. (1979) Control of aphids in
glasshouses with the fungus Verticillium lecanii. Annals
of Applied Biology 102, 455–466.
Jaffee, B.A. (1992) Population biology and biological control of nematodes. Canadian Journal of Microbiology 38,
359–364.
Kerry, B.R. & Crump, D.H. (1980) Two fungi parasitic
on females of cyst-nematodes (Heterodera spp.). Transactions of the British Mycological Society 74, 119–125.
Kerry, B.R., Crump, D.H. & Mullen, L.A. (1982) Studies
of the cereal cyst nematode, Heterodera avenae, under
continuous cereals, 1975–1978. II. Fungal parasitism of
female nematodes and eggs. Annals of Applied Biology 100,
489–499.
Tunlid, A., Jansson, H.-B. & Nordbring-Hertz, B. (1992)
Fungal attachment to nematodes. Mycological Research 96,
401–412.
Vey, A., Hoagland, R.E. & Butt, T.M. (2001) Toxic metabolites of fungal biocontrol agents. In: Fungi as Biocontrol
Agents (Butt, T.M., Jackson, C. & Magan, N., eds),
pp. 311–346. CAB International, Wallingford, Oxon.
Whisler, H.C., Zebold, S.L. & Shemanchuk, J.A. (1975) Life
history of Coelomomyces psorophorae. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA 72, 693–696.
Wilding, N. & Perry, J.N. (1980) Studies on Entomophthora
in populations of Aphis fabae on field beans. Annals of
Applied Biology 94, 367–378.

Chapter 16

“The moulds of man”

This chapter is divided into the following major sections:
• the major fungal pathogens of humans and other
mammals
• the dermatophytic fungi
• Candida albicans and other Candida species
• opportunistic and incidental pathogens: Aspergillosis
• endemic dimorphic fungi: Coccidioides, Blastomyces,
Histoplasma, and Paracoccidioides
• Cryptococcus neoformans
• Pneumocystis species
In contrast to the many thousands of fungi that infect
plants, only about 200–300 fungi are reported to cause
diseases of humans and other warm-blooded animals
– diseases that are collectively termed mycoses. We
can be thankful for this, although it remains to be
explained satisfactorily in evolutionary terms. Even the
fungi that do infect humans and other warm-blooded
animals are, for the most part, opportunistic or cause
only mild symptoms in normal, healthy individuals. But
the situation has changed drastically in recent years,
with the increasing use of immunosuppressant drugs
in transplant surgery and cancer therapy, and the
advance of HIV/AIDS. Fungal infections can be lifethreatening in these situations, and we shall see in
Chapter 17 that there are few really satisfactory drugs
to control them without causing adverse side effects.
In addition to the invasive mycoses, fungi pose a
threat to health by producing mycotoxins in foodstuffs
and animal feeds (Chapter 7), and airborne fungal
spores can be significant causes of asthma, hay fever,

and more serious occupational diseases, discussed in
Chapter 10. Taking all these factors together, fungi can
have a significant impact on human and animal health.
In this chapter we consider the major fungi that infect
humans and some other warm-blooded animals.

Major fungal pathogens of humans and
other mammals
The human-pathogenic fungi can be grouped into five
categories based on features such as their primary
route of entry into the host, the type of disease that
they cause, and their natural sources of inoculum
(Table 16.1). An outline of these groups is given below
and will provide the basis for more detailed treatment
in later sections of this chapter:
1 The dermatophytes, also known as ringworm
fungi, grow in the dead, keratinized tissues of the skin,
nails, and hair. They are very common, and infect
large sections of the human and animal populations.
The diseases that they cause are superficial, being
confined to the dead tissues, but they can cause severe
irritation of the underlying living tissues, leading to
secondary invasion by bacteria. Many of these fungi
show a degree of specialization for particular hosts
(humans, cats, cattle, etc.) but can cross-infect other
hosts. The source of inoculum is usually the shed
keratinized tissues (flakes of skin, hairs, etc.) in which
the fungus can persist in a dormant phase. As a group,
the dermatophytes are successful parasites with a
clearly defined niche.

THE MOULDS OF MAN

323

Table 16.1 The major types of fungus that cause mycoses of humans.
Primary route
of entry

Fungus

Sexual stage

Disease

Natural distribution

Skin

Trichophyton (22 species)
Microsporum (19 species)
but only 9 are involved
in infections
Epidermophyton
(2 species)

Arthroderma
(Ascomycota)

Dermatomycosis:
ringworm, tinea,
athlete’s foot, etc.

Keratinized tissues,
humans and wild or
domesticated animals

Mucosa

Candida albicans
Some other Candida spp.

Recently reported
(see text)

Candidosis: thrush,
vulvovaginitis, stomatitis

Commensal on mucosa

Lungs

Aspergillus fumigatus

None

Aspergillosis: invasive
(systemic) or
aspergillomas of lungs

Saprotrophic in soil or
organic matter (composts)

Blastomyces dermatitidis

Ajellomyces
(Ascomycota)

Blastomycosis: lungs,
skin lesions, bones, brain

Saprotrophic

Coccidioides immitis

None

Coccidioidomycosis:
lungs, systemic

Saprotrophic in soil

Cryptococcus neoformans

Filobasidiella
(Basidiomycota)

Cryptococcosis: lungs,
brain, meninges

Bird excreta, vegetation
(eucalypt trees)

Histoplasma capsulatum

Ajellomyces
(Ascomycota)

Histoplasmosis: lungs,
rarely systemic

Bird and bat droppings

Paracoccidioides
brasiliensis

None

Paracoccidioidomycosis:
lungs, cutaneous, lymph
nodes

Soil ?

Phialophora Cladosporium
Sporothrix, etc.

Often none

Subcutaneous mycoses:
chromomycosis,
sporotrichosis, etc.

Saprotrophic in soil, dead
plant material

Rhizopus, Absidia, etc.

Zygomycota

Zygomycosis

Saprotrophic

Pneumocystis species

None

Virulent pneumonia

Humans, other mammals

Wounds/
lesions

Lungs

2 Several Candida species grow as normal resident
commensals on the mucosal membranes of healthy
individuals, but can become invasive in appropriate
conditions. The diploid yeast Candida albicans is the
prime example of this. It is found commonly on
the mucosa of the gut, the mouth, and the vulvovaginal tract. But in response to environmental
triggers the yeast cells can produce hyphal outgrowths that invade the mucosa, leading to clinical
or subclinical conditions. For example, “thrush” is
a white, invasive speckling of the throat, which is
common in neonates and immunocompromised
individuals, including AIDS and cancer patients, and

people in the advanced stages of diabetes. Candida
can also cause intense irritation of the vulvo-uterine
tract of women during stages of menstruation or during pregnancy, and it commonly causes stomatitis
in people who wear dentures.
3 A diverse group of fungi that normally grow as
saprotrophs in soil or on plant or animal remains
can establish infections in the lungs from inhaled
spores. These infections invariably stem from an
environmental source of spores rather than from
direct patient-to-patient transmission. Almost any
fungus that produces spores small enough (c. 3–4 µm)
to reach the alveoli, that can grow at 37°C, and

324

CHAPTER 16

that can withstand the host’s cellular defenses is
a potential threat to health. But these infections
are normally restricted to immunocompromised or
immunosuppressed individuals, including patients
with advanced diabetes or cancers. A notable feature
of many of these infections is that they are geographically confined to specific regions – in other
words, they are endemic. For example, Coccidioides
immitis (a fungus known to have killed a laboratory
worker) is largely confined to the arid desert regions
of southwestern USA and northern Mexico.
4 A few fungi with melanized hyphal walls, such as
species of Phialophora, Cladosporium, and Sporothrix,
can invade traumatized tissues such as deep wounds
and cause tissue-degrading lesions. Although they can
be important causes of infection, especially among
agricultural workers in poorer countries, they are
essentially pathogens of wounds or traumatized
tissues. They will not be considered further in
this chapter. Similarly, some common members
of the Zygomycota cause traumatic infections of
people who suffer from diabetes and ketoacidosis, as
discussed in Chapter 2.
5 A specialized group of primitive fungus-like
organisms, now classified as different species of
Pneumocystis, are found in the lungs of humans and
a wide range of mammalian hosts. They seem to be
host-specific because DNA sequence comparisons of
Pneumocystis strains from different hosts show
wide genetic diversity, but close similarity between
strains isolated from any one type of host. The fungus that infects humans, Pneumocystis jirovici (formerly

known as P. carinii ), seems to be particularly common in young children, because often more than 80%
of children show an antibody response to the pneumocystis antigen in skin tests. But the fungus seems
to disappear as children age, and is found again in
AIDS patients, where it causes a virulent pneumonia
that can be transmitted from patient to patient by
airborne cells. Pneumonia caused by P. jirovici in
HIV patients is often regarded as one of the first
“AIDS-defining” illnesses.

Dermatophytic fungi
The dermatophytes are a clearly defined group of
about 40 species, traditionally assigned to three genera
of mitosporic fungi – Trichophyton, Microsporum, and
Epidermophyton, based on features of their conidial
stages (Figs 16.1, 16.2a). Some species of Trichophyton
(and similarly of Microsporum) have been found to
produce a sexual stage when strains of different mating types are paired in laboratory culture. The sexual
stage, named Arthroderma, is a cleistothecium containing asci and ascospores. However its role, if any, in
epidemiology is not known, and so most medical
mycologists use the familiar “asexual” names because
these are associated with specific diseases and geographical distributions.
The characteristic feature of dermatophytes is their
ability to grow in the dead, keratinized tissues of
the skin, nails, and hair (Figs 16.2b, 16.3), where their
metabolic products can induce an inflammatory

Fig. 16.1 Spores of the three common genera of dermatophytic fungi. (a) Macroconidia (about 50 µm long) and
microconidia (about 4 µm) of Trichophyton spp. (b) Macroconidia of Epidermophyton spp, which do not produce microconidia. (c) Spindle-shaped macroconidia, and microconidia of Microsporum spp.

THE MOULDS OF MAN

(a)

325

(b)

Fig. 16.2 (a) Spindle-shaped macroconidia, and microconidia, of Microsporum spp. (b) Enzyme-mediated penetration
of a hair by hyphae of Trichophyton mentagrophytes. (Reproduced by courtesy of the Canadian National Centre for Mycology;
http://www2.provlab.ab.ca/bugs/webbug/mycology/dermhome.htm)

Fig. 16.3 (a) Flattened fronds of hyphae of a dermatophyte, growing in planes of weakness within a stratified substrate
such as skin flakes. (b) Diagram of a perforating organ, similar to that in Fig. 16.2b.

response. The living tissues are not invaded because
dermatophytes cannot grow at 37°C. Nevertheless,
the irritation caused by dermatophytes often leads to
scratching and further damage to the tissues, enabling
bacteria to invade. Scratching also leads to the shedding of dermatophyte-infested skin and hair, so the
shared use of “scratching posts” by animals can lead
to transmission of the infection. Similarly, in human
populations communal facilities such as bathing areas,

changing rooms, and domestic carpets can provide
a source of inoculum. This indirect transmission is
thought to be more important than direct host-to-host
transmission. Even the role of the conidial stages is
debatable, because these are not always found on
infected tissues while they are attached to the host, but
pigmented hyphae and vegetative arthrospores (thickwalled spores formed by hyphal fragmentation) can be
found in these tissues.

326

CHAPTER 16

The pathogenicity and virulence
determinants of dermatophytes
Pathogenicity is the ability to cause disease, while
virulence factors determine the severity of a disease.
Although this distinction is clear in principle, it is not
always easy in practice without knowledge of specific
genes and gene products that can be manipulated to
establish a direct link between disease and the roles of
pathogenicity/virulence determinants. However, two key
features are thought to contribute to diseases caused
by dermatophytes: (i) their ability to grow on substrates
rich in keratin, and (ii) their significant, although not
absolute, degree of host specialization.
Keratin is a major protein found in skin, nails, and
hair. It is a difficult substrate to degrade, especially when
found in the form of “hard keratin” (e.g. nails, hoofs)
which contains numerous disulfide bonds between the
sulphur-containing amino acids. In laboratory culture
the dermatophytes can grow on keratin as their sole
carbon and energy source, by producing keratinolytic
proteases termed keratinases. This is perhaps a unique
feature of these fungi, because no other fungus is
reported to grow exclusively on proteins. Keratinases
could therefore be virulence determinants of the dermatophytes, and an understanding of these enzymes
could lead to the development of vaccines. In a recent
report (Brouta et al. 2002) a metalloprotease (MEP)
genome sequence of the unrelated fungus, Aspergillus
fumigatus, was used as a probe to identify three MEP
genes in a genomic library of Microsporum canis. One
of these genes, MEP3, was found to encode a 43.5-kDa
keratinolytic metalloprotease, and both this protease and
another (termed MEP2) were found to be produced in
vivo during experimental infection studies on guinea
pigs. This work represents the first report of a gene
family encoding potential virulence determinants in
dermatophytes.

Dermatophytes show a quite significant degree of
host- or habitat-specialization, so they are commonly
grouped into three categories (Box 16.1):
• Anthropophilic (human-loving) species are primarily parasites of humans and only rarely infect
other species. They typically cause persistent but
relatively mild infections. Examples of these fungi
include:
• Epidermophyton floccosum, with a worldwide distribution, causing infection of the groin, the body,
and feet (athlete’s foot);
• Trichophyton mentagrophytes and T. rubrum –
probably the commonest species, with worldwide
distributions, infecting many body parts.
• Zoophilic (animal-loving) species typically infect wild
or domesticated animals, such as cattle, cats, dogs,
and horses. They can also be transmitted to humans
who have very close contact with animals, but these
infections usually induce a strong inflammatory
response in the human host and then resolve spontaneously. A classic example is Microsporum canis, commonly acquired by humans who have close contact
with domestic pets such as cats and dogs.
• Geophilic species live in soil and usually degrade
keratin-containing materials such as feathers and
hair, but they can occasionally infect human hosts.
An example is Microsporum gypseum which is found
worldwide but commonly in South America, where
it is usually acquired from soil but occasionally from
animals.
The treatments used to control dermatophyte infections
are discussed in Chapter 17. Briefly, because these fungi
cause superficial infections they can be treated by
topical application of oxidizing agents or antibiotics
(e.g. nystatin, amphotericin B). If the infections are
persistent they can be treated by oral administration

Box 16.1 Some of the main dermatophytic fungi that infect humans.
Anthropophilic

Zoophilic

Geophilic

Epidermophyton floccosum

Microsporum canis (cats, dogs)

Microsporum audouinii
Microsporum ferrugineum
Trichophyton mentagrophytes
var. interdigitale
Trichophyton rubrum
Trichophyton tonsurans

Microsporum equinum (horses)
Microsporum nanum (soil/pigs)
Microsporum persicolor (rodents)

Microsporum gypseum
(commonly infects humans)
Trichophyton terrestre

Trichophyton equinum (horses)
Trichophyton mentagrophytes var.
mentagrophytes (mice, rodents)
Trichophyton verrucosum (cattle)

THE MOULDS OF MAN

of the antibiotic griseofulvin or by newer, less toxic
drugs such as terebinafine (Chapter 17).

Candida albicans and other Candida
species
Candida albicans occurs naturally as a diploid budding
yeast on the mucosal membranes of humans and
other warm-blooded animals. It is a common commensal of humans, being found on the mucosa of the
mouth, gut, or vagina of more than 50% of healthy
individuals. Usually it causes no harm, but a wide
range of predisposing factors can cause it to become
invasive, leading to conditions collectively known
as candidosis. A few other Candida species, such as
C. glabrata and C. tropicalis, cause similar conditions,
but less frequently. Several recent reviews cover
significant aspects of Candida biology – Brown & Gow
(2001), Calderone & Fonzi (2001), and Douglas
(2003).
The list of clinical manifestations of C. albicans is
extensive. This fungus can cause “thrush” in newborn
babies, when the fungus invades the mucosa of the
mouth and throat, producing speckly white pustules
from which the disease gains its name. This is often
associated with delivery through an infected birth
canal, and the fungus proliferates on the mucosa
before a normal, balanced microbial population has
developed. Candida also causes cystitis, and it can
cause inflammation of the mouth (stomatitis) of many
people who wear dentures. This is associated with
several factors, including abrasion caused by the dentures, adhesion of Candida cells to the dental plastic,
and probably the closed environment with lack of
“flushing” underneath the denture plate.
People whose hands are frequently exposed to water
can develop Candida infections of the skin and fingernails. In addition, Candida can be introduced into the
blood through catheters and other surgical procedures,
but the yeast population soon declines when the
catheter is removed. Candida infection of the gut is
often associated with prolonged antibacterial therapy,
especially with tetracycline antibiotics which suppress
the bacterial population. Stress can be an additional
factor in Candida infections; for example, astronauts
have been found to develop high populations of C.
albicans during space flights. And, in extreme cases of
predisposition, such as advanced diabetes, neutrophil
or macrophage disorders, immune disorders, and
malignancies, Candida can grow systemically and
become life-threatening. This catalog of examples
shows that Candida is potentially an ever-present
threat to human wellbeing. An understanding of its
virulence determinants could pave the way for new
approaches to controlling these infections.

327

The virulence determinants of Candida
albicans
A large body of evidence suggests that there are two
obvious virulence determinants of C. albicans – its
ability to adhere strongly to epithelia and several
other surfaces, and its ability to undergo a dimorphic
switch between a yeast phase and a hyphal or pseudohyphal phase in response to environmental factors.

Adhesins
Despite many years of study on the adhesion of
Candida cells, both in vitro and in vivo, it is still not
possible to define precisely the role that adhesion
plays in Candida infections, because there seem to be
many interacting factors. Adhesion studies in vitro
show that the yeast cells of C. albicans adhere strongly
to shed epithelial cells of the vagina, and that adhesion
is stronger to cells obtained from pregnant women. The
two commonest cell types in the vaginal epithelium
are the intermediate cells and the superficial cells.
Candida binds most strongly to the intermediate cells
in vitro, and these cells predominate when there are
high levels of progesterone (for example, during pregnancy or in women who use oral contraceptives).
Progesterone seems to have a direct effect, because
Candida binds more strongly to the epithelial cells of
nonpregnant women if progesterone is added in vitro.
Additionally, strains of C. albicans from active vaginal
infections are found to adhere more strongly in in
vitro studies than do isolates from healthy people. This
raises the possibility that venereal spread of vaginal
candidosis might involve the transmission of strongly
adherent strains.
These general correlations between in vitro adhesion
and the course of relatively mild clinical infections are
supported by other studies. For example, C. albicans
adheres to cells of the buccal cavity, to the methyl acrylate resin of dentures, and to the surfaces of catheters.
By using buccal epithelia or denture resin as model
systems in vitro, the adhesion of Candida was found to
be strongly enhanced if the fungus had been grown
on high levels of galactose, maltose, or sucrose, rather
than on glucose. This is associated with the presence
of mannoprotein adhesins on the surface of the yeast
cells. Nevertheless, the differential effects of sugars
seem to be strain-related, because Candida strains from
active infections show it frequently, whereas strains from
asymptomatic carriers can show it much less often. Also,
adhesion may be a specific feature of C. albicans rather
than of Candida species in general, because the adhesion of nonpathogenic Candida spp. or of the nonpathogenic Saccharomyces cerevisiae is not markedly
altered when they are grown on different sugars.

328

CHAPTER 16

(a)

(b)

Fig. 16.4 (a,b) Pseudomycelium of Candida albicans in nutrient-limiting conditions. Yeast cells are produced instead of
fungal branches at the septa.

The dimorphic switch
Candida albicans is a dimorphic fungus. It normally
grows as a budding yeast, but in response to nutrient
limitation the yeast cells can produce a hyphal outgrowth (see Fig. 1.4). This dimorphic switch is central
to the pathogenicity of C. albicans, because invasion
of the mucosa is always achieved by hyphal growth.
In fact, this distinguishes C. albicans from all other (nonpathogenic) Candida spp. in clinical samples, and it is
used in a simple diagnostic test: the yeast is cultured
on a selective medium, then a loopful of inoculum is
transferred to a vial containing horse serum and incubated at 37°C for 4–5 hours. Of all the Candida strains
that might occur in clinical samples only C. albicans
will sprout germ-tubes in these conditions, although
several other Candida spp. from nonhuman sources
can do so. The hyphal stage is only transitory, and
incubation for longer times results in the production
of a pseudomycelium in which the hyphae consist of
strings of sausage-shaped cells that produce budding
yeast cells at the septa (Fig. 16.4).
Progress in understanding the behavior of C. albicans
has been hampered by the fact that C. albicans is constitutively diploid, so mutants are difficult to obtain.
Some homozygous recessive strains have been generated by repeated treatment with mutagens, especially
UV-irradiation. Also, parasexual genetics (Chapter 9)
has helped to generate mutants. For this, strains with
auxotrophic mutations are combined by protoplast
fusion, then allowed to regenerate walls. Some of the
resulting strains are tetraploid hybrids or aneuploids
which, when grown on minimal medium and subjected
to heat shock or antimicrotubule agents, can revert
to an altered diploid state by loss of chromosomes.
The development of molecular genetic methods for
C. albicans has also been hampered. Many genes from
C. albicans can be transformed into, and expressed
in, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, but not vice versa because

C. albicans has a nonstandard codon usage: the codon
CUG encodes serine, whereas it encodes leucine in
most other organisms. This is a significant limitation
because many of the putative virulence determinants
of C. albicans cannot be studied easily in the background
of the pathogen itself.
The discovery of mating-type genes
As explained in Chapter 9, the mating system of the
ascomycetous yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae involves a
cassette of three mating-type genes (Mata1, Matα 1 and
Mat α 2) and the mating type of a strain can change,
depending on whether the MATa or MATα gene
is moved into the expression locus by a specific
transformation event. By contrast, nobody had ever
identified the equivalent mating-type genes of Candida
albicans, so this fungus had always been assumed
to be a clonal organism, with no capacity for sexual
recombination. However, in 1998 a single mating
type-like (MTL) locus was discovered in a laboratory
strain of C. albicans. Since there is only one MTL
locus, the cell must become homozygous for a or α by
mitotic recombination or gene conversion. An a strain
(a/a) cannot convert to α (α/α) because each strain has
lost the alternate MTL allele. This means that normal
strains of C. albicans cannot mate. But by deleting one
of the two MTL alleles it is possible to produce mating
strains that are either a/– or α/– and that, in appropriate
conditions, can fuse with one another. This was found
to be rare event, often leading to apparent tetraploids
that did not develop further. But a few a/– and α/–
strains were found to switch their phenotype from the
normal white colony appearance to an opaque colony
form, and these opaque strains have an increased
mating efficiency of about a million fold. Therefore, it
is proposed that C. albicans can undergo mating but
does so only in the opaque colony form. The opaque
phase cells are stable ay 25°C but not at 37°C, and

THE MOULDS OF MAN

they are far more efficient in colonizing skin surfaces.
Therefore it is suggested that mating in this fungus must
occur outside the body – on the skin surface or in
environmental reservoirs.

Systemic infection by C. albicans
The rare cases of systemic spread of C. albicans in
the blood and lymph tissues are always associated
with severely predisposing factors such as leukemia,
advanced diabetes, prolonged corticosteroid therapy, etc.
But, strangely, C. albicans seldom grows systemically
in AIDS patients, who tend to develop other systemic
fungal infections instead. Candida grows systemically
as a yeast in the body fluids, but dimorphism plays
an important role in one respect. If cells of C. albicans
are mixed with white blood cells (macrophages and
polymorphonuclear leucocytes) in vitro the yeast cells
can be engulfed and destroyed, but some of them
break out of the phagocyes by converting to hyphae
and then produce a further population of yeasts. In these
conditions the vigor of the host defense system will
be crucial in containing an infection. In Chapter 17 we
will see that the major drugs used to treat systemic
candidosis (modern derivatives of ketoconazole and
related compounds) act synergistically with the host
defenses, because at even low concentrations they
suppress the transition from yeast to hyphal growth.

Opportunistic and incidental pathogens
Theoretically, any fungus that can grow at 37°C could
be a potential pathogen of humans, but in practice
the spectrum is much narrower than this (Table 16.1).
A few common saprotrophic species of Phialophora,
Sporothrix, Cladosporium, and Acremonium can infect
wounds and cause damaging subcutaneous mycoses.
Many examples of this are described by Kwon-Chung
& Bennett (1992). A different spectrum of fungi characteristically infect through the lungs because their
airborne spores are small enough to reach the alveoli
(Chapter 10). Of all these fungi, the most significant
threat is posed by Aspergillus species, especially A.
fumigatus but, to a lesser extent, A. flavus. We will focus
on these and related fungi in this section, because
Aspergillus infections can be serious and often lifethreatening.

Aspergillosis
Aspergillus fumigatus, A. flavus and A. niger are very
common saprotrophs on a range of organic materials
and produce abundant airborne conidia that are small

329

enough to enter the lungs (Chapter 10). In people
with impaired respiratory function these spores can
germinate to produce dense, localized saprotrophic
colonies termed aspergillomas (see Fig. 8.4). Usually
these remain noninvasive, surrounded by fibrous
tissue of the host. Aspergillomas are quite common
in poultry that are fed on moulded grain, and can occur
in farm workers who regularly handle such materials.
Infection of the lungs is entirely incidental so far as the
fungi are concerned because they grow as saprotrophs
on plant organic matter (Chapter 10) and they have
no natural means of disseminating from the lungs to
spread the infection to other hosts.
Aspergillus fumigatus is by far the most damaging airborne fungal pathogen of humans, and is responsible
for about 90% of aspergillosis cases. Its spores are
frequently inhaled and enter the lungs, but normally
are destroyed by the body’s innate defenses. However,
A. fumigatus can become invasive and grow systemically
in the body, either from infections in the respiratory
tract of immunocompromised patients or after entry
through surgical wounds. It can be a potential problem in transplant surgery, when the patient’s immune
system is artificially suppressed.
There are thought to be two principal routes of
invasion by A. fumigatus – through the ciliated epithelium that lines the upper regions of the respiratory
tract or through the alveoli. The cells of the ciliated
epithelium can engulf conidia of A. fumigatus, and some
of these engulfed spores can survive within the host
cells. Corticosteroid treatments are also known to be
a risk factor in invasive aspergillosis, by reducing
the release or efficacy of antifungal peptides produced
by the lining epithelium. The spores that are not
engulfed by the lining epithelium enter the alveoli,
where they can germinate, but are destroyed quite
rapidly by polymorphonuclear neutrophils. However,
low neutrophil numbers resulting from chemotherapy
can reduce the efficiency of this defense system.
The spores can also be engulfed quickly by alveolar
macrophages where they are killed by reactive oxygen
species. But the rate of killing is slow, and it can take
2–3 days to clear a respiratory challenge. These factors
can be important in determining the outcome of an
infection.
To date there is no evidence of a specific virulence
factor associated with A. fumigatus, and almost any strain
of this fungus seems to be able to infect compromised
individuals. The model system most commonly used
for this is inoculation of mice (the so-called murine,
i.e. mouse, model system). But this may not be the most
appropriate model for aspergillosis of humans. The
complete genome sequence of A. fumigatus is now
available (http://www.tigr.org/tdb/e2k1/afu1). This
should enable comparisons to be made of either
the transcriptome (messenger RNA) or the proteome

330

CHAPTER 16

(protein profile) of strains grown in vitro compared with
in vivo, to identify any potential virulence determinants
that are expressed specifically in the host environment. Details of the roles of Aspergillus spp. as human
pathogens are covered by several contributors in
Domer & Kobayashi (2004).

Endemic dimorphic fungi
In addition to C. albicans, a small group of fungi can
cause systemic infections of healthy or immunocompromised individuals. These fungi are particularly
interesting because they are geographically localized
(endemic) and they are dimorphic, switching from one
growth form to another in response to temperature
shifts. All of them initiate infection from airborne
spores that enter the lungs. People with impaired
respiratory function can be particularly prone to lung
infection, and people in the advanced stages of diabetes,
leukemia, and immunosuppressive disorders can often
develop the systemic disease. Yet, skin tests with antigens of some of these fungi indicate that a substantial
proportion of the population in the endemic areas has
been exposed to infection at some stage and perhaps
suffered only mild, flu-like symptoms before the infection spontaneously resolved. Thus, these fungi pose
a significant and perpetual threat to a sector of the
population. The four main pathogens that cause these
diseases are discussed below.

Coccidioides immitis
Coccidioides immitis and a related species, C. posadasii,
are fungi that grow in the alkaline soils of arid desert
regions of California, Arizona, and Texas, extending
into parts of Central and South America. The hyphae
of these fungi fragment to produce small, thick-walled
spores (arthroconidia or arthrospores) which can be dispersed in dry, wind-blown dust and thereby enter the
lungs. Most of these cells are engulfed and destroyed
by macrophages in the lungs, and cause a flu-like
or pneumonia-like infection which resolves spontaneously. The incidence of this is quite common among
people who live in these desert areas, because up to 50%
of healthy people show a positive response to a skin
test with Coccidioides antigen, obtained from laboratory
cultures of the fungus.
However, in some people – especially those who
are immunocompromised – the fungus is not contained by macrophages and it can spread within the
lungs and enter the bloodstream, causing a serious generalized infection of the bones, subcutaneous tissues,
meninges, and major organs. This disease is called
coccidioidomycosis.
As shown in Figs 16.5 and 16.6, in the aggressive,
generalized phase of coccidiodomycosis, the arthroconidia swell and undergo multiple nuclear divisions,
leading to the production of multinucleate, swollen
structures termed spherules in the lungs. The large

Fig. 16.5 Infection cycle of Coccidioides immitis, which grows in desert soils. In its saprotrophic phase, the fungus produces hyphal branches that undergo multiple septation to form a chain of cells. Then the nutrients are withdrawn from
every alternate cell, to supply nutrients for the remaining cells (arthrospores) which develop thick walls. Arthrospores
carried in wind-blown soil enter the lungs, germinate and produce a multinucleate spherule. At maturity, the cytoplasm
cleaves around the individual nuclei, and the spherule releases uninucleate cells that can develop into further spherules.

THE MOULDS OF MAN

(a)

331

(b)

(c)
Fig. 16.6 (a) A patient showing the disseminated stage of disease (coccidioidomycosis). (b) Spherules. (c) Chains of
arthrospores interspersed with empty cellular compartments. (Reproduced by courtesy of the DoctorFungus website;
http://www.doctorfungus.org/)

spherules then undergo cytoplasmic cleavage to produce smaller bodies (subspherules), which can repeat
the infection cycle within the lung tissues.
Coccidioides immitis has several interesting features.
First, at common environmental temperatures such
as 25°C it can grow as normal hyphae which produce
arthrospores for dissemination, whereas it produces
spherules at higher temperatures (37–40°C) typical
of the host environment. Even so, a change of temperature alone is not sufficient to produce spherules,
because in vitro studies show that these are only produced in the presence of high CO2 concentrations and
in specific growth media. C. immitis and the related
species C. posadasii (see later) are the only dimorphic
fungi that produce spherules; all other endemic fungal
pathogens of humans grow in a yeast-like budding phase

in the host tissues. In advanced stages of infection, C.
immitis becomes disseminated to many of the body
tissues, as shown in Fig. 16.6.
The geographical distribution of coccidioidomycosis
is not fully known, and even within the endemic
regions it shows a patchy occurrence. There are
reports that it is most common near the burrows of
soil-dwelling rodents. In controlled experiments, dogs,
cats, rodents, and other small animals have been
shown to be susceptible to infection (but so are bottlenose dolphins and horses!). It has been suggested that
wild desert animals might provide a natural reservoir
for infection of humans. Most recently, a molecular
comparison of microsatellite DNA sequences from
strains isolated from California/Arizona compared
with Texas, Central and South America revealed that

332

CHAPTER 16

these represent two distinct species of Coccidioides
(immitis and posadasii), both of which cause the same
disease. Perhaps the most disturbing feature is that
Coccidioides has the potential to be an inherently
virulent pathogen. It is known to have killed a healthy
laboratory technician, and the Occupational Safety
and Health Administration of the US Government
classifies it as “a biological agent with the potential to
pose a severe threat to public health and safety that
could potentially be used by terrorists.” Put in simple
terms, C. immitis is the only known fungus that is considered to represent a significant bioterrorism threat.
Further information on this fungus can be found at the
“Doctor Fungus” website (see Online resources).

Coccidioides, Histoplasma can be acquired in the laboratory because there is a recorded instance of students
having tested positive after examining cultures in
the classroom. The airborne spores can readily enter
the lungs and cause acute pulmonary histoplasmosis.
However, chronic pulmonary infection is confined to
people with lung dysfunction from other causes, and
it can lead to dissemination to the other body tissues.
This dissemination occurs by carriage of the yeast cells
in the lymph system, and is most common in immunodeficient people or in the very young (less than 1 year)
or older (50 years or more) sectors of the population.
Magrini & Goldman (2001) describe the increasing
range of molecular genetic tools that have been used
to investigate the pathobiology of H. capsulatum.

Histoplasma capsulatum
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Histoplasma is a fungus with a “typical” mould-yeast
dimorphism: it grows as hyphae on laboratory media
at 25–30°C, but as a budding yeast at 37°C on cysteinerich media. The hyphae produce single conidia on the
ends of short branches. Some of these conidia are
large, warty macroconidia (8–15 µm) whereas others
are microconidia (2–4 µm) that are likely to be the
main infective agents in the lungs. The spores germinate to form a germ-tube which rapidly gives rise to a
budding yeast phase in appropriate conditions. This
yeast phase is almost invariably found throughout the
course of infection, whereas the hyphae are involved
in the saprotrophic phase in dead body tissues or in
natural substrates.
Histoplasma capsulatum has a wide geographical distribution, including much of the eastern USA, most of
Latin America, and parts of Southeast Asia, Africa and
Europe (e.g. Italy). It occurs naturally as a saprotroph
in fecal-enriched soil around poultry houses, in bat
droppings in caves, and also in starlings’ droppings
in towns and cities. The birds themselves are not
infected, and the fungus is not found in their fresh droppings. However, bats have been found to be naturally
infected by H. capsulatum, with intestinal lesions.
Spores produced from fecal materials are the most
likely source of infection of humans, because there are
recorded instances of speliologists having developed the
disease (histoplasmosis) after visiting caves. Skin tests
using an antigen, histoplasmin, obtained from culture
filtrates suggest that a high proportion of the human
population has been exposed to infection in the
endemic areas; one such study estimated that 20% of
all the people in the USA had been infected at some
time from airborne spores.
Even in mild infections this fungus has been
detected in the urine, suggesting that it might commonly be generalized, although in the vast majority
of cases the infection resolves spontaneously. Like

Blastomyces dermatitidis is an endemic dimorphic
fungus found in the southeastern and south central
regions of the USA, along the Mississippi and Ohio
rivers, where it causes a disease termed North
American blastomycosis, or Chicago disease. It is also
reported to be isolated from humans in parts of Africa
and the Indian subcontinent, but these strains lack
the characteristic antigens of B. dermatitidis and might
represent a different species. In North America infection is associated with moist soils enriched with organic
matter or rotting wood, but little is known about the
basic ecology of this fungus. When grown in laboratory
culture, it has narrow hyphae (about 2 µm diameter)
that produce single globose conidia, 2–5 µm diameter,
at the ends of short hyphal branches, similar to (but
smaller than) those of Thermomyces lanuginosus (see
Fig. 5.18). It infects humans from airborne conidia that
enter the lungs and transform into a thick-walled,
yeast-like budding phase. About 50% of infections
are asymptomatic, but other infections can progress to
an acute pulmonary phase after an incubation period
of 30–45 days, producing symptoms in the lungs that
strongly resemble a bacterial pneumonia. The infection can also progress to a chronic phase that affects
the lungs, skin, bones, genitourinary tract, and other
organs – for example, ulcerative lesions of the skin,
granulomatous inflammation of the lungs, and spread
to many other tissues and organs.
Brandhorst et al. (2002) reported that thermally
regulated dimorphism is the single most defining trait
of Blastomyces, and this is linked to a phase-specific gene
of B. dermatitidis termed BAD1 (Blastomyces adhesin),
found only on the surface of the Y-phase and not on
the hyphae that grow at lower temperatures. The cell
wall glucan of the yeast-phase cells consists of 90%
α-glucan, whereas mycelial phase cells have roughly
equal content of α-glucan and β-glucan. This is also true

THE MOULDS OF MAN

333

for Paracoccidioides brasiliensis (see below) and strains
of Histoplasma capsulatum – in all three cases the
reduced content of α-glucan correlates with loss of virulence in animal models. In B. dermatitidis this correlation between α-glucan and virulence was confirmed
by deleting the gene encoding BAD1. The deleted
strain had a diminished ability to bind to macrophages
or to mouse lung tissue, and it was highly attenuated
in experimental mice. Restoration of the BAD1 gene by
transformation restored the virulence of B. dermatitidis
and restored the adhesive properties of the fungus. The
BAD1 protein has been found to self-associate in the
presence of calcium ions, and it is suggested that, in
the conditions of the lung, chitin-bound BAD1 molecules could begin to capture further BAD1 molecules,
adding further α-glucan layers to the yeast cell wall.

Paracoccidioides brasiliensis
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis is another endemic fungus,
found mainly in subtropical forest regions of Central
and South America, especially Brazil, Venezuela, and
Columbia. It has been isolated from the digestive tract
of some animals (e.g. armadillos; Silva-Vergara et al.
2000) and from moist soil enriched with proteins, but
the natural ecology of the fungus is poorly understood.
It is a mitosporic fungus with no known sexual stage,
and it grows very slowly in agar culture. P. brasiliensis
is a dimorphic fungus that grows as mycelia at lower
temperatures but as a budding yeast at 37°C or in
body tissues. The yeast cells are oval or spherical and
range in size from 2 to 10 µm or up to 30 µm or more.
Often, they grow as a single large central cell with
multiple buds attached to the central cell by narrow
necks, resembling a mariner’s wheel. The buds remain
attached to the mother cell until they, themselves, bud
(Fig. 16.7).
P. brasiliensis causes the disease termed paracoccidioidomycosis, or South American blastomycosis.
Infection is assumed to occur from airborne spores
that enter the lungs, but most infections are asymptomatic, as evidenced by a skin test to the fungal antigen. In other cases the infection can develop several
years after initial exposure, indicating a long latent
period in which the fungus has remained dormant
in the lymph nodes. Such infections are probably
associated with immunodeficiency. The characteristic
form of the disease involves severe ulcerative lesions
of the mouth, nose, larynx, and subcutaneous tissues,
causing serious facial disfigurement. In extreme cases
the fungus can also affect other organs such as the
spleen, liver, bones, and central nervous system. A
notable feature of paracoccidioidomycosis is that it
occurs primarily in men – the ratio of infection is about
15 : 1 in men compared with women, but can be up

Fig. 16.7 Typical appearance of the budding phase of
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis: the large parent yeast-like
cell produces multiple buds that remain attached to the
mother cell.

to 78 : 1, whereas equal numbers of men and women
show a positive skin test reaction to the paracoccidioides
antigen. The reason is that estrogens inhibit the transition of cells from the conidial or mycelial form to the
yeast phase which is necessary for colonization of the
tissues (Borges-Walmsley et al. 2002).

Cryptococcus neoformans
Cryptococcus neoformans differs from the fungi discussed above because it is not endemic but has a wide
global distribution. It is common as a saprotroph
and has been isolated frequently from old, weathered
pigeon droppings in cities and from soils enriched
with bird excreta. However, it does not compete well
in wet droppings, where bacteria can raise the pH to
growth-inhibitory levels, and it does not infect the birds
themselves. Studies in New York City indicate that a
high proportion of young children have been exposed
to the fungus, because they show a reaction when skintested with the Cryptococcus antigen, but apparently
do not develop any symptoms. There are over 30 species of the yeast Cryptococcus, but only one species,
C. neoformans, is pathogenic to humans, causing the
disease called cryptococcosis.
Cryptococcosis used to be a rare disease, found
mainly in people who were naturally immunocompromised or who had undergone transplant
surgery involving immunosuppressive drugs. But the

334

CHAPTER 16

increasing incidence of HIV/AIDS in the 1980s and
1990s led to a major surge in cryptococcosis, affecting 7–10% of AIDS patients worldwide. Although the
disease can be treated with routine administration of
antifungal agents, this is seldom possible in developing countries. The typical route of infection is via the
lungs, when spores or yeast cells are inhaled. After an
initial subclinical pulmonary infection, the fungus
can cause chronic lung infection and then disseminate
to the central nervous system, where it shows a predilection for growth in the cerebral cortex, brain stem,
cerebellum, and meninges. This is invariably fatal if not
treated, and it is common in AIDS patients, perhaps
because a primary lesion in the lung has remained quiescent for many years and leads to secondary spread
when the immune system is impaired.
There are several features of C. neoformans that have
yet to be resolved and that could assist in preventing
or treating infections. Normally the fungus is isolated
from environmental samples as a haploid yeast, and
it was commonly assumed that dehydrated yeast cells
are the primary source of infection. With a diameter
ranging from 2.5 to 10 µm, some of these cells would
be small enough to reach the alveoli, rehydrate, and
initiate infection. However, more recently it was
discovered that C. neoformans has a sexual stage in
the genus Filobasidiella (Basidiomycota; Fig. 16.8),

leading to the production of airborne basidiospores
about 1.8–3.0 µm diameter. These would be an ideal
size to be deposited in the alveoli (Chapter 10). The
basidiospores can be produced in laboratory culture
by pairing of the two mating types, termed “a” and
“α”. But α strains alone can be induced to produce
basidiospores (with a single haploid nucleus in each
cell) when cultured on media that lack nitrogen
and in conditions of water-stress. The α mating-type
locus (MATα) has been cloned and shown to encode
a pheromone-like peptide. The α strains are found
much more frequently than are the a mating types in
clinical specimens, and in inoculations of mice they
cause much more rapid death than do the a-matingtype strains. Thus it seems that the gene product of
α-mating-type strains may contribute to virulence.
In addition to these points, there are two distinct
forms of C. neoformans, classified as varieties – C.
neoformans var. neoformans and C. neoformans var.
gattii. The first of these is commonly associated with
AIDS infection in Europe and North America, and presumably originates from bird excreta. By contrast, the
variety gattii is seldom found in AIDS patients; instead
it is associated with endemic disease of nonimmunocompromised people in Australia, Papua New Guinea,
and parts of Africa, India, south-east Asia and Central
and South America. The environmental source of

Fig. 16.8 Cryptococcus neoformans and its sexual stage, Filobasidiella neoformans. The budding yeast cells (Y-phase) of
opposite mating types conjugate and form a dikaryotic cell. This forms a mycelium on which the inflated basidia develop.
Meiosis in the basidia leads to the production of four haploid nuclei, which migrate to the tips of the basidia. Then
chains of four haploid basidiospores are produced, and these germinate to give the haploid Y-phase cells.

THE MOULDS OF MAN

var. gattii seems to be eucalypt trees and hollows in
decaying wood.

The pathogenicity and virulence
determinants of C. neoformans
As noted earlier in this chapter, pathogenicity determinants include all those factors that enable an
invasive organism to live in a host environment.
Virulence determinants include the factors that determine the severity of disease. For C. neoformans the major
pathogenicity determinants are the ability to grow
at 37°C in an atmosphere of about 5% CO2 and at a
pH of about 7.3. The key to this seems to be a gene
that codes for calcineurin A, a specific type of protein
phosphatase that is activated by Ca2+-calmodulin and
that is involved in stress responses in yeasts. Mutants
that are defective in calcineurin A can grow at 24°C
but not at 37°C, and they cannot survive in 5% CO2
or alkaline pH.
There are several virulence determinants of C.
neoformans. The most conspicuous of these – both
in laboratory culture and in clinical specimens – is
the presence of a thick, rigid polysaccharide capsule
around the yeast cells, similar to the capsules seen
in Fig. 16.9. The capsule consists of a high molecular
weight polysaccharide, with a backbone of α-1,3linked d-mannose units and single units of d-xylose and
d-glucuronic acid. It seems to be a key virulence determinant of C. neoformans, because naturally noncapsulate strains, or mutants that lack the capsule, are
nonvirulent. The encapsulated cells are not as easily
phagocytized or killed by neutrophils, monocytes or
macrophages, compared with noncapsular cells, and
their high net negative charge can reduce cell–cell
interactions required for clearance of the cryptococci.
Pathogenic strains of C. neoformans also produce
brown or black pigments containing diphenolic com-

335

pounds. Through the action of phenoloxidase, these
compounds are oxidized and polymerized to produce
melanin, which is deposited in the yeast walls, perhaps
helping to protect against reactive oxidants in the
host tissues. A similar protective role has been proposed
for d-mannitol, which is produced by Cryptococcus and
is especially effective as a scavenger of hydroxyl radicals. Thus, overall there seem to be several potential
virulence determinants in C. neoformans, even if the
precise roles of some of these are not fully understood
at present. The virulence determinants of Cryptococcus
are reviewed by Perfect (2004).

Pneumocystis species
So far in this chapter, we have seen some quite
astonishing examples of fungi that cause serious diseases of humans, often as opportunistic or incidental
pathogens. They include fungi whose natural habitat
is eucalypt trees, or pigeon excreta, or the excreta of
cave-dwelling bats, and soil fungi that are endemic to
specific regions of the globe. We have also seen fungi
that disseminate “silently” in the tissues of humans and
that show predilections for certain organs of the body.
And yet many of these aggressive fungi have no obvious natural means of transmission from one host to
another. For many of them, the infection of a human
host seems to be purely incidental.
Now we turn to perhaps the most astonishing fungi
of all – the many Pneumocystis species that cause virulent pneumonia-like symptoms associated with AIDS
and immunosuppressive therapies. These organisms
were first described as protozoa (protists), under the
name Pneumocystis carinii, over 100 years ago, and have
a life cycle that more closely resembles that of a protist than a typical fungus. Phylogenetic analysis (based
on 18S ribosomal DNA sequence) places them closest
to the early ascomycota, along with the fission yeast
Schizosaccharomyces pombe. But they have one unique
feature: they are the only fungi that have cholesterol
in the cell membrane, whereas most other fungi (with
the exception of some zygomycota) have ergosterol as
their characteristic membrane sterol. One consequence
of this is that Pneumocystis is not susceptible to the common antifungal agents that target ergosterol; instead
Pneumocystis is controlled by some of the antiprotozoal
agents.

The natural occurrence of Pneumocystis
species
Fig. 16.9 Cells of a Cryptococcus species (C. albidus) viewed
by phase-contrast microscopy in the presence of India ink,
which clearly shows the rigid polysaccharide capsules.

Pneumocystis species are found worldwide in human
hosts and in the lungs of a wide range of wild mammals. However, before the widespread development

336

CHAPTER 16

of AIDS in the 1980s Pneumocystis was only found
infrequently as a cause of pneumonitis, called Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia (PCP). It was found
first in malnourished children and then in patients
undergoing immunosuppressive therapies. Now PCP
has become one of the commonest causes of death of
AIDS patients, and there is a direct correlation between
the risk of developing PCP and a low number of circulating CD4+ T lymphocytes. A cell count of 200 or less
per microliter of blood is the critical lower limit.
It is notable that a very high proportion of children
in Europe and the USA show a positive serum test for
Pneumocystis antigens by the age of 4 years, indicating
exposure to the fungus. This is probably also true
for most other countries. However, Pneumocystis then
seems to disappear from the lungs and only returns
as people age, or in response to immunosuppression.
Thus Pneumocystis infection is strongly age-linked, and
re-infections later in life probably result from widespread and constant re-exposure to the fungus.
Soon after Pneumocystis carinii had been formally
transferred to the fungal kingdom, DNA sequence
analysis showed that strains obtained from different
animal hosts were very diverse and each was specific
for the individual host species. Using the polymerase
chain reaction, primers were developed to amplify
DNA from all known species of Pneumocystis, and each
of these was found to be distinct and host-specific, with
no evidence of cross-infection from one host species
to another. Confirmation of this in several studies has
led to the proposal that all the host-specific forms of
Pneumocystis should be regarded as separate species.
Thus, the human-host-specific fungus has been named
P. jiroveci, and the original name P. carinii has been
retained for one of the two known Pneumocystis
species found in rats. Pneumocystis organisms obtained
from rats, mice, ferrets, pigs, and monkeys all show hostspecies specificity and new names for these are likely
to be proposed. Consistent with the co-evolution of parasites with their hosts, the Pneumocystis species from
humans are most similar to (although distinct from)
those of other primates.

Modes of transmission, pathology, and
the life cycle of Pneumocystis
Pneumocystis cannot be maintained for long in laboratory culture, so it seems to be essentially an obligate
parasite. Small amounts of DNA of P. jiroveci have
been detected in environmental samples, including
samples of airborne spores and pond water, but the most
likely source of infection is either the activation of
a pre-existing latent infection or re-infection from
inhaled spores. The fungus escapes the defenses of the
upper respiratory tract, and establishes infections in the

Fig. 16.10 Saucer-shaped cysts of Pneumocystis jiroveci (Reproduced with permission from Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, Image Library; http://www.dpd.cdc.gov/
dpdx/HTML/ImageLibrary/Pneumocystis_il.htm)

alveoli, apparently by binding to the type 1 epithelial
cells.
The life cycle of Pneumocystis is complicated, and still
incompletely understood. Asexual trophic (feeding)
forms proliferate by mitosis in the lungs. There is also
a sexual stage in which haploid cells conjugate to produce a diploid pre-cyst. This undergoes meiosis, followed
by mitosis, to produce eight haploid nuclei in the
“late phase cyst.” Mature cysts are variable in shape but
often have a saucer-like appearance (Fig. 16.10). They
are thought to rupture, releasing haploid vegetative cells.
In immunocompromised people the Pneumocystis
cells proliferate and can result in tiers of cells up to four
layers thick in the alveolar lumen, creating oxygen
deficiency. A foamy alveolar exudate is produced,
and in advanced stages of disease the fungus can be
detected in all major organs of the body, especially the
lymph nodes, bone marrow, liver, and spleen.
DNA sequence polymorphisms have often been
found in isolates of the human pathogen P. jiroveci,
indicating that many strains exist within this species.
For example, polymorphisms have been found in
the mitochondrial 18S ribosomal RNA gene, the
mitochondrial small subunit rRNA gene, the internal
transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of the nuclear rRNA
gene, and the dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) gene.
These polymorphisms provide the basis for investigating the epidemiology of Pneumocystis infections
in humans. Comparisons of strains collected before
(1968–1981) and after (1982 to present) the beginning
of the AIDS pandemic indicate that there has been no
substantial change in the Pneumocystis population that
could account for the massive increase in AIDS-related
pneumonia. DNA sequence polymorphisms have also
been used to investigate whether PCP (pneumonia)
exists in a long-term latent form in humans or is re-

THE MOULDS OF MAN

acquired during continuous or periodic exposure to the
pathogen. The reactivation of long-term latent infection cannot be ruled out, because theoretically even a
single latent Pneumocystis cell could give rise to infection when a host is immunocompromised. But studies
of population genetics have helped to address this
issue, by comparing the strains found in adult patients
who have remained close to their birthplace against the
strains found in patients who moved far away from
their birthplace. The data indicate that adult patients
acquire strains that are more similar to those in their
current place of residence than in their birthplace,
strongly suggesting that infection is reacquired rather
than being carried since early childhood.
The following points can be made in summary of the
current knowledge of Pneumocystis:

337

Doctor Fungus website. http://www.doctorfungus.org. [An
excellent, comprehensive source of up-to-date information on all the human mycoses]

General texts
Evans, E.G.V. & Richardson, M.D., eds (1989) Medical
Mycology: a practical approach. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Kwon-Chung, K.J. & Bennett, J.E. (1992) Medical Mycology.
Lea & Febinger, Philadelphia.
Sutton, D.A., Fothergill, A.W. & Rinaldi, M.G., eds (1998)
Guide to Clinically Significant Fungi. Williams & Wilkins,
Baltimore.

Cited references
• Pneumocystis is a genus of worldwide distribution.
It exists as many different host-specific species, with
no evidence of cross-infection between different
hosts.
• Pneumocystis seems to be a primitive fungus-like
organism that represents one of the earliest basal
lineages of fungi and has diversified as an obligate
parasite that infects many species of mammals,
including humans.
• In human populations, young children are frequently infected but typically exhibit only a transient
infection and subsequently develop immunity.
Children may be the primary reservoir of infection.
• Adults seem to acquire infection from environmental sources close to their areas of residence, but they
only develop disease if they are immunosuppressed
or immunocompromised. In these circumstances
the infection can progress rapidly, and is closely
correlated with a low count of circulating CD4+ T
lymphocytes.
We return to this and other fungal pathogens of
humans in Chapter 17, where we consider the methods
available for treating human mycoses.

Online resources
Aspergillus
fumigatus
genome
sequence.
http://
www.tigr.org/tdb/e2k1/afu1
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, USA, Image
library.
http://www.dpd.cdc.gov/dpdx/HTML/
ImageLibrary/Pneumocystis_il.htm

Borges-Walmsley, M.I., Chen, D., Shu, X. & Walmsley, A.R.
(2002) The pathobiology of Paracoccidioides brasiliensis.
Trends in Microbiology 10, 80–87.
Brandhorst, T.T., Rooney, P.J., Sullivan, T.D. & Klein, B.S.
(2002) Using new genetic tools to study the pathogenesis of Blastomyces dermatitidis. Trends in Microbiology
10, 25–30.
Brouta, F., Descamps, F., Monod, M., Vermout, S., Losson,
B. & Mignon, B. (2002) Secreted metalloprotease gene
family of Microsporum canis. Infection & Immunity 70,
5676–5683.
Brown, A.J.P. & Gow, N.A.R. (2001) Signal transduction and
morphogenesis in Candida albicans. In: The Mycota VIII.
Biology of the Fungal Cell (Howard, R.J. & Gow, N.A.R.,
eds), pp. 55–71. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Calderone, R.A. & Fonzi, W.A. (2001) Virulence factors of
Candida albicans. Trends in Microbiology 9, 327–335.
Domer, J.E. & Kobayashi, G.S., eds (2004) The Mycota XII.
Human Fungal Pathogens. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Douglas, L.J. (2003) Candida biofilms and their role in infection. Trends in Microbiology 11, 30–36.
Kwon-Chung, K.J. & Bennett, J.E. (1992) Medical Mycology.
Lea & Febinger, Philadelphia.
Magrini, V. & Goldman, W.E. (2001) Molecular mycology:
a genetic toolbox for Histoplasma capsulatum. Trends in
Microbiology 9, 541–546.
Perfect, J.R. (2004) Genetic requirements for virulence
in Cryptococcus neoformans. In: The Mycota XII. Human
Fungal Pathogens (Domer, J.E. & Kobayashi, G.S., eds),
pp. 89–112. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Silva-Vergara, M.L., Martinez, R., Camargo, Z.P., Malta, M.H.,
Maffei, C. M. & Chadu, J.B. (2000) Isolation of
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis from armadillos (Dasypus
novemcinctus) in an area where the fungus was recently
isolated from soil. Medical Mycology 38, 193–199.

Chapter 17

Principles and practice of
controlling fungal growth

In this chapter we deal with the major practical methods
of controlling fungi, under the following headings:
• control by management of environmental and
biological factors
• biological and integrated control
• chemical control of fungi
• the principal cellular targets of antifungal agents
• the use of fungicides for plant disease control
• antifungal antibiotics used for plant disease control
• control of fungal infections of humans

Control through the management of
environmental and biological factors
We have seen many good examples of how fungi can
be controlled through the management of physical and
environmental factors. For example, the management
of water potential is essential for grain storage, and
the combination of temperature and water potential
can be used to predict the safe limits for preventing
growth of mycotoxin-producing fungi in stored food
products (see Fig. 8.10). The storage and shipment of
fresh produce, including many fruits, is often achieved
by controlled atmosphere storage – a combination of
cool temperature and elevated levels of carbon dioxide.
This delays ripening and the onset of senescence, and
can be cheaper than either of the single treatments
alone. Similarly, bananas are routinely shipped from
Central America to the European market as unripe, green
fruits and are then ripened artificially by exposure to
ethylene-generating chemicals. The green fruits survive

long-distance shipping (2–3 weeks), and while they are
green the fruits will not develop lesions of banana
anthracnose (Colletotrichum musae) which is present as
latent infections on the skin (see Fig. 5.3).
Wounding of fruits leads to the release of ethylene,
a wound hormone, and can lead to premature ripening and invasion by fruit-rotting fungi. To counteract
this, several types of fruit are treated with fungicides
or with wax coatings, and held in cool storage. We
saw in Chapter 12 that several bacteria and yeasts are
now marketed commercially as fruit protectants, as
an alternative to the use of fungicides. It may not be
necessary to use living organisms at all, because the cell
wall fractions of many yeasts, including S. cerevisiae, can
act as powerful elicitors of plant defense mechanisms.
Similarly, there is increasing interest in the use of
chitosan to protect plants from pathogenic attack. At
present, chitosan is obtained commercially by chemical deacetylation of crab shells. It disrupts the growth
of several fungi in vitro, causing excessive branching,
wall alteration, and cytoplasmic disorganization. Chitin
is a characteristic wall component of fungi, and some
fungi – especially Zygomycota – naturally deacetylate
chitin by the enzyme chitin deacetylase. They could
be used as an alternative, renewable source of chitosan
for triggering plant defense reactions.

Sanitation, quarantine, and similar
biologically based strategies
Crop rotation is a traditional, highly effective method
of controlling many plant diseases if the pathogen
does not survive for long in the absence of a host crop.
This is true of the take-all fungus Gaeumannomyces

PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF CONTROLLING FUNGAL GROWTH

graminis (see Fig. 9.11), which usually declines to nondamaging levels within 1 year if a different (noncereal)
crop is sown. As we saw in Chapter 12 (see Fig. 12.2),
the alternative is to grow cereal crops continuously, year
after year, until the soil becomes naturally suppressive
to take-all.
Crop management practices can be altered to
avoid disease. In many countries stinking smut of
wheat (caused by Tilletia caries, Chapter 14) is seedtransmitted and must be controlled by seed-applied
fungicides. But in the Pacific northwest of the USA it
is mainly soil-borne, and if winter wheat is sown early
it reaches the most susceptible stage while the soil moisture and temperature are unsuitable for germination
of the smut spores. Other simple and effective disease
avoidance practices include the liming of soil to prevent
serious clubroot disease of cruciferous crops caused
by the protist Plasmodiophora brassicae. Phosphate
deficiency can be a major cause of yield losses. The
browning root rot disease of wheat, caused by Pythium
graminicola (Oomycota), was one of the most damaging diseases in the North American prairies until the
1940s, but was virtually eliminated when phosphate
fertilizers became widely available.
Meteorological forecasting has been used for many
years as a disease-management tool. It was developed
initially for control of potato blight (Chapter 14)
by Beaumont in 1947. By studying the relationship
between weather and blight epidemics, he established
that, after a certain date which varies from region
to region, a blight epidemic will develop within 2–3
weeks following a 2-day period in which the temperature is 10°C or more and the relative humidity is
more than 75%. This 2-day period became known as
a Beaumont period, and it enabled growers to time
the application of fungicides so that major epidemics
could be avoided. This has now been refined further,
and similar forecasting methods are widely used in other
cropping systems. One example is the facial eczema
warning system for Pithomyces (see Fig. 7.20).
Sanitation can be highly effective for controlling
or avoiding disease. Two mycoparasites, Trichoderma
harzianum and Pythium oligandrum, are best known for
their potential to control plant pathogens (Chapter 12)
but can also be a problem in commercial mushroom
production because they attack and destroy the
mycelium of Agaricus bisporus. A distinctive strain (or
strains) of T. harzianum has become a problem in some
British mushroom sheds, when spores contaminate the
trays of compost. P. oligandrum also has caused serious
cropping losses in some mushroom-production units.
A recent example was described from New Zealand,
where internal transcribed spacer (ITS) ribosomal DNA
(Chapter 9) was used to identify a specific strain of P.
oligandrum responsible for a serious outbreak of mushroom disease (Godfrey et al. 2003).

339

The growth of fungi such as Amorphotheca resinae and
Paecilomyces varioti in aviation fuel storage tanks has
been particularly difficult to control. These fungi grow
on the long-chain n-alkanes of aviation kerosene
(Chapter 6) and cause problems by blocking filters
and corroding the walls of fuel-storage tanks when
they produce acids as metabolic byproducts. At least
one aircrash has been attributed to A. resinae in the
1960s, before the seriousness of this problem was
recognized. Theoretically, these fungi should not grow
in aviation fuel because they require water. But it is
almost impossible to prevent water from seeping into
fuel storage tanks or condensing during changes of
air temperature. Then the fungi grow at the fuel–water
interface. This problem is now controlled by a combination of measures – lining the tank walls with
rubberized materials to prevent corrosion, regular
checking and cleaning of filters to prevent blockages
caused by fungal growth in the fuel lines, and the
addition of biocides to the fuel – often mixtures of
organoborates, or ethylene glycol monoethyl ether.
Quarantine is one of the principal methods for
preventing the spread of pathogens, but is becoming
increasingly difficult to enforce with the volume of
international trade. Most major epidemics are caused
by fungi that were introduced inadvertently from
other countries. Typical examples include potato
blight (Chapter 14) and the several major epidemics
of Dutch elm disease in North America and Western
Europe, which have been linked to introductions of elm
timber that was not de-barked to remove the beetle
vectors (see Fig. 10.9). The devastation caused by
chestnut blight (Cryphonectria parasitica) in North
America seems to be traceable to the introduction of
an ornamental Asian chestnut tree to the New York
Zoological Garden in 1904 (see Fig. 9.13), although
recently it has been suggested that the fungus must have
been present earlier than this to have caused such extensive devastation.
A unique strain of the human-pathogenic fungus
Cryptococcus neoformans is increasingly being isolated
from AIDS patients and has been traced to tropical
origins. The same strain was discovered to grow on certain types of eucalypt tree in Australia, and the regions
where the clinical strain occurred corresponded to
regions where these trees had been imported – an
association that could not have been foreseen for
quarantine purposes (Chapter 16). The spread of
Panama disease of bananas (Fusarium oxysporum forma
specialis cubense, Chapter 14) to most banana-growing
regions of the world was almost certainly caused by
transport of planting material – bananas are established from pieces of corm at the base of the stem,
because commercial bananas are sterile triploids,
unable to establish from seeds. This fungus is thought
to have its center of origin in the southeast Asian

340

CHAPTER 17

peninsula and to have been disseminated by traders
in the nineteenth century. The development of technologies for raising sterile “tissue-culture” plantlets
(actually derived by meristem culture) should overcome
such problems in the future.
More recent examples can be cited. A serious rootrot disease of raspberry canes caused by Phytophthora
fragariae var. rubi is now found in most raspberry
production areas of the world. It seems to have been
spread in vegetative propagating material (canes) of new,
improved cultivars. Consistent with the spread of this
pathogen from a single source in recent times is the
finding that restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs, Chapter 9) are virtually identical in
pathogenic strains across the world (Stammler et al.
1993). The same was true in the past for the spread of
P. fragariae var. fragariae, the cause of red core disease of
strawberry plants; and for a particular form (biovar. 3)
of the crown gall bacterium, Agrobacterium tumefaciens,
on grape vines. This pathogen has been discovered to
grow as a systemic, symptomless endophyte, so in the
past it would have escaped detection in “visibly clean”
vegetative propagation material.
This catalogue of examples illustrates an important
point: many diseases can be controlled easily and
cheaply, without the need for toxic chemicals, but
simply by “good housekeeping.”

Biological and integrated control
Several examples of biological control have been discussed in this book, so here we review the subject
in broader terms. Biological control (biocontrol)
can be defined as the practice in which, or process
whereby, an undesirable organism is controlled
by the activities of other organisms. This definition
covers both naturally occurring biocontrol and the
practical methods used to achieve control, such as:
• the purposeful introduction of one organism to control another;

Disease caused by
Rhizoctonia solani

• the purposeful exploitation and management of
naturally occurring biocontrol systems;
• the purposeful change of an environmental factor to
promote the activities of natural biocontrol agents;
• any combination of these, because often it is necessary to change some environmental factor in order
to favor an introduced biocontrol agent.
Examples of the purposeful introduction of a control
agent include the use of Phlebiopsis gigantea to control
root rot of pine (see Fig. 12.9); the use of hypovirulence to control chestnut blight (see Fig. 9.15); the use
of mycoparasites such as Trichoderma spp. as seedling
protectants (see Fig. 12.5), and the use of various fungi
to control insect pests (Chapter 15).
The purposeful exploitation of naturally occurring
biocontrol was seen in the decline of cereal cyst nematode (Chapter 15), the exploitation of soils naturally
suppressive to Pythium diseases of cotton (Chapter 12),
and the manipulation of turf pH to control the takeall patch disease of turf grasses (see Figs 12.16–12.18).
The third approach to biocontrol involves changing an environmental factor to promote the activities
of naturally occurring biocontrol agents. A classic
example of this is shown in Table 17.1, from the work
of Olsen & Baker (1968) on pasteurization of soil in
glasshouse cropping systems. Plant-pathogenic fungi
tend to build up during the course of a cropping
season in glasshouses, so the soil needs to be treated
to destroy pathogens before a new crop is sown.
Traditionally this has been done by raising the soil
temperature to 65–70°C for 30 minutes, using steam–air
mixtures (aerated steam) rather than by treatment
with steam alone (100°C). The use of steam–air mixtures is not only cheaper but also more effective,
as shown by the experimental results in Table 17.1
and Fig. 17.1. In this experiment, trays of soil naturally
contaminated with the seedling pathogen Pythium
ultimum were treated at different temperatures then
sown with a thick crop of bell pepper seedlings. A small
inoculum of another pathogen, Rhizoctonia solani,
was placed in one corner of each tray, to simulate a
surviving pocket of inoculum that might be found just

Temperature

Area (cm2)

Linear spread (cm)

Area of disease (cm 2)
caused by resident
Pythium species

No treatment
100°C
71°C
60°C

None
253
65
3

<1
18
9
2

103
0
0
0

Table 17.1 Disease caused by Rhizoctonia solani when introduced into one
corner of seedling trays containing soil
treated at different temperatures to
eradicate a natural resident soil population of Pythium. (Data from Olsen &
Baker 1968.)

PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF CONTROLLING FUNGAL GROWTH

(b)
V
V
V
V

(a)

341

V

V
V
V
V

V

V

V

Fig. 17.1 (a,b) Diagram of the spread of disease
caused by Rhizoctonia from a pocket of surviving
inoculum.

beyond a treated area in a commercial glasshouse. The
area of diseased plants in each box was then assessed.
Treatment of the soil for 30 minutes at any temperature (61, 70 or 100°C) eliminated the resident Pythium
population. But after treatment at 100°C the soil
was sterile and highly conducive to the spread of
Rhizoctonia, which can grow rapidly through sterilized
soil. By contrast, soil treated at 61°C was free from any
disease. This was explained by the fact that Bacillus spp.,
which occur naturally as dormant spores in soil, can
not only survive pasteurization but also are triggered to
germinate at this temperature. These naturally occurring biocontrol agents grow rapidly to fill the biological
“vacuum” and they produce several antifungal antibiotics that protect the newly sown crop.
The use of steam–air mixtures in glasshouse crops has
now been replaced by the use of Trichoderma spp. and
similar antagonists. But solar heating of soil (solarization) has become common practice for raising valuable
field crops in many of the warmer parts of the world.
It is achieved by covering the soil with thin polyethylene sheeting for a 20- to 30-day period. This creates
a “greenhouse effect,” raising the temperature at the
soil surface to 40°C or more, and often to 30°C or more
at even 50 cm soil depth. The spores of most soil-borne
pathogens can survive these temperatures in vitro,
but in moist, solar-heated soil the pathogens are progressively eliminated by the activities of competing
and antagonistic microorganisms that flourish at the
higher temperatures (Katan 1987).

starch-based materials, cotton fabrics, and structural
timbers. In each case the choice of preservative
depends on specific needs. For example, the preservatives used in cosmetics and ointments must be nontoxic, nonirritant, and compatible with the product
formulation. Often, low-molecular-weight alcohols
and esters of p-hydroxybenzoic acid (parabens) are used
in these cases. At the other extreme, marine timbers,
fence posts, and telegraph poles need to be treated with
persistent compounds that will protect against decay
and insect attack for several decades. The three most
commonly used wood preservatives are coal-tar creosote, pentachlorophenol, and inorganic arsenicals
such as chromated copper arsenate. Timbers are often
pressure-treated with these compounds to ensure high
penetration and retention in the wood. Clearly, many
of these wood-treatment products pose potential health
hazards. Pentachlorophenol is a known carcinogen
that is absorbed by the lungs and skin, and it can
contain trace amounts of dioxin. Arsenic-based wood
treatments are widely known to be poisonous, and
the Environmental Protection Agency of the USA recently announced (2003) that arsenic will be withdrawn
from use. The extreme toxicity of many of these wood
preservatives has spurred interest in the possible use of
biological control agents for wood protection. Among
the potential candidates are strains of Trichoderma
that frequently colonize the cut surfaces of logs and
that antagonize wood-decay fungi in laboratory tests
(Vanneste et al. 2002).

Chemical control of fungi

Control of human and crop pathogens:
the principle of selective toxicity

Fungitoxic or fungicidal chemicals are often used to
control fungal growth, but a distinction must be made
between general toxicants and selectively toxic agents.

General toxicants
Fungitoxic chemicals play a major role in preventing
decay of a range of products including cosmetics,

In contrast to general toxicants, chemicals used to
control fungi in the tissues of another living organism
must show selective toxicity. The rest of this chapter
will be devoted to this topic, dealing first with the
control of plant diseases and then with the control
of human mycoses. These areas are more closely
related than one might think, because the same types
of chemical are used to control both plant- and

342

CHAPTER 17

human-pathogenic fungi. For example, the azole
fungicides (imidazoles and triazoles) were first developed to control plant diseases, but in modified forms
they are now widely used to control human mycoses.
Similarly, the naturally occurring antifungal antibiotic
griseofulvin was first discovered as a “curling factor”
that caused the germ-tubes of a plant-pathogenic
fungus, Botrytis allii, to grow in a distorted spiral fashion, but it was developed commercially as an orally
administered antibiotic to control infections caused
by the dematophytic fungi. It acts by disrupting fungal
microtubules, and this explains its morphogenetic
effect because microtubules are involved in the delivery of cellular components to the growing hyphal tip
(Chapter 4).

Principal cellular targets of antifungal
agents
The main cellular targets currently used to control
plant or human diseases are shown in Fig. 17.2. At

first sight it might seem that there are a large number
of cellular targets that could be exploited for disease
control. But in practice the range is limited. Many
of the compounds shown in Fig. 17.2 have a very
restricted usage (shown as “R”) and are used mainly in
Japanese agriculture. If we exclude these compounds
then we are left with just five main types of antifungal
target:
1 the cell membrane, because fungi are unique in
having ergosterol as their characteristic membrane
sterol;
2 the microtubules and microtubule-associated
proteins, which are disrupted by the antibiotic griseofulvin, and by benzimidazole fungicides (which
have now been withdrawn);
3 mitochondrial respiration, which is targeted by
some plant fungicides;
4 fungal cell wall components, especially β1-3 glucans,
for which a new group of drugs, the echinocandins,
has recently come into use (2002);
5 various aspects of general metabolism.

Fig. 17.2 The main cellular targets for
chemical control of fungi that cause
plant and human diseases. Compounds
shown as “(R)” have limited usage.

PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF CONTROLLING FUNGAL GROWTH

There is an urgent need to find new chemicals (with
novel modes of action) and new cellular targets, to provide a greater range of options for controlling fungal
diseases.

Fungicides used for plant disease control
The term “fungicide” is used in a broad sense for any
compound that kills or inactivates fungi. Most of these
compounds are chemically synthesized, but some are
modified derivatives of naturally occurring compounds.
All fungicides have to be officially approved for
use by the relevant national regulatory body, which
also specifies the crops on which the fungicide can be
used and any “withholding period” between the last
application of a fungicide and the harvesting of a crop.
Currently, there are about 80 different chemical groups
of fungicides (where a group is defined as a specific type
of chemical such as the pyrimidines, the imidazoles,
the triazoles, etc.). These groups can be combined into
12 categories according to their primary cellular target
or mode of action, as shown in Table 17.2.
In practice, fungicides can be grouped into three
broader categories, reflecting their different roles in
plant disease control – the inorganic fungicides, the
organic contact (protectant) fungicides, and the
systemic fungicides.

343

Inorganic fungicides
Inorganic fungicides were the first to be used to control plant diseases, beginning with elemental sulfur in
1846, copper salts in 1882, and mercury around 1920
(although its use has been banned since 1992 because
of its extreme toxicity, and Britain holds the distinction of being the last industrialized country to accept
this ban!).
Inorganic sulfur always had a limited use because
of its insolubility, but it can be dusted onto leaves to
control powdery mildew fungi, because the hyphae and
spores of these fungi develop on or near the leaf surface. Sulfur is the only fungicide available to organic
growers because it is an entirely natural product.
Fungicides based on various copper salts have been used
extensively for their broad antifungal and antibacterial
spectrum. They were spectacularly successful against
downy mildew of grapevines (Plasmopara viticola,
Oomycota) in the late 1800s, when “Burgundy mixture” and “Bordeaux mixture” were developed. Usually,
the copper fungicides are complexes of copper sulfate with lime (Bordeaux mixture) or they are based
on copper hydroxide or copper oxychloride. They
control many leaf and fruit diseases, but are potentially
phytotoxic. Their mode of action is based on the disruption of several basic metabolic processes, so fungi
do not develop resistance to them easily.

Table 17.2 Classification of fungicides according to their main site or mode of action.
Site/mode of action

Comments

Nucleic acid synthesis

A few fungicides, including the acylalanines that control diseases
caused by Oomycota; e.g. Phytophthora infestans
A few fungicides, including the benzimidazoles that act systemically
Many fungicides that block steps in the mitochondrial electron
transport chain or that inhibit ATP synthesis
A few fungicides and antibiotics such as blasticidin-S and kasugamycin
A few fungicides that affect G proteins in cellular signalling or MAP
protein kinase
Several fungicides that affect lipid peroxidation, phospholipid
biosynthesis, or cell membrane permeability
Many important fungicides that target different steps in the sterol
synthesis pathway
A few fungicides and antibiotics (polyoxin, validamycin)
A few fungicides that block melanin biosynthesis
Several inorganic fungicides (sulfur, copper) and protectant (contact)
fungicides that disrupt basic metabolic processes
A few compounds (e.g. salicylic acid, chitosan) that activate plantdefense mechanisms
A few compounds, including phosphorous acid and fosetyl-aluminum,
for controlling Phytophthora root rot

Microtubules (mitosis and cell division)
Respiration
Amino acid and protein synthesis
Signal transduction
Lipids and membrane synthesis
Sterol biosynthesis
Glucan and cell wall synthesis
Melanin synthesis
Multisite activity
Induced host plant defense
Various; unknown mode of action

344

CHAPTER 17

Organic contact (protectant) fungicides
Organic fungicides were developed in the 1930s and
quickly replaced the inorganic fungicides for most
purposes. They are termed “protectant” or “contact”
fungicides because they act only near the site where
they are applied – to protect the plant surface or to
control an established infection. Thus, they need to
be applied over the whole plant surface, and must be reapplied to protect any new growth. They are, however,
extremely durable fungicides and many of them are still
in use today. Fungi do not develop resistance to them
easily because they interfere with basic metabolic
processes and often have multiple sites of action in
fungal cells.
Examples of these protectant fungicides include
the dithiocarbamates such as maneb (Fig. 17.3) and
thiram (Fig. 17.3). These contain one or more thiol
(sulfur-containing) groups and they inactivate sulfydryl
(-SH) groups in amino acids, proteins, and enzymes.
They are used to control many leaf diseases. Other protectant fungicides include the dinitrophenols such as
dinocap (Fig. 17.3), which uncouples respiration from
ATP synthesis.

Systemic fungicides
Systemic fungicides are absorbed by plants and are then
distributed internally, usually by upward movement in
the xylem, where they can help to protect new growth.
The development of these compounds in the 1960s revolutionized crop protection because these fungicides

can eradicate existing infections and protect against
subsequent infections. They are now used widely,
although most of them do not move downwards in
the phloem, so they provide little protection against
the major soil-borne pathogens. Their use has also
revealed another problem: the active ingredients are
not general toxicants but instead have highly specific
sites or modes of action – for example, on a single step
in an enzymic pathway or by binding to a specific
component of a fungal cell. Because of this, fungi
can develop resistance to them quite easily, often by a
single-gene mutation. When this happens a fungus
often shows cross-resistance to all other members of that
fungicide group. For this reason, the systemic fungicides
need to be used in conjunction with a resistancemanagement strategy. This can involve the alternating use of fungicides with different modes of action,
or the combination of systemic and broad-spectrum
protectant fungicides. We consider some representative
examples below.

Benzimidazole fungicides
The benzimidazole compounds were the first systemic
fungicides to be introduced – thiabendazole in 1964,
benomyl in 1967, and then others such as carbendazim
(1970) and thiophanate-methyl (Fig. 17.4). Ironically,
thiabendazole was developed and released in 1962
as an antihelminthic, and only later was its fungicidal
role discovered. This empirical approach to fungicide
development is still common. It involves the screening of thousands of potentially active compounds
against a few major pathogens, typically including a

Fig. 17.3 Examples of protectant fungicides: maneb, thiram, and dinocap.

Fig. 17.4 Examples of two systemic
benzimidazole fungicides.

PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF CONTROLLING FUNGAL GROWTH

cereal rust fungus, a powdery mildew fungus, a downy
mildew pathogen (e.g. Phytophthora infestans), and a
rice pathogen (Magnaporthe grisea). Compounds that
show promise in this primary screen are chemically
modified to produce a range of isomers for further testing, to enhance the fungicidal activity, and to minimize
undesirable side effects. This type of approach led to
the separate patenting of benomyl and carbendazim
from the initial compound, thiabendazole. It is now
believed that they have similar or identical modes of
action: they are converted to methyl benzimidazole-2yl-carbamate (MBC) which binds to spindle microtubules and blocks mitosis. They also affect fungal tip
growth, by binding to the cytoplasmic microtubules
which deliver components to the growing hyphal tip
(Chapter 4).
Benzimidazole fungicides are selectively antifungal,
with little or no effect on plant and animal cells,
despite the fact that plants and animals also have
microtubules. The reason for this was shown by in
vitro studies. Microtubules are formed when β-tubulin
forms a dimer with α-tubulin, and the microtubule
grows by successive additions of these dimers. MBC
binds strongly to the β-tubulin of fungi, preventing its
association with α-tubulin, and therefore preventing
the self-assembly of microtubules. MBC does not bind
strongly to the tubulins of higher animal or plant cells,
nor to the tubulins of Oomycota. So it is a selective
antifungal agent (Davidse 1986).
The benzimidazoles have been used successfully to
control several plant pathogens, but fungi can develop
tolerance (resistance) to them if they are used repeatedly. This seems to be caused by point mutations
at various sites in the β-tubulin gene, sometimes involving reduced binding of the fungicide to β-tubulin
and sometimes affecting the interaction of β-tubulin
with α-tubulin or with the tubulin-associated proteins,
all of which are necessary for functional microtubules.
Despite the use of benomyl (Benlate) as a fungicide
for more than 30 years, it has been linked to a birth
defect in which mothers exposed to benomyl in the
very early stages of pregnancy can give birth to children
with empty eye sockets. According to The Observer
newspaper (21 December 2003), “more than 40% of
pregnant rats fed high levels of benomyl produced
foetuses with severe eye defects.” The manufacturer
recently withdrew Benlate from the global market.

Sterol synthesis inhibitors
Sterols are found in the cell membranes of all eukaryotes and of some archaea (the methanotrophs), but are
absent from bacterial membranes. Sterols insert into the
phospholipid bilayer and help to maintain membrane
stability and fluidity. Different groups of organisms have

345

different types of membrane sterol. Fungi characteristically have ergosterol as their membrane sterol, whereas
cholesterol is the characteristic sterol of animals, and
sitosterol and similar phytosterols are found in plants
and Oomycota.
All sterols are synthesized by a complex, multistep
pathway, described in Chapter 7 (see Fig. 7.15). In
outline, they are derived from the condensation of
three molecules of acetyl coenzyme A, to form isoprene
units (5-carbon compounds), then three isoprene units
condense to form the 15-carbon compound, farnesyl
pyrophosphate. Two molecules of this combine to
form the 30-carbon compound, squalene, which then
undergoes a series of cyclization reactions and ring
closures, resulting in the sterol, lanosterol. This is
the precursor sterol from which all other sterols are
produced. There are several intermediate steps from
lanosterol to the final sterol, but the key step leading
to ergosterol is the removal of a methyl group from the
C-14 position of the molecule. This step is catalysed
by the enzyme lanosterol 14 α-demethylase, which
has an iron-containing cytochrome P-450 as its coenzyme. This demethylation step occurs only during
synthesis of the fungal sterol, not during the synthesis
of plant or animal sterols, so it provides an ideal target
for antifungal agents.
Several systemic fungicides act by inhibiting sterol
demethylation, with the result that the fungus cannot synthesize its normal sterols, and instead other
sterols such as lanosterol are incorporated in the fungal membrane. This leads to membrane leakage and
ultimately to cell death. The imidazoles (e.g. imazalil,
Fig. 17.5) and triazoles (e.g. propiconazole, Fig. 17.5)
are important examples of fungicides that act in this
way. Their common feature is the possession of a
five-membered heterocyclic ring containing either
two (imidazoles) or three (triazoles) nitrogen atoms.
These azole fungicides are thought to act in the same
way as the azole drugs used to treat fungal infections
of humans (see below). The lipophilic part of the
fungicide is thought to bind to the demethylase
enzyme, while nitrogen in the heterocyclic ring associates with an iron-containing coenzyme, blocking
demethylation.

Group-specific systemic fungicides
Several systemic fungicides act more or less specifically
on particular fungal groups. For example, the carboxamide fungicides such as carboxin (Fig. 17.6) act
against Basidiomycota (rusts, smuts, Rhizoctonia solani)
by interfering with respiration; they inhibit the step
in the TCA cycle where succinate is dehydrogenated
to fumarate (see Fig. 7.2). The 2-aminopyrimidine
fungicides such as ethirimol (Fig. 17.6) act specifically

346

CHAPTER 17

Cl
CH3

CH2

Cl

O

CH2

CH2
Cl

CH

O
CH2
N

Propiconazole

Cl

CH2

O

CH2
N

Imazalil

N

N

CH

N

Fig. 17.5 Examples of azole fungicides: propiconazole is a triazole with three nitrogen atoms in the heterocyclic ring;
imazalil is an imidazole, with two nitrogen atoms in the heterocyclic ring.

Fig. 17.6 Systemic fungicides of the carboxamide and 2-aminopyrimidine classes.

Fig. 17.7 Metalaxyl and fosetyl-aluminum,
two fungicides that act specifically against
Oomycota.

against powdery mildew fungi by inhibiting an
enzyme (adenosine deaminase) involved in purine
metabolism. In this case, fungicide-tolerant mutants
often show no alteration of the enzyme but are
thought to circumvent the inhibition by obtaining
purines from the host plant.
The acylalanine fungicides (e.g. metalaxyl, Fig. 17.7)
act specifically against Oomycota by inhibiting the
nuclear RNA polymerase, thereby blocking RNA
synthesis. They have no effect on the true fungi
but are highly effective in controlling Pythium and
Phytophthora spp., including Phytophthora infestans.
Resistance to the acylalanines can develop rapidly
in field conditions, so these fungicides are used in
combination with protectant fungicides such as the
dithiocarbamates. Fosetyl-aluminium (Fig. 17.7) is
another compound that acts specifically against
Oomycota, and it has the remarkable property of
being fully mobile in phloem. So it can be applied
to the shoots and it moves into the roots, making
it extremely valuable for control of root-infecting

Phytophthora spp., such as Phytophthora cinnamomi.
The mode of action of fosetyl-Al is still unclear. It shows
little or no activity against Oomycota in laboratory culture, and this led initially to the view that it might act
by inducing host resistance. Subsequent work showed
that fosetyl-Al decomposes readily in plants to yield
phosphorous acid (H3PO3) and this simple mineral
acid can suppress the growth of Oomycota in culture
media of low phosphate content.
A few fungicides act as melanin synthesis
inhibitors. They have no effect on fungal growth
in culture, but interfere with the infection process,
especially when fungi infect from melanized appressoria
(see Fig. 5.2). These fungicides have found a limited
application in the control of Colletotrichum spp. and
especially of Magnaporthe grisea (the cause of rice
blast). Appressoria attach strongly to a host surface,
then become melanized, enabling them to build-up
an astonishing osmotic pressure equivalent to about
8 atmospheres (8 megaPascals). This is essential for
“focusing” of the narrow penetration peg which

PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF CONTROLLING FUNGAL GROWTH

develops from a small nonmelanized region of the
wall in contact with the host surface. If the fungus cannot synthesize melanin then there is a broad zone
of contact with the host surface, and the attempted
penetration fails. Melanin-deficient mutants of these
pathogens show a similar inability to penetrate the host.
The main target pathogens, including rice blast, can
rapidly develop resistance to these fungicides, whose
mode of action is based on a specific enzyme – either
a reductase or a dehydratase in the melanin biosynthetic
pathway (Wolkow et al. 1983).

347

O
CH3
O

C

H

C

O

C
N
O

C
C

CH3

O

CH3

N

O

CH2 O

O

N
O

CH3

Strobilurin fungicides
Strobilurin A and Oudemansin A are natural products found in the toadstools of two wood-rotting
Basidiomycota, Strobilurus tenacellus and Oudemansiella
mucida (Fig. 17.8). They were discovered independently but later were found to be chemically identical,
with a common mode of action – they inhibit mitochondrial respiration in fungi, by blocking the oxidation of ubiquinol at a specific site of the cytochrome
bc1 complex in the electron-transport chain. Thus,
they inhibit the generation of ATP. Although these
compounds had been known for some time, they only
started to be developed commercially in the early
1980s when agrochemical companies produced synthetic analogues, known as the strobilurins, which were
photochemically stable and had other desirable properties such as low mammalian toxicity, appropriate
mobility within plants and acceptable crop safety.
The first commercial strobilurins – azoxystrobin and
kresoxim methyl (Fig. 17.9) – were launched in 1996,

C
Kresoxim-methyl

N

Azoxistrobin

Fig. 17.9 Structures of two strobilurin fungicides.

and there are now over 700 patents filed on these compounds by the major agrochemical companies.
The strobilurin fungicides show an astonishingly
wide range of activity against all the major taxonomic
groups of plant pathogens. For example, azoxystrobin
is registered for use against more than 400 plant
pathogens. It strongly inhibits spore germination,
shows excellent preventative activity, and has eradicant and antisporulation properties. Specific formulations are marketed for many different types of crop,
including all the major diseases of cereals. The question arises as to why these compounds are toxic to fungi
but have little effect on plant hosts, which have the
same mitochondrial target sites. The proposed explanation is that there could be differential penetration
and degradation of these fungicides in plants compared
with in fungi. Like all fungicides that act on specific
metabolic targets, there is strong evidence that fungi
can develop resistance to the strobilurins. So they need
to be used in mixtures or as alternating treatments with
other fungicides, as part of a resistance-management
strategy.

Antifungal antibiotics used for plant disease
control

Fig. 17.8 Oudemansiella mucida, the “porcelain fungus”
that grows on rotting wood and is one of the original
sources of strobilurin-type fungicides. (Courtesy of Marek
Snowarski, Fungi of Poland; www.grzyby.pl)

There are several antifungal antibiotics (Table 17.3)
but only a few are selective enough to be used for disease control. For example, cycloheximide is a broadspectrum antifungal agent and is widely used as an
experimental tool in laboratory studies, but it acts by
blocking protein synthesis on 80S ribosomes and is
therefore toxic to all eukaryotes. It is not used for
disease control. The few antibiotics that have been used

348

CHAPTER 17

Table 17.3 Some antifungal antibiotics used for the control of plant or human mycoses.
Antibiotic

Produced by

Fungi affected

Site/mode of action

Griseofulvin
Polyene macrolides
Polyoxins
Validamycin A
Blasticidin-S
Kasugamycin
Streptomycin
Pyrrolnitrin
Pyoluteorin
Gliotoxin
Gliovirin
Viridin
Viridiol
Heptelidic acid
Trichodermin
6-pentyl-a-pyrone
Suzukacillin
Alamethicine

Penicillium griseofulvum
Streptomyces spp.
Strep. cacaoi
Strep. hygroscopicus
Strep. griseochromogenes
Strep. kasugaensis
Strep. griseus
Pseudomonas spp.
Pseudomonas spp.
Trichoderma virens
T. virens
T. virens
T. virens
T. virens
Trichoderma spp.
Trichoderma spp.
Trichoderma spp.
Trichoderma spp.

Many (not Oomycota)
Many (not Oomycota)
Many (not Oomycota)
Some
Some
Some
Oomycota

Fungal tubulins
Cell membrane
Chitin synthesis
Morphogen
Protein synthesis
Protein synthesis
Calcium?

5
4
4
4
4
Various plant
6
pathogens
4
4
4
4
7

Implicated in biocontrol
by nutrient competition,
antibiosis, parasitism of
other fungi, etc.

Five novel types of antifungal antibiotic have been
discovered and commercialized in Japan. They are discussed briefly below, and their structures are shown
in Fig. 17.10.

synthase, and compete with the normal substrate,
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine from which chitin is synthesized (see Fig. 7.11). They have been used in practice to control some plant diseases, especially sheath
blight of rice (Rhizoctonia) and black spot of pear
(Alternaria) in Japan. However, these pathogens
rapidly develop tolerance/resistance to the antibiotics
in field conditions, because mutant strains of the
fungi show reduced antibiotic uptake. Attempts to use
these antibiotics to control diseases of human and
animal hosts have also been unsuccessful. In vitro
studies in laboratory media show that the polyoxins
are powerful inhibitors of chitin synthesis. However,
these compounds are taken into fungal cells through
membrane proteins that are normally used for the
uptake of dipeptides, and the abundance of small peptides in human or animal tissues competitively blocks
the uptake of these antibiotics.

Polyoxins and nikkomycin

Blasticidin-S, kasugamycin, and validamycin

The polyoxins, including polyoxin D, are specific
inhibitors of chitin synthesis and therefore represent
a unique mode of action. Their discovery in 1965
raised hopes that they could have significant roles in
controlling fungi and insects – the two major groups
of chitin-containing organisms – while having no
effect on higher animals or plants. Nikkomycin is a
similar compound that acts in the same way. Both
compounds bind strongly to the active site of chitin

These three antibiotics have found limited roles in
Japanese agriculture. Blasticidin-S inhibits protein
synthesis in bacteria and a few fungi, by binding to
the large subunit of 70S and 80S ribosomes. It was
developed for control of rice blast (M. grisea) but later
it was replaced by another protein synthesis inhibitor,
kasugamycin, which has lower mammalian toxicity.
Resistance has developed to both of these compounds
in field conditions. It is based on reduced uptake of

commercially for plant disease control were developed
in Japan, mainly for the control of rice diseases (rice
blast caused by Magnaporthe grisea, and rice sheath
blight, caused by Rhizoctonia solani). In addition to these
fermenter-produced antibiotics, several biological control agents are known to produce antifungal antibiotics.
But these compounds are exploited indirectly by
marketing the biocontrol agents as microbial inoculants
– a strategy that can avoid the need to undertake
detailed and expensive toxicological testing.

The Japanese agricultural antibiotics

PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF CONTROLLING FUNGAL GROWTH

349

CH3
O
HOOC

C

N
H

OH

OH

O

NH

HOH3C
OH

HO
HO

NH2
OH

Kasugamycin

OH

H
N

OH

OH
CH3

H
N

O

N
H2N

N

O

N

O
COOH

NH2

OH
C

NH2

HOH2C
O
OH

NH
C

Blasticidin-S
COOH

O

COOH

H

O
H
H H
H
C
C
C
O
C
O
N
NH
N
H2N
O H C C C
H
O H
H
HH
H
O
NH+3
OH OH
Polyoxin D

HO
CH2OH

O
OH
Validamycin A

Fig. 17.10 Japanese agricultural antibiotics.

blasticidin-S, and reduced binding of kasugamycin to
the ribosome.
Validamycin A is used to control several diseases
caused by Rhizoctonia, including seedling diseases,
black scurf of potato, and sheath blight of rice, but
it is inactive against most fungi and bacteria. It has
no effect on Rhizoctonia in rich culture media, but it
causes abnormal branching and cessation of growth in
weak media. Validamycin has been found to be converted to validoxylamine in fungi, and this compound
is a strong inhibitor of trehalase, the enzyme that
cleaves the fungal disaccharide trehalose to glucose (see
Fig. 7.6).

Antibiotics implicated in biocontrol
The roles of antibiotics in interfungal interactions
were discussed in Chapter 12, so here we consider
only the practical applications of these compounds in
disease control. Several new biocontrol products are
undergoing field trials or have been marketed in the
last few years. One of these, marketed as GlioGard™
but now as SoilGard, consists of small, air-dried
alginate beads containing fermenter-grown biomass
of Trichoderma virens and wheat bran as a food base.
This product is thought to act mainly by producing

the antibiotic gliotoxin. The dried granules are mixed
with soil-less rooting media in glasshouses and left for
several days after the medium is moistened, before
seedlings or rooted cuttings are transplanted into the
beds. The timing of these operations is crucial, because
the fungus must grow on the wheat bran substrate
and produce gliotoxin which diffuses into the rooting
medium, protecting the plants from pathogenic attack.
If there is a delay in planting then the antibiotic levels
start to decline and the degree of protection is reduced.
Rhizosphere bacteria also produce many antifungal
compounds. Table 17.4 shows the results of “nonselective” screening (on Trypticase Soy agar) of the dominant bacteria from a range of plants by a commercial
company (Leyns et al. 1990). The most common bacteria with antifungal properties included Pseudomonas
spp. (some of which produce the antibiotics pyrrolnitrin, pyoluteorin, phenazines, and diacetylphloroglucinol), Xanthomonas maltophilia (unknown antibiotics),
Bacillus subtilis and other Bacillus spp. (some of which
produce iturins, mycosubtilins, bacillomycin, fengymycin, mycobacillin, and mycocerein), and Erwinia
herbicola (which produces herbicolins). Some of these
bacteria are used in commercial biocontrol formulations.
For example, Bacillus subtilis is marketed for seed
treatment of cotton and soybeans, to protect against
damping-off fungi. Others have been implicated in

350

CHAPTER 17

Crop

No. of plants
examined

No. of dominant
bacterial isolates

% of isolates with
antifungal properties

Sugarbeet
Maize
Soybean
Sunflower
Barley
Grape

1550
503
450
450
36
36

6780
1508
1139
1119
175
231

38
27
21
22
92
100

natural biocontrol in field conditions, a classic example being the role of fluorescent pseudomonads
(P. fluorescens and P. putida) in suppressing the take-all
disease of cereals.

Control of fungal infections of humans
The control of fungal infections of humans presents
considerable difficulties, because often the patient is
severely compromised or immunosuppressed (Chapter 16). It is worth noting that even the common
antibacterial antibiotics such as penicillins and
cephalosporins do not work alone; they act in conjunction with the host’s normal defenses. There are,
however, several antimycotic agents that can be used
successfully to treat human mycoses (Odds et al. 2003).
We consider these below.

Griseofulvin
Griseofulvin (Fig. 17.11) is a naturally occurring antifungal antibiotic, produced by the fungus Penicillium
griseofulvum. It is insoluble in water but can be taken
orally in a microcrystalline form and it then accumulates in the keratin precursor cells of the skin, nails, and
hair. It is used almost exclusively to control the dermatophyte infections of the keratinized tissues, but it

OCH3 O

is fungistatic rather than fungicidal, so for serious
infections the treatment must be prolonged until all
the infected tissues have been shed.
As noted earlier, griseofulvin causes growth distortions of fungal hyphae in spore germination tests,
including thickening of the hyphal walls, associated with
heavy deposition of glucans. However, this is now
known to be a secondary effect, and the primary role
of griseofulvin is to interfere with the assembly of
microtubules or of the tubulin-associated proteins. It
causes abnormal nuclear division by disrupting the
spindle microtubules, and abnormal growth, presumably
by disrupting the microtubule-associated transport of
materials to the hyphal tip. In these respects, the role
of griseofulvin is similar to that of the benzimidazole
fungicides used for plant disease control, because
these also block microtubule assembly. But the benzimidazoles evidently act at a different site on microtubules because mutants that develop resistance to
the benzimidazoles are not resistant to griseofulvin, and
vice versa.
Griseofulvin has been the main drug used to
treat dermatophyte infections for many years, and
although resistance to the antibiotic can occur quite
frequently in vitro, it has not been a major problem in
clinical practice. However, griseofulvin is now being progressively replaced by newer synthetic drugs, including terbinafine and itraconazole, which are less toxic
and require shorter treatment times.

CH3

H

O
O
CI

CH3

OCH3
C

N

CH3O

Table 17.4 Bacteria with antifungal
properties isolated by “nonselective”
methods from the root zone of crop
plants. (Adapted from Leyns et al.
1990.)

CH2

CH2

C
C

C

C

CH3

CH3

H
CH3

Griseofulvin

Terbinafine

Fig. 17.11 Structures of griseofulvin and terbinafine, two compounds used to treat dermatophyte infections.

PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF CONTROLLING FUNGAL GROWTH

351

CH3
CH3

O

HO

O

OH

H2N
OH

CH3

OH

OH

H3C
O

COOH
O

OH

OH

OH

OH

O

OH

Fig. 17.12 Amphotericin B, a member of the polyene macrolide class of antifungal antibiotics.

Fig. 17.13 Proposed mode of action of
amphotericin B and similar large polyene
antibiotics. The antibiotic shows strong
affinity for ergosterol in the fungal
cell membrane. It binds to ergosterol
molecules and repositions them so that
the polyene–sterol complexes assemble
to form a polar pore through which
small ions diffuse freely. Note that only
one layer of the phospholipid bilayer is
shown in this diagram. (Based on a diagram in Gale et al. 1981.)

Terbinafine
Like griseofulvin, terbinafine (Fig. 17.11) can be taken
orally (or topically) and it tends to accumulate in the
skin, nails, hair, and fatty tissues. It inhibits ergosterol
synthesis by interfering with an early step in sterol
biosynthesis, where the enzyme squalene epoxidase
starts the process of cyclization leading to lanosterol.

Polyene macrolide antibiotics
The polyene macrolide antibiotics are produced by
several Streptomyces spp. Their typical structure is
exemplified by amphotericin B (Fig. 17.12). An
aminosugar group is attached to a large lactone ring
with a series of double bonds on one face (hence the
term polyene) and a series of hydroxyl groups on the
other face. So the molecule has both a hydrophobic
and a hydrophilic face. By X-ray crystallography the
molecule is seen to have a rod-like structure, about
2.1 nm long in the case of amphotericin B, similar to
a membrane phospholipid. The polyenes insert in the
cell membrane by associating with sterols (the hydrophobic face) and are thought to cause rearrangement

of the sterols so that a group of eight polyene molecules
forms a ring with the hydrophilic faces in the center
(Fig. 17.13). Thus they form a polar pore through
which small ions (K+, H+ ) can pass freely, disrupting
the cell’s ionic control.
Almost all eukaryotic cells have sterols in the membranes, although some Oomycota do not produce
them or even need them for growth. So the polyene
antibiotics would not, at first sight, seem to be selective antifungal agents. However, there are many different
polyenes that differ in the ring size and presence
or nature of the aminosugar group, and they show
preferential binding to different sterols. Three of these
compounds – amphotericin B, nystatin, and pimaricin
– have a much higher affinity for ergosterol than for
cholesterol, the mammalian membrane sterol, so they
are selectively antifungal. Nystatin and pimaricin can be
applied topically as creams to control Candida infection
of the vagina, or as powder formulations to control
athlete’s foot.
Amphotericin B has lower mammalian toxicity than
nystatin or pimaricin, and it also has some (low)
degree of water solubility. Initial development work
in the 1950s and 1960s showed that amphotericin B
could be administered orally, with some success. But
all the polyene antibiotics have adverse side effects,

352

CHAPTER 17

N
CI

N

Ketoconazole

CH2

CI

O

N

N

OH

F

C

CH2

CH3

F

N

N

N

OH

Cl
N

N

N
CH3

O

O
CH2

N

N

Fluconazole

CH2
O

O

H

CH2O

N

N

N

N
N

O

CHCH2CH3

Itraconazole
CH3
Fig. 17.14 Imidazole and triazole drugs.
so the main thrust of research has been to develop formulations that minimize these effects, such as chronic
renal toxicity. There are now several lipid formulations
of amphotericin B, either approved for human use or
in stages of development. For example, the commercial formulation named AmBisome consists of small
(<100 nm diameter) liposomes consisting of a single
layer of phospholipids that incorporate amphotericin
B. Single dose intravenous toxicity tests on mice
showed that AmBisome had an LD50 value (the dose
resulting in 50% mortality) of more that 175 mg/kg,
compared with an LD50 of 2–3 mg/kg for a standard
colloidal formulation of amphotericin B mixed with
sodium deoxycholate. Amphotericin in the new formulations has the potential to control several systemic
fungal pathogens, including Candida, Cryptococcus,
Aspergillus, Blastomyces, Coccidioides, and Histoplasma.
Further details of drug delivery systems for antifungal
agents can be found in Adler-Moore & Proffitt (2004).

Azole drugs
The azole drugs are ergosterol biosynthesis inhibitors
similar to those used for plant disease control, but with
structures designed for the treatment of systemic
mycoses of humans. They act by blocking sterol
demethylation at the C-14 position, during the pathway from lanosterol to ergosterol (see Fig. 7.15).
Depending on whether these drugs have two or three
nitrogens in the five-membered heterocyclic ring, they
are termed imidazoles or triazoles.

Ketoconazole (an imidazole; Fig. 17.14) was the
first of these drugs to be developed for treatment of
humans. It has strong activity against Candida and
Cryptococcus neoformans, and also can be used against
other systemic pathogens such as Blastomyces dermatitidis and Coccidioides immitis, but it has little activity
against Aspergillus. However, ketoconazole has several
adverse side effects, and it has been largely replaced by
the more recent and less toxic triazole drugs such as
fluconazole (Fig. 17.14) and itraconazole (Fig. 17.14).
Although ketoconazole is still available, it is used
mainly as a second-line drug for infections that do not
respond to the triazoles.
Fluconazole is mainly used against Candida and
Cryptococcus species, and is available as both oral and
intravenous formulations. It also has limited activity
against Histoplasma and Blastomyces, but almost no
activity against other human pathogens. It is a widely
used front-line drug against many Candida albicans
infections, but is not effective against some of the
less common Candida spp. such as C. krusei and C.
glabrata.
Itraconazole is available in oral or intravenous
forms and is active against many fungi including
yeasts, dimorphic fungi, and mycelial fungi. Its spectrum includes Candida spp., Cryptococcus, Aspergillus,
Histoplasma, Blastomyces, Coccidioides, and dermatophytes. However, resistance to itraconazole has been
reported among many fungi, and this sometimes leads
to cross-resistance to drugs with a similar mode of
action. Three new triazoles with different spectra of
activity have recently been developed. In one case,

PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF CONTROLLING FUNGAL GROWTH

voriconazole, the compound appeared on the market
in 2002, and the other two compounds, ravuconazole
and posaconazole, are in the final stages of clinical
trials. Thus, compared with the situation only a decade
ago, when ketoconazole was the drug of choice, there
is now a wide range of azoles available for the treatment of specific mycoses.
For all these azole drugs, the consequence of blocking the demethylation step of the ergosterol biosynthetic
pathway is to deplete the concentration of ergosterol
so that fungi incorporate other sterols in the membrane.
The effect of this can be studied in a model system,
by exploiting the fact that Saccharomyces cerevisiae can
grow both anaerobically and aerobically. When grown
aerobically, Saccharomyces synthesizes ergosterol; but
when grown anaerobically Saccharomyces needs to be
supplied with sterols, because these are products of aerobic biosynthetic pathways (Chapter 7). If anaerobic cells
of Saccharomyces are supplied with a different sterol such
as lanosterol, they become leaky and cannot assemble
the wall in the normal way. In this respect it will be
recalled that the major wall-synthetic enzymes, chitin
synthase and glucan synthase, are integral membrane

353

proteins (Chapter 4), so presumably any change in the
membrane composition could affect these enzyme
functions. In Candida, one of the effects of the azole
drugs is to prevent the phase transition from yeasts to
hyphae. As we noted in Chapter 16, this phase transition is important for invasion of tissues and for allowing Candida to break out of phagocytes.

5-Flucytosine (5-FC)
5-FC is a fluorine-substituted nucleoside, developed
originally as an antitumour agent but it has an additional role as an antimycotic agent for the treatment of
systemic Candida and Cryptococcus. Its mode of action
is shown in Fig. 17.15. It is taken into a fungal cell by
the cytosine permease of the cell membrane, then
deaminated to 5-fluorouracil which, through a series
of steps, is incorporated into RNA in place of uracil,
causing impaired RNA function. It also impairs DNA
synthesis because one of the products of 5-fluorouracil
inhibits the enzyme thymidylate synthase in the
pathway that generates thymidine nucleotides.

Fig. 17.15 Mode of action of the synthetic pyrimidine 5-flucytosine.

354

CHAPTER 17

5-FC is selectively toxic to fungi because mammalian
cells have a low rate of uptake of the molecule and
have little or no ability to convert it to 5-fluorouracil
because they lack the enzyme cytosine deaminase (Fig.
17.15). However, 5-FC affects only a small number of
fungi, notably Candida, Cryptococcus, and Aspergillus
fumigatus, and even these fungi easily develop resistance
to it in clinical practice. The cause of this resistance
can be studied in vitro by supplying cells with the various intermediates along the pathway shown in Fig.
17.15. Most resistant strains from clinical specimens are
found to be deficient in uridylate pyrophosphorylase
activity, but a few lack a cytosine permease or deaminase. Because of the rapid development of resistance,
5-FC is not used alone but in conjunction with other
drugs, especially amphotericin B, with which it has a
significant synergistic effect.

Control of Pneumocystis jirovici
We noted in Chapter 16 that P. jirovici is an unusual
fungus which for many years was classified as a protozoan. The principal means of controlling it is
with the drug pentamidine which is thought to act
on DNA. It is also sensitive to the antibacterial agents
trimethoprim and sulfomethoxazole, which disrupt
the folate pathway involved in transfer of groups from
the amino acid serine to a range of other compounds.
P. jirovici is not affected by the antifungal polyenes or
azoles because it has cholesterol, not ergosterol, in
its cell membrane. However, all three of the echinocandins mentioned above are active against P. jirovici.

The future . . .
Echinocandins
Echinocandins are naturally occurring secondary
metabolites of fungi, which are now in an advanced
stage of development as novel antifungal agents because
they inhibit the synthesis of β1-3 glucan, one of the
major wall polymers of fungi. Caspofungin (Fig. 17.16),
a polypeptide antifungal, was licensed for clinical use
in 2002. It is active against some Candida spp. and
Aspergillus fumigatus. Two other compounds of the
same structural class, anidulafungin and mycafungin,
are expected to be licensed soon.

Despite the impressive advances that have been made
in controlling fungal infections of humans, and the
recent introduction of the echinocandins, there is still
concern that the pace of development of drugs with
novel modes of action is slow. To quote Odds et al.
(2003), “. . . the spectre of emergence of resistance is a
real one . . . and new inhibitors will continue to be required for effective antifungal therapy in the future.”
In parallel with the development of new antifungal
agents, there is increasing interest in the development
of vaccines to protect against some of the endemic
human-pathogenic fungi. These studies are at a rel-

H2N
OH

HN
HO

O

O
NH

NH
O

N

H2N

HN

O

OH

O
NH
O

N

H
N

HO

OH
OH

O

HO
Fig. 17.16 Caspofungin, one of the new echinocandin antifungal agents.

PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF CONTROLLING FUNGAL GROWTH

atively early stage, but potential antigens have been
identified for both Coccidioides immitis (and the related
fungus C. posadasii) (Magee & Cox 2004) and Paracoccidioides brasiliensis (Travassos et al. 2004).

Online resources
Doctor Fungus website. http://www.doctorfungus.org [An
excellent, comprehensive source of up-to-date information on all human mycoses.]

General texts
Deacon, J.W. (1991) Significance of ecology in the development of biocontrol agents against soil-borne plant
pathogens. Biocontrol Science and Technology 1, 5–20.
Georgopapadakou, N.H. & Walsh, T.J. (1994) Human
mycoses: drugs and targets for emerging pathogens.
Science 264, 371–373.
Mintz, A.S. & Walter, J.R. (1993) A private industry
approach: development of GlioGard™ for disease
control in horticulture. In: Pest Management: biologically
based technologies (Lumsden, R.D. & Vaughn, J.L., eds),
pp. 398–404. American Chemical Society, Washington.
Shepherd, M.C. (1987) Screening for fungicides. Annual
Review of Phytopathology 25, 189–206.
Trinci, A.P.J. & Ryley, J.F. (1984) Mode of Action of Antifungal Agents. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Cited references
Adler-Moore, J.P. & Proffitt, R.T. (2004) Novel drug delivery systems for antifungal agents. In: The Mycota XII.
Human Fungal Pathogens (Domer, J.E. & Kobayashi, G.S.,
eds), pp. 339–362. Springer-Verlag Berlin.
Davidse, J.C. (1986) Benzimidazole fungicides: mechanisms of action and biological impact. Annual Review of
Phytopathology 24, 43–65.

355

Gale, E.F., Cundcliffe, E., Reynolds, P.E., Richmond, M.H.
& Waring, M.J. (1981) The Molecular Basis of Antibiotic
Action, 2nd edn. Wiley, London.
Godfrey, S.A.C., Monds, R.D., Lash, D.T. & Marshall, J.W.
(2003) Identification of Pythium oligandrum using speciesspecific ITS rDNA PCR oligonucleotides. Mycological
Research 107, 790–796.
Katan, J. (1987) Soil solarization. In: Innovative Approaches
to Plant Disease Control (Chet, I., ed.), pp. 77–105. Wiley,
New York.
Leyns, F., Lambert, B., Joos, H. & Swings, J. (1990)
Antifungal bacteria from different crops. In: Biological
Control of Soil-borne Plant Pathogens (Hornby, D., ed.),
pp. 437–444. CAB International, Wallingford.
Magee, M. & Cox, R.A. (2004) Vaccine development for
Coccidioidomycosis. In: The Mycota XII. Human Fungal
Pathogens (Domer, J.E. & Kobayashi, G.S., eds), pp. 243–
257. Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Odds, F.C., Brown, A.J.P. & Gow, N.A.R. (2003) Antifungal
agents: mechanisms of action. Trends in Microbiology 11,
272–279.
Olsen, C.M. & Baker, K.F. (1968) Selective heat treatment
of soil and its effect on inhibition of Rhizoctonia solani
by Bacillus subtilis. Phytopathology 58, 79–87.
Stammler, G., Seemuller, E. & Duncan, J.M. (1993)
Analysis of RFLPs in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA
and the taxonomy of Phytophthora fragariae. Mycological
Research 97, 150–156.
Travassos, L.R., Taborda, C.P., Iwai, L.K., Cunha-Neto,
E.C. & Puccia, R. (2004) The gp43 from Paracoccidioides
brasiliensis: a major diagnostic antigen and vaccine
candidate. In: The Mycota XII. Human Fungal Pathogens
(Domer, J.E. & Kobayashi, G.S., eds), pp. 279–296.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Vanneste, J.L., Hill, R.A., Kay, S.J., Farrell, R.L. & Holland,
P.T. (2002) Biological control of sapstain fungi with
natural products and biological control agents: a review
of the work carried out in New Zealand. Mycological
Research 106, 228–232.
Wolkow, P.M, Sisler, H.D. & Vigil, E.L. (1983) Effect of
inhibitors of melanin biosynthesis on structure and
function of appressoria of Colletotrichum lindemuthianum. Physiological Plant Pathology 22, 55–71.

Sources

Chapter 1
Fig. 1.1 (Based on a diagram in Woese (2000) but showing only a few of the major groups of organisms.)
Woese, C.R. (2000) Interpreting the universal phylogenetic tree. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
USA 97, 8392–8396.
Fig.
1.3 (Based
on
a
drawing
from:
http://
microscope.mbl.edu/scripts/microscope.php?func=
imgDetail&imageID=4575)
Fig. 1.7(a,b) (Courtesy of Robert L. Anderson (photographer)
and USDA Forest Service; www.forestryimages.org)

Chapter 2
Fig. 2.2 (From Deacon & Saxena 1997.) Deacon, J.W. &
Saxena, G. (1997) Orientated attachment and cyst germination in Catenaria anguillulae, a facultative endoparasite of nematodes. Mycological Research 101, 513–522.
Fig. 2.4 (Reproduced by courtesy of Schuessler et al. 2001,
and the British Mycological Society.) Schuessler, A.,
Schwarzott, D. & Walker, C. (2001) A new fungal phylum,
the Glomeromycota: phylogeny and evolution. Mycological Research 105, 1413–1421.
Fig. 2.6 (Courtesy of Dirk Redecker and the AAAS;
see Redecker et al. 2000.) Redecker, D., Kodner, R.
& Graham, L.E. (2000) Glomalean fungi from the
Ordovician. Science 289, 1920–1921.
Fig. 2.7 (Courtesy of Redecker et al. 2000 and the AAAS.)
Redecker, D., Kodner, R. & Graham, L.E. (2000)
Glomalean fungi from the Ordovician. Science 289,
1920–1921.
Fig. 2.13 (Courtesy of N. Read; from Read, N.D. & Lord,
K.M. 1991 Experimental Mycology 15, 132–139.)
Fig. 2.35 (Courtesy of Florian Siegert ©) (From: http://
www.zi.biologie.unimuenchen.de/zoologie/dicty/dicty.html)

Fig. 2.37 ((a,b) Courtesy of J.P. Braselton, Ohio University;
see http://oak.cats.ohiou.edu/~braselto/plasmos/)

Chapter 3
Fig. 3.2 (Courtesy of C. Bracker; from Grove & Bracker
1970.) Grove, S.N. & Bracker, C.E. (1970) Protoplasmic
organization of hyphal tips among fungi: vesicles and
Spitzenkörper. Journal of Bacteriology 104, 989–1009.
Fig. 3.3 (Courtesy of C. Bracker; from Grove & Bracker
1970.) Grove, S.N. & Bracker, C.E. (1970) Protoplasmic
organization of hyphal tips among fungi: vesicles and
Spitzenkörper. Journal of Bacteriology 104, 989–1009.
Fig. 3.4 (Courtesy of R. Roberson; see Roberson & Fuller
1988, 1990.) Roberson, R.W. & Fuller, M.S. (1988)
Ultrastructural aspects of the hyphal tip of Sclerotium
rolfsii preserved by freeze substitution. Protoplasma 146,
143–149. Roberson, R.W. & Fuller, M.S. (1990) Effects of
the demethylase inhibitor, Cyproconazole, on hyphal
tip cells of Sclerotium rolfsii. Experimental Mycology 14,
124–135.
Fig. 3.6 (From McCabe et al. 1999.) McCabe, P.M.,
Gallagher, M.P. & Deacon, J.W. (1999) Microscopic
observation of perfect hyphal fusion in Rhizoctonia
solani. Mycological Research 103, 487–490.
Fig. 3.9 (Based on Hunsley & Burnett 1970.) Hunsley, D.
& Burnett, J.H. (1970) The ultrastructural architecture
of the walls of some hyphal fungi. Journal of General
Microbiology 62, 203–218.
Fig. 3.10 (Based on Trinci 1978.) Trinci A.P.J. (1978)
Science Progress 65, 75–99.
Fig. 3.13 (Courtesy of C.E. Bracker; from Bartnicki-Garcia
et al. 1978.) Bartnicki-Garcia, S., Bracker, C.E., Reyes, E.
& Ruiz-Herrera, J. (1978) Isolation of chitosomes from
taxonomically diverse fungi and synthesis of chitin
microfibrils in vitro. Experimental Mycology 2, 173–
192.

SOURCES

Fig. 3.14 (Photographs courtesy of B. Rees, V. Shepherd and
A. Ashford; from Rees et al. 1994.) Rees, B, Shepherd, V.A.
& Ashford, A.E. (1994) Presence of a motile tubular
vacuole system in different phyla of fungi. Mycological
Research 98, 985–992.
Fig. 3.15 (Courtesy of N.D. Read; from Fisher-Parton
et al. 2000.) Fisher-Parton, S., Parton, R.M., Hickey,
P., Dijksterhuis, J., Atkinson, H.A. & Read, N.D. (2000)
Confocal microscopy of FM4-64 as a tool for analysing
endocytosis and vesicle trafficking in living fungal
hyphae. Journal of Microscopy 198, 246–259.
Fig. 3.17 (Courtesy of N.D. Read; from Fisher-Parton
et al. 2000.) Fisher-Parton, S., Parton, R.M., Hickey, P.,
Dijksterhuis, J., Atkinson, H.A. & Read, N.D. (2000)
Confocal microscopy of FM4-64 as a tool for analysing endocytosis and vesicle trafficking in living fungal
hyphae. Journal of Microscopy 198, 246–259.
Fig. 3.18 (From Fisher-Parton et al. 2000.) Fisher-Parton,
S., Parton, R.M., Hickey, P., Dijksterhuis, J., Atkinson, H.A.
& Read, N.D. (2000) Confocal microscopy of FM4-64
as a tool for analysing endocytosis and vesicle trafficking in living fungal hyphae. Journal of Microscopy 198,
246–259.
Fig. 3.19 (Courtesy of H.C. Hoch; from Hoch & Staples
1985.) Hoch, H.C. & Staples, R.C. (1985) The microtubule
cytoskeleton in hyphae of Uromyces phaseoli germlings:
its relationship to the region of nucleation and to the
F-actin cytoskeleton. Protoplasma 124, 112–122.
Fig. 3.20 (Courtesy of R. Roberson; from Roberson &
Fuller 1988.) Roberson, R.W. & Fuller, M.S. (1988)
Ultrastructural aspects of the hyphal tip of Sclerotium
rolfsii preserved by freeze substitution. Protoplasma 146,
143–149.

Chapter 4
Fig. 4.6 (Based on a diagram in Wessels 1990.) Wessels,
J.G.H. (1990) Role of cell wall architecture in fungal tip
growth generation. In: Tip Growth in Plant and Fungal Cells
(Heath, I.B., ed.), pp. 1–29. Academic Press, New York.
Fig. 4.7 (Based on Anderson & Smith 1971.) Anderson, J.G.
& Smith, J.E. (1971) The production of conidiophores
and conidia by newly germinated conidia of Aspergillus
niger (microcycle conidiation). Journal of General Microbiology 69, 185–197.
Fig. 4.8 (Redrawn from Robinson 1973.) Robinson, P.M.
(1973) Oxygen-positive chemotropic factor for fungi? New
Phytologist 72, 1349–1356.
Fig. 4.9 (From Allan et al. 1992.) Allan, R.H., Thorpe, C.J.
& Deacon, J.W. (1992) Differential tropism to living
and dead cereal root hairs by the biocontrol fungus
Idriella bolleyi. Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology
41, 217–226.
Fig. 4.10 (Mitchell & Deacon 1986.) Mitchell, R.T. &
Deacon, J.W. (1986) Chemotropism of germ-tubes from
zoospore cysts of Pythium spp. Transactions of the British
Mycological Society 86, 233–237.
Fig. 4.11 (Based on a drawing by Hartwell 1974.)
Hartwell, L.L. (1974) Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle.
Bacteriological Reviews 38, 164–198.

357

Fig. 4.12 (Reprinted from Mata, J. & Nurse, P. 1998, copyright 1998, with permission from Elsevier.) Mata, J. &
Nurse, P. (1998) Discovering the poles in yeast. Trends
in Cell Biology 8, 163–167.
Fig. 4.14 (Courtesy of D.J. Read; from Read 1991.)
Read, D.J. (1991) Mycorrhizas in ecosystems – nature’s
response to the “Law of the Minimum”. In: Frontiers
in Mycology (Hawksworth, D.L., ed.), pp. 29–55. CAB
International, Wallingford, Oxon, pp. 101–130.
Fig. 4.17 (From Trinci 1992.) Trinci, A.P.J. (1992) Mycoprotein: a twenty-year overnight success story. Mycological
Research 96, 1–13.

Chapter 5
Fig. 5.1 (Based on Bartnicki-Garcia & Gierz 1993.)
Bartnicki-Garcia, S. & Gierz, G. (1993) Mathematical
analysis of the cellular basis of dimorphism. In: Dimorphic
Fungi in Biology and Medicine (Van den Bossche, H., Odds,
F.C. & Kerridge, D., eds), pp. 133–144. Plenum Press, New
York.
Fig. 5.5 (Courtesy of N.D. Read; from Read et al. 1992.)
Read, N.D., Kellock, L.J., Knight, H. & Trewavas, A.J.
(1992) Contact sensing during infection by fungal
pathogens. In: Perspectives in Plant Cell Recognition
(Callow, J.A. & Green, J. R., eds), pp. 137–172. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Fig. 5.6 (Courtesy of N.D. Read; from Read et al. 1992.)
Read, N.D., Kellock, L.J., Knight, H. & Trewavas,
A.J. (1992) Contact sensing during infection by fungal
pathogens. In: Perspectives in Plant Cell Recognition
(Callow, J.A. & Green, J.R., eds), pp. 137–172. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Fig. 5.7 (Based on a drawing by H.C. Hoch & R.C.
Staples; see Hoch et al. 1987.) Hoch, H.C., Staples,
R.C., Whitehead, B., Comeau, J. & Wolfe, E.D. (1987)
Signaling for growth orientation and differentiation
by surface topography in Uromyces. Science 235, 1659–
1662.
Fig. 5.8 (Based on Allen et al. 1991.) Allen, E.A., Hazen,
B.A., Hoch, H.C., et al. (1991) Appressorium formation
in response to topographical signals in 27 rust species.
Phytopathology 81, 323–331.
Fig. 5.9 ((c,d) Courtesy of F.M. Fox; see Fox 1986.) Fox,
F.M. (1986) Ultrastructure and infectivity of sclerotia of
the ectomycorrhizal fungus Paxillus involutus on birch
(Betula spp.) Transactions of the British Mycological Society
87, 627–631.
Fig. 5.10 (From Christias & Lockwood 1973.) Christias, C.
& Lockwood, J.L. (1973) Conservation of mycelial constituents in four sclerotium-forming fungi in nutrientdeprived conditions. Phytopathology 63, 602–605.
Fig. 5.12 (Courtesy of F.M. Fox; from Fox 1987.) Fox, F.M.
(1987) Ultrastructure of mycelial strands of Leccinum
scabrum, ectomycorrhizal on birch (Betula spp.). Transactions of the British Mycological Society 89, 551–560.
Fig. 5.13 (Courtesy of F.M. Fox; from Fox 1987.) Fox, F.M.
(1987) Ultrastructure of mycelial strands of Leccinum
scabrum, ectomycorrhizal on birch (Betula spp.). Transactions of the British Mycological Society 89, 551–560.

358

SOURCES

Fig. 5.16 (Courtesy of C.E. Bracker; from Bracker 1968.)
Bracker, C.E. (1968) The ultrastructure and development of sporangia in Gilbertella persicaria. Mycologia 60,
1016–1067.
Fig. 5.19 (Based on Suzuki et al. 1977.) Suzuki, Y.,
Kumagai, T. & Oka, Y. (1977) Locus of blue and near ultraviolet reversible photoreaction in the stages of conidial
development in Botrytis cinerea. Journal of General
Microbiology 98, 199–204.
Fig. 5.21 (Based on a diagram in Wessels 1996.) Wessels,
J.G.H. (1996) Fungal hydrophobins: proteins that function at an interface. Trends in Plant Science 1, 9–15.

Fig. 8.11 (From Northolt & Bullerman 1982.) Northolt,
M.D. & Bullerman, L.B. (1982) Prevention of mould
growth and toxin production through control of environmental conditions. Journal of Food Production 45,
519–526.
Fig. 8.12 (Adapted from Hallsworth & Magan 1994.)
Hallsworth, J.E. & Magan, N. (1994) Effect of carbohydrate type and concentration on polyhydric alcohol and
trehalose content of conidia of three entomopathogenic
fungi. Microbiology 140, 2705–2713.

Chapter 9
Chapter 6
Fig. 6.3 ((a) From Gow 1984. (b) Based on Kropf et al. 1984.)
Gow, N.A.R. (1984) Transhyphal electric currents in
fungi. Journal of General Microbiology 130, 3313–3318.
Kropf, D.L., Caldwell, J.H., Gow, N.A.R. & Harold, F.M.
(1984) Transhyphal ion currents in the water mould
Achlya. Amino acid proton symport as a mechanism of
current entry. Journal of Cell Biology 99, 486–496.

Chapter 7
Fig. 7.7 (Based on Brownlee & Jennings 1981.) Brownlee,
C. & Jennings, D.H. (1981) The content of carbohydrates
and their translocation in mycelium of Serpula lacrymans.
Transactions of the British Mycological Society 77, 615–
619.

Chapter 8
Fig. 8.1 (From Henry 1932.) Henry, A.W. (1932)
Influence of soil temperature and soil sterilization on the
reaction of wheat seedlings to Ophiobolus graminis Sacc.
Canadian Journal of Research 7, 198–203.
Fig. 8.6 (Based on Edwards & Bowling 1986.) Edwards, M.C.
& Bowling, D.J.F. (1986) The growth of rust germ
tubes towards stomata in relation to pH gradients.
Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology 29, 185–196.
Fig. 8.8 (After Trinci et al. 1994.) Trinci, A.P.J., Davies, D.R.,
Gull, K., et al. (1994) Anaerobic fungi in herbivorous
animals. Mycological Research 98, 129–152.
Fig. 8.9 (Reproduced from Akhmanova et al. 1998,
with permission; copyright Macmillan Publishing.)
Akhmanova, A., Voncken, F., Van Alen, T., et al. (1998)
A hydrogenosome with a genome. Nature 396, 527–528.
Fig. 8.10 (Data from Ayerst 1969, for Aspergillus spp., and
from Magan & Lacey 1984, for F. culmorum.) Ayerst, G.
(1969) The effects of moisture and temperature on
growth and spore germination in some fungi. Journal of
Stored Products Research 5, 127–141. Magan, N. & Lacey, J.
(1984) Effect of temperature and pH on water relations of
field and storage fungi. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 82, 71–81.

Fig. 9.3 (Based on Oliver 1987.) Oliver, S.G. (1987)
Chromosome organization and genome evolution in
yeast. In: Evolutionary Biology of the Fungi (Rayner,
A.D.M., Brasier, C.M. & Moore, D., eds), pp. 33–52.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Fig. 9.4 (Courtesy of Rawlinson et al. 1975.) Rawlinson,
C.J., Carpenter, J.M. & Muthyalu, G. (1975) Doublestranded RNA virus in Colletotrichum lindemuthianum.
Transactions of the British Mycological Society 65, 305–
308.
Fig. 9.8 (Courtesy of M. Sweetingham; from MacNish
& Sweetingham 1993.) MacNish, G.C. & Sweetingham,
M.W. (1993) Evidence of stability of pectic zymogram
groups within Rhizoctonia solani AG-8. Mycological Research 97, 1056–1058.
Fig. 9.9 (After MacNish et al. 1993.) MacNish, G.C.,
McLernon, C.K. & Wood, D.A. (1993) The use of
zymogram and anastomosis techniques to follow the
expansion and demise of two coalescing bare patches
caused by Rhizoctonia solani AG8. Australian Journal of
Agricultural Research 44, 1161–1173.
Fig. 9.17 (From Peter et al. 2003, with permission from
the New Phytologist Trust.) Peter, M., Courty, P.-E.,
Kobler, A., et al. (2003) Analysis of expressed sequence
tags from the ectomycorrhizal basidiomycetes Laccaria
bicolor and Pisolithus microcarpus. New Phytologist 159,
117–129.
Fig. 9.18 (From Freimoser et al. 2003; with permission
from the Society for General Microbiology.) Freimoser,
F.M., Screen, S., Bagga, S., Hu, G. & St Leger, R.J. (2003)
Expressed sequence tag (EST) analysis of two subspecies
of Metarhizium anisopliae reveals a plethora of secreted
proteins with potential activity in insect hosts. Microbiology 149, 239–247.

Chapter 10
Fig. 10.4 (Data from Deacon et al. 1983.) Deacon, J.W.,
Donaldson, S.J. & Last, F.T. (1983) Sequences and interactions of mycorrhizal fungi on birch. Plant and Soil 71,
257–262.
Fig. 10.12 (Courtesy of M.S. Fuller; from Reichle & Fuller
1967.) Reichle, R.E. & Fuller, M.F. (1967).

SOURCES

Fig. 10.14 (Courtesy of M.S. Fuller; from Cho & Fuller
1989.) Cho, C.W. & Fuller, M.F. (1989) Ultrastructural
organization of freeze-substituted zoospores of Phytophthora palmivora. Canadian Journal of Botany 67, 1493–
1499.
Fig. 10.16 (Photographs courtesy of F. Gubler & A.
Hardham; (a) from Hardham 1995; (b–d) from Gubler &
Hardham 1988.) Hardham, A.R. (1995) Polarity of vesicle
distribution in oomycete zoospores: development of
polarity and importance for infection. Canadian Journal
of Botany 73(suppl.) S400–407. Gubler, F. & Hardham,
A.R. (1988) Secretion of adhesive material during
encystment of Phytophthora cinnamomi zoospores, characterized by immunogold labeling with monoclonal
antibodies to components of peripheral vesicles. Journal
of Cell Science 90, 225–235.
Fig. 10.17 (From Deacon & Mitchell 1985.) Deacon, J.W.
& Mitchell, R.T. (1985) Toxicity of oat roots, oat root
extracts, and saponins to zoospores of Pythium spp. and
other fungi. Transactions of the British Mycological Society
84, 479–487.
Fig 10.21 (All data from Warburton & Deacon 1998.)
Warburton, A.J. & Deacon, J.W. (1998) Transmembrane
Ca2+ fluxes associated with zoospore encystment and cyst
germination by the phytopathogen Phytophthora parasitica.
Fungal Genetics and Biology 25, 54–62.
Fig. 10.25 (From Lacey 1988; based on the work of P.H.
Gregory and J.L. Monteith.) Lacey, J. (1988) Aerial dispersal and the development of microbial communities.
In: Micro-organisms in Action: concepts and applications
in microbial ecology (Lynch, J.M. & Hobbie, J.E., eds),
pp. 207–237. Blackwell Scientific, Oxford.
Fig. 10.27 (From Carter 1965.) Carter, M.V. (1965) Ascospore deposition of Eutypa armeniacae. Australian Journal
of Agricultural Research 16, 825–836.

Chapter 11
Fig. 11.11 (Based on Chang & Hudson 1967) Chang, Y.
& Hudson, H.J. (1967) The fungi of wheat straw compost: paper I. Transactions of the British Mycological Society
50, 649–666.
Fig. 11.14 (From Krauss & Deacon 1994.) Krauss, U. &
Deacon, J.W. (1994) Root turnover of groundnut
(Arachis hypogea L.) in soil tubes. Plant & Soil 166,
259–270.
Fig. 11.15 (From Krauss & Deacon 1994.) Krauss, U. &
Deacon, J.W. (1994) Root turnover of groundnut
(Arachis hypogea L.) in soil tubes. Plant & Soil 166,
259–270.
Fig. 11.16 (From Lascaris & Deacon 1991.) Lascaris, D. &
Deacon, J.W. (1991) Comparison of methods to assess
senescence of the cortex of wheat and tomato roots.
Soil Biology and Biochemistry 23, 979–986.
Fig. 11.17 (Based on Waid (1957) but with additional
information and interpretation.) Waid, J.S. (1957)
Distribution of fungi within the decomposing tissues
of ryegrass roots. Transactions of the British Mycological
Society 40, 391–406.

359

Chapter 12
Fig. 12.3 (Reproduced from Raaijmakers & Weller 1998.)
Raaijmakers, J.M. & Weller, D.M. (1998) Natural
plant protection by 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol-producing
Pseudomonas spp. in take-all decline soils. Molecular
Plant–Microbe Interactions 11, 144–152.
Fig. 12.4 (From Wood et al. 1997.) Wood, D.W., Gong, F.,
Daykin, M.M., Williams, P. & Pierson, L.S. (1997)
N-acyl-homoserine lactone-mediated regulation of gene
expression by Pseudomonas aureofaciens 30–84 in the
wheat rhizosphere. Journal of Bacteriology 179, 7663–
7670.
Fig. 12.5 ((a) Courtesy of Samuels, G.J, Chaverri, P.,
Farr, D.F. & McCray, E.B. Trichoderma Online,
Systematic Botany and Mycology Laboratory, ARS,
USDA; from http://nt.ars-grin.gov/taxadescriptions/keys/
TrichodermaIndex.cfm)
Fig. 12.10 (Courtesy of P. Jeffries; from Jeffries & Young
1976.) Jeffries, P. & Young, T.W.K. (1976) Ultrastructure
of infection of Cokeromyces recurvatus by Piptocephalis unispora (Mucorales). Archives of Microbiology 109, 277–288.
Fig. 12.11 (From van den Boogert & Deacon 1994.) van
den Boogert, P.H.J.F & Deacon, J.W. (1994) Biotrophic
mycoparasitism by Verticillium biguttatum on Rhizoctonia
solani. European Journal of Plant Pathology 100, 137–156.
Fig. 12.19 (Data from Deacon 1985.) Deacon, J.W. (1985)
Decomposition of filter paper cellulose by thermophilic
fungi acting singly, in combination, and in sequence.
Transactions of the British Mycological Society 85, 663–
669.

Chapter 13
Fig. 13.4 (From van der Heijden et al. 1998, with permission from the publisher.) van der Heijden, M.G.A.,
Wiemken, A. & Sanders, I.R. (1998) Mycorrhizal fungal
diversity determines plant diversity, ecosystem variability and productivity. Nature 396, 69–72.
Fig. 13.5 (Data from van der Heijden et al. 1998, with permission from the publisher, but only some of the plant
species are shown in this figure.) van der Heijden,
M.G.A., Wiemken, A. & Sanders, I.R. (1998) Mycorrhizal
fungal diversity determines plant diversity, ecosystem variability and productivity. Nature 396, 69–72.
Fig. 13.25 (Image courtesy of A. Scheussler & M. Kluge;
from Schuessler & Kluge 2001.) Scheussler, A. & Kluge,
M. (2001) Geosiphon pyriforme, an endocytosymbiosis
between fungus and cyanobacteria, and its meaning as
a model system for AM research. In: The Mycota, vol. IX.
Fungal Associations (Hoch, B., ed.), pp. 151–161.
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Fig. 13.26 (Courtesy of M.P. Coutts, J.E. Dolezal and the
University of Tasmania; see Madden & Coutts 1979.)
Madden, J.L. & Coutts, M.P. (1979) The role of fungi in
the biology and ecology of woodwasps (Hymenoptera
Siricidae). In: Insect–Fungus Symbiosis (Batra, L.R., ed.),
p. 165. Allanheld, Osmun & Co., New Jersey.

360

SOURCES

Chapter 14
Fig. 14.9 (Based on Wastie 1960.) Wastie, R.L. (1960)
Mechanism of action of an infective dose of Botrytis spores
on bean leaves. Transactions of the British Mycological Society
45, 465–473.
Fig. 14.14 (Based on Beckman & Talboys 1981.)
Beckman, C.H. & Talboys, P.W. (1981) Anatomy of
resistance. In: Fungal Wilt Diseases of Plants (Mace, C.E.,
Bell, A.A. & Beckman, C.H., eds), pp. 487–521. Academic
Press, New York.
Fig. 14.18 (Source: http://www.aphis.usda.gov/vs/ceah/
Equine/eq98endoph.htm)
Fig. 14.20 (Images courtesy of Joseph O’Brien, USDA
Forest Service, www.invasive.org; accessed 22 March
2004.)
Fig. 14.21 (Based on a diagram in Voegele & Mendgen
2003.) Voegele, R.T. & Mendgen, K. (2003) Rust haustoria: nutrient uptake and beyond. New Phytologist 159,
93–100.

Chapter 15
Fig. 15.2 ((a),(b) Courtesy of G.L. Barron; (c) courtesy
of Shirley Kerr; http://www.kaimaibush.co.nz/; (d),(e)
courtesy of Louis Tedders (photographer) and USDA,
Agricultural Research Service, www.invasive.org)
Fig. 15.3 (Based on Charnley 1989.) Charnley, A.K.
(1989) Mechanisms of fungal pathogenesis in insects.
In: Biotechnology of Fungi for Improving Plant Growth
(Whipps, J.M. & Lumsden, R.D., eds), pp. 85–125.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Fig. 15.5 (Adapted from Whisler et al. 1975.) Whisler,
H.C., Zebold, S.L. & Shemanchuk, J.A. (1975) Life history of Coelomomyces psorophorae. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA 72, 693–696.
Fig. 15.6 (Based on data in Wilding & Perry 1980.)
Wilding, N. & Perry, J.N. (1980) Studies on Entomophthora in populations of Aphis fabae on field beans.
Annals of Applied Biology 94, 367–378.

Fig. 15.7 (Courtesy of Marlin E. Rice, University of Ohio.)
Fig. 15.8 (Courtesy of B.A. Jeffee; from Jaffee 1992.)
Jaffee, B.A. (1992) Population biology and biological
control of nematodes. Canadian Journal of Microbiology
38, 359–364.
Fig. 15.9 (Courtesy of B.A. Jeffee; from Jaffee 1992.)
Jaffee, B.A. (1992) Population biology and biological
control of nematodes. Canadian Journal of Microbiology
38, 359–364.
Fig. 15.10 (Courtesy of B.A. Jeffee; from Jaffee 1992.)
Jaffee, B.A. (1992) Population biology and biological
control of nematodes. Canadian Journal of Microbiology
38, 359–364.
Fig. 15.11 (Drawn from photographs in Kerry & Crump
1980.) Kerry, B.R. & Crump, D.H. (1980) Two fungi parasitic on females of cyst-nematodes (Heterodera spp.).
Transactions of the British Mycological Society 74, 119–
125.

Chapter 16
Fig. 16.2 (Reproduced by courtesy of the Canadian National Centre for Mycology; http://www2.provlab.ab.ca/
bugs/webbug/mycology/dermhome.htm)
Fig. 16.6 (Reproduced by courtesy of the DoctorFungus
website; http://www.doctorfungus.org/)
Fig. 16.10 (Reproduced with permission from Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, Image Library;
http://www.dpd.cdc.gov/dpdx/HTML/ImageLibrary/
Pneumocystis_il.htm)

Chapter 17
Fig. 17.8 (Courtesy of Marek Snowarski, Fungi of Poland;
www.grzyby.pl)
Fig. 17.13 (Based on a diagram in Gale et al. 1981.) Gale,
E.F., Cundcliffe, E., Reynolds, P.E., Richmond, M.H. &
Waring, M.J. (1981) The Molecular Basis of Antibiotic
Action, 2nd edn. Wiley, London.

Systematic index

Page numbers in italics refer to figures or tables
A = Ascomycota
B = Basidiomycota
C = Chytridiomycota
G = Glomeromycota

L = lichen
O = Oomycota
P = plasmodiophorid
SM = slime mould

Y = yeast
Z = Zygomycota
M = mitosporic fungi (sexual stage
rare, absent, or unknown)

Absidia corymbifera (Z) 27, 323
Acaulospora (G) 23, 257
gerdemannii 23
trappei 23
Achlya (C) 43, 75, 97, 104, 113,
118, 152, 161
ambisexualis 76
bisexualis 76, 80
Acontium velatum (M) 147
Acremonium (M) 132
Acremonium spp. see Neotyphodium
(A)
Acremonium chrysogenum (M) 12
Agaricus (B) 204
bisporus 9, 31, 34, 107–8, 162,
168, 186, 224, 226, 339
brunnescens 9
campestris 221
Ajellomyces (A; sexual stage of
Blastomyces and Histoplasma)
323
Alatospora (M) 184, 194, 221
Allomyces (C) 18, 21, 58, 103, 104,
126, 160, 198
arbuscula 17, 20, 161
javanicus 20, 161
macrogynus 21
Alternaria (M; some have a Pleospora
(A) sexual stage) 9, 39, 40, 74,
155, 156, 207, 209, 218
tenuis 190

Amanita (B) 34, 206, 261
muscaria 39, 133, 136, 186, 188,
263
phalloides 34, 64, 136, 137
virosa 137
Amorphotheca resinae (A) 111, 339
Ampelomyces quisqualis (A) 246–7
Amylostereum areolatum (B) 257, 277
Anguillospora (M) 184, 194
Aphanomyces (O) 17, 43, 195, 198
astaci 43
cochlioides 200
euteiches 43
Aqualinderella fermentans (O) 148
Archaeospora spp. (G) 257
Armillaria (Armillariella) mellea (B)
33, 96, 111, 231
Armillariella elegans (B) 97
Arthrobotrys (M)
oligospora 317, 318
Arthroderma (A; sexual stage of some
Trichophyton and Microsporum
spp.) 323
Ascobolus (A) 31, 186, 190, 192,
204
Aspergillus (M; but some may have
sexual stages) 40, 100, 133,
167, 208, 238, 352
amstelodami 153
clavatus 137, 208
flavipes see Fenellia flavipes (A) 2

flavus 40, 132, 133, 134, 137,
138, 143, 144, 153, 154, 178,
329
fumigatus 7, 27, 39, 103, 143,
145, 148, 153, 161, 167, 208,
223, 224, 225, 237, 323, 326,
329, 354
nidulans see Emericella nidulans
niger 12, 13, 14, 61, 73, 81, 101,
115, 120, 128, 146, 161, 167,
329
ochraceus 133
oryzae 14
parasiticus 132, 133, 134, 137, 138
terreus 12, 178
Athelia (Sclerotium) rolfsii (B) 49, 52,
76, 93, 94, 147, 281–2, 287
Atricordyceps (A; sexual stage of
Harposporium oxycoracum) 317
Aureobasidium pullulans see Sydowia
polyspora (A) 40, 57
Auricularia auricula (B) 36
Basidiobolus ranarum (C) 17, 27, 58,
78, 191
Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (C)
178
Beauveria (A) 40, 85, 309–11, 316
bassiana 86, 133, 154, 155,
310–11
brogniartii 316

362

SYSTEMATIC INDEX

Bipolaris oryzae (M) 279
(= Cochliobolus miyabeanus =
Helminthosporium oryzae)
Blastocladiella (C) 21, 126
emersonii 196
ramosa 148
Blastomyces dermatitidis (A) 86, 208,
323, 332–3, 352
see also Ajellomyces
Blumeria graminis (A) 23, 90, 204,
206, 207, 305, 306
Bolbitius vitellinus (B) 186, 242
Boletus (B) 34, 206, 261
edulis 258, 267
scaber 36
Botryotinia fuckeliana (A) see Botrytis
cinerea
Botrytis (M)
allii 342
cinerea 1, 7, 63, 101–2, 144, 156,
215, 241, 249, 250, 284, 288,
290, 292
elliptica 288
fabae 288
squamosa 288
tulipae 288
Bovista plumbea (B) 207
Bremia lactucae (O) 43, 98, 161,
306
Caecomyces (C) 149
Calocera viscosa (B) 37
Candida (M; usually yeast but some
are dimorphic) 111, 218, 352,
353, 354
albicans 5, 30, 53, 58, 79, 85, 86,
88, 160, 161, 173, 219, 322, 323,
327–9
glabrata 327
lipolytica 13
oleophila 31, 218, 252
tropicalis 327
utilis 80, 111
Cantharellus cibarius (B) 38
Catenaria anguillulae (C) 17, 19, 20,
195, 202, 317
Cenococcum geophilum (A) 93, 94
Cephalosporium acremonium (M) 132,
133
Ceratocystis (A) 230
Cereosporiopsis (A) 195
Chaetomium (A) 31, 220, 230
globosum 76
thermophile 143, 144, 223, 253,
254
Chlorosplenium aeruginascens (B)
220
Chondrostereum purpureum (B) 241
Chrysosporium (M) 147
Chytridium confervae (C) 20, 221
Cladonia rangiferina (L) 269
Cladonia spp. (L) 270

Cladosporium spp. (M) 9, 39, 40, 74,
117, 155, 156, 204, 206, 209,
218
Cladosporium
fulvum see Fulvia fulvum
herbarum (M) 144, 146, 207
Clavariopsis (M) 184
Claviceps purpurea (A) 12, 13, 30,
94, 132, 133, 137, 138, 298
Clonostachys rosea (A) 229, 247, 250,
280
Coccidioides (M) 208, 352
immitis 86, 323, 330–2, 352, 355
posadasii 161, 178, 331, 355
Cochliobolus (M)
heterostrophus 292
miyabeanus (see Bipolaris oryzae)
sativus 190
Codosiga gracilis (choanoflagellate)
4
Coelomomyces psorophorae (C) 18,
310, 313, 314
Cokeromyces recurvatus (Z) 245
Collema sp. (L) 272
Colletotrichum (M) 88–9, 164, 218,
288
circinans 291
graminicola 284
musae 88, 99, 338
Conidiobolus coronatus (Z) 27, 204,
205
Coprinus (B) 23, 33, 38, 108, 186,
192, 226
cinereus 32, 161, 178, 224
comatus 38
heptemerus 242
Cordyceps militaris (A) 310
Coriolus versicolor (B) 37, 225, 231,
232
Corollospora (A) 195
Cortinarius (B) 34, 188, 261
Cryphonectria parasitica (A) 7, 30,
164, 174–6, 279
Cryptococcus (A) 53, 218, 352
albidus 54, 335
neoformans (see also Filobasidiella
neoformans (B) ) 33, 56, 322,
323, 333, 334, 335, 352
Curvularia lunata (M) 190
Cyathus striatus (B) 34, 205
Cystopage spp. (Z) 317
Dactylaria candida (M) 317
Dactylella brochopaga (M) 317
Dendrospora (M) 184, 194
Dictyostelium discoideum (SM) 43,
44
Dimargaris (Z) 245
Diplodia maydis (M) 284
Dispira (Z) 245
Doratomyces (M) 224
Drechmeria coniospora (M) 317

Emericella nidulans (A) 14, 39, 58,
74, 79, 101, 102, 107, 111,
126, 158, 160, 161, 168, 171,
178
Endogone (Z) 23
Endothia sp. (A) 176
Entomophthora (Z) 26, 310, 312
muscae 313
Entrophospora (G) 23, 257
Epicoccum purpurascens (M) 209
Epidermophyton floccosum (M) 323,
326
Eremascus (A) 23
Erynia (Z) 310
Erysiphe graminis see Blumeria
graminis (A)
Eurotium (A) 23, 28, 153
Eutypa armeniacae (A) 207, 208
Fenellia flavipes (A) – sexual stage of
Aspergillus flavipes 2, 39
Filobasidiella neoformans (B) 161,
178, 218, 323
Filobasidiella neoformans (B) var. gattii
218
Fomes fomentarius (B) 35, 230
Fuligo septica (SM) 44
Fulvia fulvum (M) 302, 307
Fusarium (M) 9, 40, 133, 136, 137,
155, 166, 167, 205, 220, 221,
224, 238, 280
culmorum 153, 190, 229, 250,
289
graminearum 80, 137, 178
moniliforme 137
oxysporum 40, 68, 74, 85, 119,
148, 215, 247, 289, 293, 294,
295–6, 339
venenatum 10, 82
Fusicoccum amygdali (M) 133, 148
Fusidium coccineum (M) 12, 237
Gaeumannomyces graminis (A) 142,
172, 173, 220, 238, 290, 291,
339
var. avenae 172, 251–2
var. graminis 89, 251
var. tritici 172, 251
Galactomyces geotrichum (A) 10
Ganoderma spp. (B) 206
adspersum 214
Geastrum (B) 34
Geosiphon pyriforme (G) 21, 23, 257,
273, 275– 6
Geotrichum candidum (A) 10, 40,
74
Gibberella (A)
fujikuroi 12, 132
zeae 12, 284
Gigaspora (G) 257
margarita 23
Gilbertella persicaria (Z) 97–8

SYSTEMATIC INDEX

Gliocladium (M) 155
catenulatum (see also Clonostachys
rosea) 247, 280
roseum see Clonostachys rosea
Gloeosporium (M) 39, 40
Glomus (G) 22, 257
etunicatum 23
intraradices 23
mosseae 23
occultum 23
versiforme 23
Halosphaeria hamata (A) 195, 221,
230
Hansenula polymorpha (A) 13, 106
Harposporium (asexual stage of
Atricordyceps) 317
Hebeloma (B) 34, 186, 187, 188,
261, 263, 264
Heliscus (M; sexual stage of Nectria
(A) ) 184
Helminthosporium oryzae see Bipolaris
oryzae
Heterobasidion annosum (B) 33,
242–4
Hirsutella (M)
rhossiliensis 317, 319, 320
thompsonii 310, 312
Histoplasma capsulatum (M; see also
Ajellomyces) 33, 86, 208, 323,
332, 352
Hohenbuehelia (sexual stage of some
Nematoctonus spp.) 317
Humicola (M) 39, 40, 220, 221
grisea 11
insolens 144, 223, 224
Hygrocybe (B) 222
Hymenoscyphus ericae (A) 13, 258,
265
Hyphochytrium catenoides (C) 221
Hypomyces 23
Hypoxylon 31
Idriella bolleyi (M) 74, 75
Inocybe (B) 188
Klyveromyces (Y) 173
lactis 173
Laccaria (B) 186, 188, 264
bicolor 181
Lactarius (B) 34, 186, 187, 188, 261,
263
pubescens 130
torminosus 37
Lagena radicicola (O) 43
Lagenidium giganteum (O) 43
Lecanicillium lecanii (M) 309, 310,
312, 315
Leccinum scabrum (B) 95, 186, 188
Lemonniera (M) 184, 221
Lentinula edodes (B) 9, 10, 34, 108

Leptomitis lacteus (O) 43, 111
Leucagaricus sp. (B) 277
Lewia infectoria (A; sexual stage of
Alternaria (M) ) 39
Lobaria pulmonaria (L) 269
Lulworthia (A) 31, 195, 221, 230
Lycogala epidendron (SM) 44
Lycoperdon (B) 35, 95, 204, 205
Macrophomina phaseolina (M) 284
Magnaporthe grisea (A) 88, 90, 158,
161, 178, 307, 346
Marasmius oreades (B) 33, 206, 221,
222
Melampsora lini (B) 120, 307
Metarhizium (M) 40, 85, 309–10,
315
anisopliae 86, 133, 154, 155, 181,
310, 316
flavoviride 316
Microsporum (M; sexual stage
Arthroderma) 323, 325
audouinii 326
canis 326
equinum 326
ferrugineum 326
gypseum 326
nanum 326
persicolor 326
Monacrosporium (M)
cionopagum 317
ellipsosporum 318
eudermatum 319
Monilinia fructigena see Sclerotinia
fructigena (A)
Monographella nivalis (M) 145,
146
Morchella (B) 23
Mortierella (Z) 23, 221, 222
Muciturbo (A) 186
Mucor (Z) 14, 23, 56, 97, 98, 104,
213, 228, 245
hiemalis 148
mucedo 74
recemosus 86, 192
rouxii 86
Mycena (B) 33
galopus 221
Myzocytium humicola (O) 317
Nectria haematococca (A) 292
Nematoctonus pachysporus – asexual
stage of Hohenbuhelia (B)
317
Nematophthora gynophila (O) 317,
320
Neocallimastix (C) 149, 150, 151
Neotyphodium (A) 133, 257, 298,
299
coenophialum 298
lolii 298
Neozygites fresenii (Z) 313

363

Neurospora (A) 23, 57, 62, 63, 67,
68, 72, 74, 75, 189
crassa 27, 29, 30, 49, 56, 58, 79,
80, 99, 132, 156–7, 158, 159,
161, 162, 166, 177–9, 190
discreta 178
intermedia 162
sitophila 30
tetrasperma 30, 168, 185, 186
Nomuraea rileyi (M) 310
Oedemansiella mucida (B) 347
Olpidium (C) 202
brassicae 18, 20, 203
radicale 203
Ophiostoma (A) 23, 170, 220, 293
novo-ulmi 7, 30, 85, 86, 87, 191,
193–4, 279
ulmi 7, 30, 100, 191, 193–4, 279,
294
Orbilia spp. (sexual stage of some
Dactylella, Arthrobotrys,
Monacrosporium spp.) 317
Orpinomyces (C) 149
Oudemansiella mucida (B) 347
Paecilomyces (M)
farinosus 310
fumosoroseus 316
varioti 111, 339
Pandora neoaphidis (Z) 26, 311, 313,
314
Papulaspora (M) 250
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis (A) 86,
323, 333, 355
Paraglomus spp. (G) 257
Paxillus involutus (B) 93, 94, 178,
188, 264
Peltigera canina (L) 269, 271
Peltula sp. (L) 272, 274, 275
Penicillium (M) 14, 39, 40, 167, 208,
229, 238
brevicaulis 144
camemberti 10
chrysogenum 12, 132, 133, 136,
143, 144
cyclopium 165
digitatum 154, 286
expansum 61, 100, 137, 141, 154,
285
griseofulvum 12, 13, 132, 133,
134, 348, 350
italicum 286
janczewskii 154
notatum 133, 136
patulum 133, 134
roqueforti 10, 141
rubrum 133, 136
verrucosum 153, 154
Peronospora (O) 204
Peronospora parasitica (O) 98, 293
Pesotum (A) 39, 40

364

SYSTEMATIC INDEX

Phaeolus schweinitzii (B) 35
Phakospora pachyrhizi (B) 92
Phanerochaeta chrysosporium (B) 13,
161, 222
Phialophora spp. (M) 39, 323
Phialophora (M) 40, 248
asteris 86
graminicola 229, 251, 252, 253
zeicola 285
Phlebiopsis gigantea (B; previously
Peniophora gigantea) 242–4
Phomopsis (A) 39, 40
Phycomyces (Z) 23, 108
Physarum (SM)
cinereum 44
polycephalum 44, 65
Physcia grisea (L) 271
Phytophthora (O) 43, 57, 58, 104,
111, 147, 161, 185, 195, 196,
198, 202, 298, 346
cactorum 41
capsici 14, 299
cinnamomi 17, 43, 97, 198, 279,
284, 299, 346
erythroseptica 98, 300
fragariae var. fragariae 34
fragariae var. rubi 340
infestans 7, 17, 41, 42, 43, 98, 99,
111, 160, 161, 204, 206, 279,
298, 300, 307
nicotianae 299
palmivora 197, 299
parasitica 201
ramorum 7, 17, 41, 43, 279, 299,
300–1
sojae 161, 200, 284, 307
Pichia (Y) 106
pastoris 13
Pilaira anomala (Z) 191, 192, 245
Pilobolus spp. (Z) 26, 27, 190, 191,
192
Piptocephalis (Z) 25, 26, 245
unispora 245
virginiana 56, 245
Piptoporus betulinus (B) 35
Piromyces (C) 149
Pisolithus (B) 180
microcarpus 181
tinctorius 188
Pithomyces chartarum (M) 133, 137,
140, 209
Plasmodiophora brassicae (P) 45, 46,
202, 339
Plasmopara viticola (O) 43, 98, 306,
343
Pleospora (A) 195, 230
Pleurotus ostreatus (B) 9, 11, 38, 108,
317
Pneumocystis 323, 335–7
carinii 8, 178, 324
jiroveci 8, 161, 324, 354
Podosphaera clandestina (A) 305

Podospora anserina (A) 30, 161–2
Polymyxa (P) 202
betae 203
graminis 45, 46, 203
Polyporus squamosus (B) 35
Poria placenta (B) 231
Psathyrella (B) 38
Pseudoperonospora humuli (O) 98, 99,
306
Psilocybe (B) 136
Puccinia (B)
graminis 33, 90, 91, 93, 120, 186,
206, 207, 209, 302–5
kraussianna 161
menthae 92, 302
recondita 90, 93
Pythium (O) 17, 41, 42, 43, 49, 57,
58, 103, 104, 111, 117, 145, 161,
168, 185, 195, 198, 199, 200,
202, 280, 346
acanthicum 248
aphanidermatum 50, 51, 75, 197
arrhenomanes 284
graminicola 221, 284, 339
mycoparasiticum 185, 250
oligandrum 41, 103, 118, 146,
147, 215, 222, 248, 249, 339
periplocum 24
sylvaticum 284
ultimum 240, 251, 281, 340
Rhizina undulata (A) 186
Rhizocarpon geographicum (L)
270
Rhizoctonia (B) 169, 221, 266,
349
cerealis 288
oryzae 90
solani 53, 63, 94, 167, 169, 240,
246, 247, 250, 280, 282, 287,
340, 345
Rhizomucor pusillus (Z) 27
Rhizophlyctis rosea (C) 17, 18, 20,
221
Rhizopus (Z) 14, 23, 104, 213, 286,
323
arrhizus 27, 81
nigricans 112, 128, 144
oligosporus 10
oryzae 178
sexualis 26
stolonifer 23
Rhodotorula (Y) 218
Ruminomyces (C) 149
Russula (B) 23, 34, 188
Saccharomyces cerevisiae (A) 5, 12,
13, 14, 23, 27, 30, 53, 54, 58,
64, 76, 77–8, 81, 103, 105–6,
111, 112, 117, 118, 148, 154,
158, 160, 161, 162, 168, 171,
173, 177, 328, 353

Saprolegnia (O) 41, 42, 43, 72, 75,
97, 118, 152, 161
diclina 43
ferax 72
Schizophyllum commune (B) 58, 71,
102, 107, 160, 161, 171, 230
Schizosaccharomyces (A) 55, 171
octosporus 27
pombe 14, 30, 77–8, 158, 161,
168, 177, 335
Sclerotinia (A)
borealis 144, 145
fructigena 100, 286
sclerotiorum 53, 93, 94, 147, 170,
287
Sclerotium cepivorum (A) 189–90, 215
Sclerotium rolfsii see Athelia rolfsii (B)
Scutellospora (G) 23, 257
Scytalidium thermophilum (M) 223,
225
Septoria (A)
lycopersici 172–3, 291
nodorum 74
Serpula lacrymans (B) 9, 95, 129–30,
230–1
Sordaria (A) 31, 160, 186, 190, 192,
204, 237
brevicollis 159
fimicola 112
macrospora 28
Sphaerobolus stellatus (B) 191, 192
Sphaerotheca (A)
mors-uvae 305
pannosa 305
Spongospora subterranea (P) 45, 202–3
Sporidesmium sclerotivorum (M) 120
Sporobolomyces roseus (B) 33, 53,
206, 218
Sporothrix spp. (M) 323
Sporothrix schenckii 86
Stachybotrys chartarum (M) 9, 137,
141, 146, 147, 220
Strobilurus tenacellus (B) 347
Stylopage spp. (Z) 317
Suillus (B)
grevillei 264
Sydowia polyspora (A; sexual stage of
Aureobasidium pullulans) 9, 13,
39, 117, 155, 156, 216, 218
Synchytrium endobioticum (C) 18
Talaromyces flavus (A) 247–8
Tapesia yallundae (A) 220, 289
Taphrina (A)
populina 30
Termitomyces spp. (B) 257, 278
Tetrachaetum (M) 184, 194
Tetracladium (M) 184, 194, 221
Thamnidium elegans (Z) 24, 25
Thanatephorus cucumeris (see
Rhizoctonia solani (B) ) 94, 282,
283

SYSTEMATIC INDEX

Thelephora terrestris (B) 264
Thermoascus aurantiacus (A) 223,
224, 225
Thermomucor (Z) 23
miehei 223
pusillus 25, 143, 144, 223
Thermomyces lanuginosus (M) 99,
100, 143, 144, 146, 222, 225,
253
Thielaviopsis basicola (M) 190
Tilletia (B) 23
caries (B) 207, 297, 339
Tolypocladium (M) 12, 13
Torulopsis (Y) 218
Tremella (B) 23
mesenterica 36
Trichoderma (M; some have a
Hypocrea sexual stage) 155, 167,
220–1, 229, 237, 238, 240, 241,
280
aureoviride 250
hamatum 240, 241
harzianum 240, 250, 339

reesei 117
virens 13, 133, 240, 348,
349
viride 63, 240
Trichophyton (M; some have an
Arthroderma (A) sexual stage)
323
equinum 326
mentagrophytes 326
rubrum 161, 178, 326
terrestre 326
tonsurans 326
verrucosum 326
Tuber spp. (A) 31, 264
Tulasnella 256
Typhula idahoensis (B) 144, 145
Uromyces (B)
anemones 297
appendiculatus 91–2
phaseoli 65, 186
viciae-fabae 148
Usnea spp. (L) 269

365

Ustilago (B)
maydis 58, 86, 173, 178, 297
nuda 297
Vanrija aquatica (A,Y) 194
Verticillium (M)
albo-atrum 190, 289, 294
biguttatum 246
chlamydosporium 317, 320
dahliae 40, 94, 247–8, 294
lecanii see Lecanicillium lecanii
Volvariella volvacea (B) 9, 34, 108
Wilcoxina (A) 258
Xanthoria parietina (L) 267, 268,
270, 273
Xylaria (A) 31
hypoxylon 232
polymorpha 232
Zalerion varium (M) 195, 221
Zygosaccharomyces rouxii (Y) 153, 154

General index

Page numbers in italics refer to figures or tables
abscisic acid 148
acervulus 39
acetyl-coenzyme A
as a central metabolite 123–6
glyoxylate cycle 128
isoprenoid pathway 136
polyketide pathway 133, 134
role in β-oxidation 127–8
N-acetylglucosamine
chitosomes 59–60
substrate for chitin synthesis 55,
67, 71, 131
UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 71
acrasid slime moulds 16, 41, 43
actin/F-actin 17, 49, 52, 62, 64, 70,
72, 73, 77–8, 97
aecia, aeciospores 304–5
aerobes – facultative/obligate 148
aerobic/anaerobic respiration 148,
149
aflatoxins 1, 9, 40, 122, 132, 133,
134, 137, 138–9
aging – mitochondrial role in 158,
161
AIDS 2, 7, 178, 322 et seq.
airborne spores/dispersal 190–1,
203–8
air-sampling devices 208–11
alamethicine 240
alcoholic drinks/ethanol 10, 12, 81,
96, 126
α-amylase 13, 14
alveolitis, acute allergic 211
amatoxins 136
α-amino adipic acid – lysine
biosynthesis 6, 131–2
6-aminopenicillanic acid 136

amphotericin B 351–2
ampicillin see antibiotics: penicillins
anamorphs 39
anaplerotic reactions 127
anastomosis
chestnut blight 175–6
hyphal fusions 52–3, 94–5, 162,
164, 165–7
Anderson spore sampler 209–11
aneuploidy 168
antheridiol 104
antheridium 41–2
antibiotics
β lactams 12–13
cephalosporins 12–13, 132
in commercial biocontrol 241,
349–50
in defense of territory 114–15
griseofulvin 350
and human mycoses 350–2
from insect-pathogenic fungi 40
in Japanese agriculture 348–9
patulin 134
penicillins 133, 136–7
in plant disease control 347–8
polyene macrolides 326, 351–2
of Trichoderma spp. 13, 237–41
antifungal agents – cellular targets
342–7
apex, hyphal 48–52
aphids 218, 310, 312, 313, 314,
315, 316
apical growth 67–73
apical vesicle cluster see
Spitzenkorper
apothecium 27, 28, 268, 269, 270,
273

appressorium 88, 89, 90–2, 311–12
aquatic fungi
appendaged spores 194–5
Chytridiomycota 17–21
marine fungi 194–5
tetraradiate spores of 184
rumen chytrids 149–51
zoospores 195–8, 199–203
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi 4,
21–3, 34, 228, 257–61
archiascomycetes 30
arthrospores 55
ascomycetous yeasts on leaves 218
Ascomycota 27–31, 50, 138,
159–60
ascospores 28, 29, 30, 195
ascus 28, 29, 30
chromosome numbers 58, 161
mating systems 105–6
mating-type genes 105–6
septa 57
as soft-rot fungi of wood 229–30
spore dormancy/germination 103,
185–6, 188–90
wall components 55
as white-rot fungi of wood 232
aspergilloma 145
ATP, ATPase – role in fungal
nutrition 113–14
autolysis 48–9, 80, 225
auxotrophs 165, 166
avenacin/avenacinase 172, 173
aviation kerosene, fungal growth in
111, 339
avirulence genes of biotrophic
pathogens 302, 307
axoneme (of flagellum) 195

GENERAL INDEX

azole drugs for human therapy
ketoconazole 352
fluconazole 352
itraconazole 352
ravuconazole 353
voriconazole 353
bacteria – ice-nucleating 252–3
clamp connections 33
dolipore septum 31
fossil evidence 21
basidiocarps – fruitbodies, diversity
34–9
basidiomycetous yeasts 218
Basidiomycota 16, 31–9
basidiospores 31, 32
basidium 31, 32
batch culture 80–1
beauvericin 133, 313
beetles, bark 191
benzimidazole fungicides 344–5
biological control
of frost damage 252
of fruit-rot fungi 241, 252–3
of insects 309–16
of nematodes 317–21
of plant pathogens 246–52
role of pseudomonads 238–9
biotin
as co-factor in carboxylations
127
required as a nutrient 111
biotrophic mycoparasites 244–7
biotrophic plant pathogens 6, 20,
43, 93, 120, 280, 302–7
defined 280
blasticidin-S 348–9
blastospores 312
blue light perception in Neurospora
156–7
boundary layer – spore liberation
204
branching – hyphal 53
bromatia 277
brown-rot fungi, of wood 35,
230–1
Burkard spore sampler 209
cDNA (complementary DNA) 87,
107, 164, 171–2, 175–6, 179
calcium and calcium signalling 60,
72–3, 87, 201–2
calcium interaction with pectic
compounds 287
carbohydrates typical of fungi
128–31
arabitol 6, 129, 155
erythritol 155
glycogen 5–6, 128
mannitol 5–6, 128–9, 155
ribitol 129
trehalose 5–6, 128–9, 155

carbon dioxide and fungal growth
152
carbon : nitrogen ratio in
decomposition 224–6, 253–4
carbon substrates 110–12
β-carotene/carotenoids 103, 104,
132, 156–7, 190–1, 218
catabolite repression 107
cell cycle
of budding yeasts 76–8
cell division cycle (CDC) genes
77–8
duplication cycle of Basidiobolus
78
of fission yeasts 77–8
of mycelial fungi 78–9
cellulase enzyme complex 116–17
cellulolytic fungi 213, 217, 218,
220–2, 223–4
cellulose chemistry 115–16
cerato-ulmin 294
chemostat 81
chemotaxis of zoospores
Chytridiomycota 17–19
dictyostelium 43–4
Oomycota 199–202
plasmodiophora 45–6
rumen chytrids 149
chemotropism of hyphae 53
chestnut blight 174–6
chiasma formation 159–60
chitin
structure 131
synthesis 131
chitin synthase 49, 58, 59, 69–71,
108, 131
chitinase 108
chitosan 13, 131, 338
chitosomes 59–60
chlamydospores 48, 51, 294
choanoflagellates 4
chromosome numbers 161
Chytridiomycota 17–21
ciclosporins 1, 12–13
citric acid production 12, 122, 128,
161
cleistothecium 28
coccidioidomycosis 323, 330–1
colchicine 6
commensalism 237, 253–4
compatible solutes 154–5
competitive niche exclusion 243,
251–3
cDNA – complementary DNA
175
composts 223–6, 253–4
conidia 30, 39
conidiophore 39
contact-sensing
non-topographical 90
topographical 90–3, 311
coprophilous fungi 190–1, 192

367

coremium 39–40
crater disease of wheat 282–3
culture
batch 80–1
continuous 81–3
media 110–13
cutinase 88, 289
cyclic AMP 87
cycloheximide 347
cysteine – involved in hyphal
tropisms 75–6
cysts, zoospore 185, 195–202
cytochalasins 72
cytochrome P-450 – role in sterol
synthesis inhibitors 345
cytosine permease – role as an
antimycotic agent 353
cytoskeleton, components of 62–6
damping-off diseases 280 –1
decline and replant diseases 283–4
decomposer fungi – behavioral
groups 217–22
defense of territory 115
depolymerase enzymes 5, 110, 113,
114–17
dermatophytes (“ringworm fungi”)
322–3, 324–7
destruxins 133, 312–13
deuteromycota 39
diagnostic probes 170
diaminopimelic acid – lysine
biosynthesis 6, 131–2
diauxic growth curve 112
dikaryon 31–3
dilution rate
dimorphism – mould-yeast 5, 85–8
of Blastomyces 332
of Candida 328–9
of Histoplasma 332
of Paracoccidioides 333
diploidization – parasexual cycle
168
diploidy
in Chytridiomycota 18
in Zygomycota 24
dispersal of spores
airborne 190–1
insect-vectored 191–4, 257,
277–8
water-dispersed 194–5
zoospores 195–202
DNA
chromosomal 160–1
mitochondrial 161–2
plasmids and transposons 162
viral elements and double-stranded
RNA 162–4
dormancy of spores
constitutive 185–6
of ectomycorrhizal fungi 186–8
exogenously imposed 188–90

368

GENERAL INDEX

downy mildew fungi 293, 302,
306–7
dsRNA and chestnut blight 175–6
dry rot 95, 129–30, 230–1
dung, herbivore 190–2
Dutch elm disease 170, 191–4
dynein 63
echinocandins 342, 354
economic coefficient (of culture
biomass) 120
electric fields around hyphae
113–14
electron transport chain 125
elicitors of plant defense 291–3
Embden-Meyerhof pathway 122
et seq.
endocytosis and vesicle trafficking
60–2
endophytic fungi 7, 217, 218, 257,
296, 298–9, 302, 316
clavicipitaceous, producing toxins
ergovaline 298
lolitrem B 298
peramine 298
energy
generation 122–6
storage/translocated compounds
see arabitol, erythritol, mannitol,
glycogen, trehalose
environmental conditions for growth
142–57
enzymes
of insect pathogens 181
of plant pathogens 282, 284–7,
288–9
of saprotrophs 220–2
secretion 71–2, 114–15
wall-bound 115
wall-lytic 94, 107
in wood decay 229–35
ergosterol 6, 41, 58, 178, 215, 335,
342, 345, 351, 352–3
ergot/ergot alkaloids 7, 13, 133,
137–8
ethanol 96
exponential growth phase 80
expressed sequence tags (ESTs) 80–1
facial eczema 140
fairy ring fungi 221–2
farmer’s lung disease 208
fatty acids: β-oxidation 126
fermentation – biochemical process,
defined 126
filasomes 52
flagella see zoosporic fungi
fluorescent pseudomonads – control
of plant pathogens 238–9
fluorescent vital dyes (fluorochromes)
215–16
food spoilage 338

foods and flavorings 9–11
Quorn mycoprotein 81–3
foreign gene products see
heterologous gene products
form-genus 39
fossil fungi 3, 4, 21–3
fruit-rot fungi 88, 90, 102, 284–6
fumaric acid 128
fungal growth – mechanisms 67–73
et seq.
fungal viruses and viral genes
162–4
fungi
characteristic features 4–6
control of fungi 338–54
fungal interactions 240–54
fungicides
inorganic – copper, mercury, sulfur
343
organic (protectant) 344
systemic 344–7
fungistasis (mycostasis) 188–90
furoviruses (fungally transmitted
rod-shaped) 202–3
fusaric acid 294
fusicoccin 148
fusidic acid 294
galactosidase (β-) 112
galvanotropism 75
gametangium
of Chytridiomycota 18, 21
of Zygomycota 23, 24, 26
gari 10
gel electrophoresis 87, 286
gene-for-gene relationship 296–7,
302, 307
genes
differentiation-related 107
mating-type 103–6
targeted disruption 103, 171, 173,
289, 292
genomes of fungi
chromosomal genome size 161
fungal genome initiative 177–9
genome defense mechanisms
179
mitochondrial genome size 161
germ pore, of uredospores 73
germ-tube 51, 65, 73
gibberellins 12
gliotoxin 240
gliovirin 240
Glomeromycota 16, 21–3
glucan synthase 50, 58, 69–71
glucanase (β-1,3) – wall lytic enzyme
71
glucans
of fungal walls 55–6, 70–2
synthase 71
glucobrassicin/glucosinolase 46–7
gluconeogenesis 127

glucose oxidase 247–8
β-glucosidase (cellobiase) 116
glyoxylate cycle 127–8
golgi apparatus 59
gongylidia 277
gossypol 291
Gramineae (grasses) – root cortical
death 226–8
griseofulvin 342, 348, 350
growth
apical 4, 5, 41, 48–52, 63–5,
67–73
colony 51–3, 78–9
dimorphism 85–7
environmental influences on
142–57
intercalary 108
kinetics 80–1
media 110–13
pre-penetration, of plant
pathogens 90–3
specific growth rate 80–3
yeast 53–5, 76–8
haploidy – typical of most true fungi
6, 164
Hartig net, of ectomycorrhizas 264
haustorium
of biotrophic mycoparasites 25,
245
of lichens 271–2
of plant pathogens 302–6
hemibiotroph 280, 300
hemicellulose 213, 217, 218, 220,
223, 229, 231
hepatitis B vaccine 2, 171
heterologous gene products 2, 171,
235, 286
heterothallism
(outcrossing)/homothallism 24,
27, 30, 32
histoplasmosis 323, 332
homokaryons/heterokaryons 164–6
human disease 7–8, 322–37
aspergillosis 329–30
blastomycosis 332–3
candidosis 327–9
coccidioidomycosis 330–2
cryptococcosis 333–5
dermatophycosis 322–7
histoplasmosis 332
paracoccidioidomycosis 333
pneumonitis 335–7
zygomycosis 27
humidity, relative 155
hydrogen ion concentration (pH)
146–8
hydrogenosome 149–51
hydrophobins 102–3, 269
cerato-ulmin 294
hypersensitive response (to infection)
288–9

GENERAL INDEX

hyphae
anastomosis 51–3
apex 48–52 et seq., 67–73
branching 53
fiber hyphae 95–6
hyphal growth unit 79
melanized 88–90, 93–4, 96–7,
155
tropisms 74–6, 245–6
vessel hyphae 95–6
hyphal interference (Basidiomycota)
241–4
hyphomycetes 156
hyphopodia 88–9
hypovirulence 174–6
hypovirus group (hypoviridae) 164
ice-minus mutants – control of frost
damage 252–3
idiomorphs – mating of Ascomycota,
Basidiomycota 106
impaction of spores 207
infection structures
of insect parasites 312
of plant parasites 90–3
insect-dispersed fungi 191–4
insect-pathogenic fungi 309–16
in commercial biocontrol 314–16
host range 313
infection cycle 311–13
interactions of fungi 237–54
intercalary growth 108
introns 4, 171, 179
invertase 112
iron availability: siderophores 119
isoprenoid pathway 133–6
itaconic acid 12
Jasmonic acid – plant defense
signalling 293
K-selected behavior 213–14
karyogamy 31
kasugamycin 342–3, 348–9
keratin – fungal growth on 323–6
killer strains (of yeasts) 164, 173
kinesin 63
kingdoms 16–17
“La France” disease of mushrooms
162
laccase 175, 233
lactic acid 126
lactose 112
Lagenidales 43
Leptomitales 43
lichens 257, 267–73
life-history strategies 213–14
light – effects on fungi 155–7
lignin
breakdown 231–5
structure 233

lignin-degrading fungi 221–2
lignin peroxidase 235
lignocellulose 213, 221–2, 224, 235
lipids – as energy sources 113
lysergic acid 13
lysine biosynthesis 6, 132
maize – stalk/root rot 284–5
manganese peroxidase 233
mannans 31, 56, 77
mannoproteins 70–1
MAT gene locus 105–6
mating compatibility systems 103–6
mating pheromones 106
mating-type genes in Candida
328–9
mating-type switching in
Ascomycota 105–6
media for fungal culture 110–11
meiosis
Ascomycota 27–9
Basidiomycota 31
Chytridiomycota 18
Zygomycota 24
melanin 24, 55, 88–90, 93–4, 95–7,
132, 155–6, 233–5, 247, 324,
335
melanin-biosynthesis inhibitors
343, 346–7
merosporangium 25–6, 245
mesophilic fungi 143
messenger RNA (mRNA) gel
electrophoresis 87
metabolism/metabolites 122 et seq.
co-ordination of 126–8
energy-yielding pathways 124–6
mobilizable and energy-storage
compounds 128–31
secondary metabolism 132–41
methane/methanol, as growth
substrate 111
mevalonic acid (isoprenoid pathway)
134–5
microcycle sporulation 74
microfilaments, microtubules
in apical growth 62–6
microtubule-organizing center
(spindle-pole body) 58
microtubules of yeast 65
polymerization 65
mitochondria
codon usage UGA 6
plate/disk-like cisternae 6
tubular cisternae 6
ultrastructure and distribution
50–2, 61–2
molecular tools for fungal population
structure
AFLP – amplified fragment length
polymorphisms 216
FISH – fluorescence in-situ
hybridization 216

369

fluorescent AFLP
oligonucleotide probes 216
pectic zymograms 169–70
RAPD – random amplified
polymorphic DNA 170
RFLPs – restriction fragment length
polymorphisms 170
ribosomal RNA genes –
phylogenetic trees 170–1
vegetative compatibility barriers
166–7, 175–6
monokaryon 31
motor proteins, and cytoskeleton
65
Mucorales 23
multivesicular bodies 65
muscarine 133
mushrooms 9–11, 31, 32, 34, 107–8
mutualism 237
mycangia 277
mycelial cords 95–6
mycoinsecticides 316
mycolaminarins 129
mycoparasites
biotrophic 244–7
necrotrophic 247–51
mycorrhizal successions 186–8
mycorrhizas
arbuscular 4, 17, 21–4, 33–4, 76,
229, 257–62, 266
arbutoid 258
ectendomycorrhizas 258
ectotrophic 34, 94, 95, 96, 130,
261–5
ericoid 258, 265–6
monotropoid 258, 267
orchid 258, 266–7
mycoses see human disease
mycotoxins 137–41
myosin 63–4
myxamoebae 48
myxomycota 16, 44–5
NAD+/ NADP+ 124–5
near-ultraviolet light (NUV) 101,
155
necrotrophic plant pathogens
280–92
defense mechanisms 289–92
host ranges 280 et seq.
inoculum dose 288–9
nematodes
egg-parasites 320–1
endoparasites 319–20
nematode-trapping fungi 317–20
nematophagous fungi 317
nikkomycin 348
nitrogen (nitrate, ammonium, etc.)
C : N ratio in decomposition
224–6, 253–4
as a nutrient 111, 118
role in ectomycorrhizal fungi 264

370

GENERAL INDEX

nuclear division 78, 159–60
nuclear ratio in heterokaryons
165–6
nuclei of fungi 58, 78
chromosome counts 161
genome size 161
nutrients
adaptations for nutrient capture
79–80, 113–15
nutrient requirements 110 et seq.
translocation in mycelial cords,
rhizomorphs 94–7
ochratoxins 133, 137
oligotrophy 120
oogoniol 104
oogonium 41–2
Oomycota 16, 41–3
oospore 41–2
organic acid production 12, 128
osmotic potential see water
potential
oxalic acid – role in plant disease
147, 282, 287
oxidative burst in plant defense 290
oxygen
requirements for fungal growth
148–52
rhizomorph growth 94–7
terminal electron acceptor 125
Panama disease of bananas 295–6
papillae-invasion of plant walls
289–90
paramorphogens 80–1
parasexuality/parasexual cycle
167–8
parenthosomes 57
patulin 133–4
pectin/pectic enzymes 169, 286–7
penicillins 1, 132, 133, 136–7, 350
pentose-phosphate pathway 124
perforating organs of dermatophytes
325
peripheral growth zone of a colony
68
perithecium 27–9
pH (hydrogen ion concentration)
cytosolic 147
effects on fungi 146–8
growth-orientation towards
stomata 148
phalloin 65
phallotoxins 136
phenolic compounds 285, 290, 291,
293–6
phenoloxidase 335
phenylalanine ammonia lyase 291
pheromones 103–6
phialide 40
phosphate availability 7, 258–60,
275

phototropism 190–2
phyllosphere 218–19
phylogenetic tree, universal 2–4
phytoalexins/phytoanticipins 290–2
Phytophthora diseases 298–302
pimaricin 351
pine root rot 242–4
pisatin 291
plasmids 137, 162
plasmodiophorids 45–7
plasmodium 44
plasmogamy 31
polyene antibiotics 348, 351–2
polygalacturonase 285–6
polyketide pathway 133–4
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
151
polyols (polyhydric alcohols) 6, 129
polyoxins 348–9
population structure see molecular
tools
potato (late) blight 7, 17, 41–3,
98–9, 206, 279, 299–300, 339
see also Phytophthora infestans
powdery mildews 6, 30, 90, 120,
131, 204, 206, 246–7, 302,
305–6
prohormones of zygomycota 104–5
proteins
gel electrophoresis 87, 286
heterologous 2, 171, 235, 286
integral membrane 58
wall 55–6
protists 4
protoplasts 18, 45
pseudothecium 27
psilocybin 136
psychrophiles 143–5
pullulan 13
pycnidium 39
pyoluteorin 348
pyrophilous (fire-loving) fungi 186
pyrrolnitrin 348
pyruvate/pyruvic acid 122–5
Quorn mycoprotein 11, 81–3
quorum sensing 239
r-selected behavior 213
RAPD 170
reactive oxygen – hydrogen peroxide;
hydroxyl radical
superoxide 151–2, 290
recalcitrant polymers, degradation
217, 221–2
replant and decline diseases 283–4
resistance, plant disease
hypersensitive response 288
induced systemic resistance (ISR)
293
pre-formed resistance factors
288–9, 291

systemic acquired resistance (SAR)
293
respiration – biochemical process,
defined 126
aerobic 125
anaerobic 126
respiratory tract (spores in) 145,
208–211, 329 et seq.
restriction enzymes 170
restriction fragment length
polymorphisms (RFLP) 170
reverse transcriptase 162, 180
rhamnolipids 198–9
rhizoids 17, 20
rhizomorphs 96–7
rhizosphere 220, 293
rhodamine 65
ribitol 129
ribosomal RNA gene processing
170–1
rishitin 291
RNA
double-stranded (dsRNA) 164,
171, 173–6
messenger 161
roots
cortical cell death 228
fungal decomposers of 227–9
rhizodeposition 226–8
take-all disease 172–3
rotorod spore sampler 208–9
Rubner coefficient 120
rubratoxins 133, 136
ruderal behavior 213
rumen organisms – chytrids,
protozoa 149–51
rust fungi 8, 31, 33, 65, 73, 90–3,
120, 131, 148, 186, 206, 302–5,
345
salicylic acid – plant defense
signalling 293
saponins 172–3
Saprolegniales 41
saprotrophs 213 et seq.
sclerotia 93–4, 120, 137–8, 145,
189–90, 246, 281–2
seed rots, seedling pathogens 280–3
senescence phenotype 161–2
septa/septum 29, 30, 32, 49, 57
dolipore septum 57
shikimic acid pathway 133, 136
siderophores – iron-chelating 119
signal transduction 58, 60, 72–3,
87
sirenin 103–4
slime moulds
acrasid slime moulds 17
dictyostelid slime moulds 17,
43–4
myxomycota (plasmodial slime
moulds) 17, 44–5

GENERAL INDEX

smut fungi (ustilaginomycetes) 31,
33, 86, 173, 207, 297
snow moulds 145
soils – disease-suppressive/conducive
fusarium wilt 296
role of fluorescent pseudomonads
238–9
role of montmorillonite clays
294–5
role of nutrient competition
251–3
take-all fungus 238–9
solarization, of soil 341
specific growth rate, of a culture 80
spermatium 29
spherules 330–1
spitzenkorper 50, 52, 62–5, 88, 90–1
splash dispersal of spores 24, 88,
203–5
sporangioles 24
sporangiophores 24–5
sporangiospores 24
sporangium 24, 26, 191–2
spores
aquatic 194–5
asexual 97–102
Chytridiomycota 17–21
marine fungi 194–5
Oomycota 185
rumen chytrids 149–51
sexual 103–6
tetraradiate 184
zoospores 195–8, 199–203
spore germination
host-specific triggering 189
zoospore cysts 18–19, 196–202
sporidesmin 133, 140
stalk-rot pathogens 284–5
stationary phase, of culture 68
sterols 6, 134–6, 148, 172
sterol synthesis inhibitors 343, 345
Stoke’s law 206–7
stomata – infection through 87–93,
98–9, 147–8
straminipila 16, 41
stress-tolerance 214
stunting diseases of cereals 281–3
successions of fungi
composts 223–6
decaying roots 226–9
decomposer fungi 216–22
ectomycorrhizas 186–8
herbivore dung 192
sugar alcohols see polyols
superoxide dismutase 151
symbiosis 257–78

symport proteins 113–14
synnema 39
take-all fungus see also soils
control by pseudomonads 252
in golf turf – control by
Phialophora 251–3
talaron 247
targeted gene disruption 103, 171,
173, 289, 292
taxol 62
teleomorph 39
teliospores 297
tempeh 10
temperature
in composts 223–4
and dimorphism 85–6
and fungal growth 142–6
thermophiles 143–4
α-tomatine/tomatinase 172–3
transamination 118
translocating organs 94–7
transposons 162
trehalose 128–9
tricarboxylic acid cycle 122–5
trichoderma – antibiotics 240–1
trichoderma – as a mycoparasite
250
trichogyne 27
trichothecenes 133, 136
trisporic acids 25
tropisms
hyphal tropisms 75–6
spore germination 74–5
tubulins – α, β 62–3
Ty elements 163
tyloses 293–4
ultrastructure, fungal 48–66
ultraviolet/near-UV irradiation
155–7
uredospores 302
vacuoles
branched tubular 50, 52, 60–1
water-expulsion, of zoospores
196–7
validamycin A 349
vascular wilt diseases 293–6
vegetative compatibility groups 175
vesicles
apical vesicle cluster 48–52
of arbuscular mycorrhizas 259
in fungal wall synthesis 69–72
peripheral, of zoospores 196–8
vesicle-supply center 87

371

viruses and virus-like particles (VLPs)
162–4
viruses – vectored by fungi 202–3
VIVID (blue light perception) 157
walls, hyphal
architecture 56
components 55–7
cross-linking of polymers 71
dimorphic fungi 86–7
lytic enzymes 71
wall growth 69–73
walls, yeast see yeasts
water potential and fungal growth
152–5
white-rot fungi 231–5
white rot of onions 189
wind dispersal of spores 203–8
wood – as a substrate for fungi
229
wood decay
bluestain fungi 220
brown-rot fungi 230–1
lignin structure 233
sapstain fungi 220
soft-rot fungi 229–30
white-rot fungi 231–5
wood wasps 277
Woronin bodies 50, 57
wyerone acid 291
yeasts
actin 78
budding 76, 77
cell cycle 76, 77
cell division cycle genes 78
fission 14, 27, 55, 77
killer strains 164, 173
septins 78
zoospores
calcium-mediated encystment and
germination 201
Chytridiomycota 17–21
Oomycota 41–3
“homing and docking” behavior
199–202
plasmodiophorids 45–7
swimming behavior, chemotaxis,
electrotaxis 199
ultrastructure 196–8
as vectors of plant viruses
202–3
zygophores 24
zygospores 24
zymograms 169–70

