The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

The History of Our Tribe: Hominini
Barbara Helm Welker
Illustrations by Keenan Taylor

Open SUNY Textbooks

The History of Our Tribe: Hominini by Barbara Helm Welker is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

© 2017 Barbara Helm Welker
Illustrations as marked © 2017 Keenan Taylor
ISBN: 978-1-942341-40-6 ebook
978-1-942341-41-3 print
This publication was made possible by a SUNY Innovative Instruction Technology Grant (IITG). IITG is a competitive
grants program open to SUNY faculty and support staff across all disciplines. IITG encourages development of
innovations that meet the Power of SUNY’s transformative vision.
Published by Open SUNY Textbooks
Milne Library
State University of New York at Geneseo
Geneseo, NY 14454
This book was produced with Pressbooks (https://pressbooks.com) and rendered with Prince.

Contents

About the Book

vii

Reviewer's Notes

viii

Kristi L. Lewton
Acknowledgements

ix

Introduction

x

Part I: An Introduction to Paleoanthropology
1. Paleoanthropology

3

2. Primate Classification

12

3. Primate Evolution

23

4. Primate Social Organization

31

5. What is a Hominin

39

Part II: Miocene Epoch
6. Sahelanthropus tchadensis

59

7. Orrorin tugenensis

63

8. Ardipithecus ramidus, Ardipithecus kadabba

66

Part III: Pliocene Epoch
9. Gracile Australopiths

79

10. Australopithecus anamensis

81

11. Australopithecus afarensis

85

12. Australopithecus bahrelghazali

94

13. Kenyanthropus platyops

96

14. Australopithecus prometheus or africanus

99

15. Australopithecus africanus

102

Part IV: Pleistocene Epoch
16. Paranthropines

117

17. Australopithecus/Paranthropus aethiopicus

118

18. Paranthropus boisei

124

19. Paranthropus robustus

131

20. Australopithecus garhi

134

21. Australopithecus sediba

136

22. Genus Homo

143

23. Homo habilis

144

24. Homo rudolfensis

153

25. Homo species indeterminate

156

26. Homo naledi

157

27. The "erectus Grade"

163

28. Homo ergaster

165

29. Homo erectus

173

30. Homo georgicus

179

31. Homo antecessor

184

32. Homo floresiensis

189

33. Homo heidelbergensis

194

34. The Denisovans

204

35. Homo neanderthalensis

208

36. Homo sapiens

221

Postscript

249

Bibliography

250

About the Author

255

About Open SUNY Textbooks

256

About the Book
Where did we come from? What were our ancestors like? Why do we differ from other animals? How do scientists trace and construct our evolutionary history? The History of Our Tribe: Hominini provides answers
to these questions and more. The book explores the field of paleoanthropology past and present. Beginning
over 65 million years ago, Welker traces the evolution of our species, the environments and selective forces
that shaped our ancestors, their physical and cultural adaptations, and the people and places involved with
their discovery and study. It is designed as a textbook for a course on Human Evolution but can also serve
as an introductory text for relevant sections of courses in Biological or General Anthropology or general
interest. It is both a comprehensive technical reference for relevant terms, theories, methods, and species
and an overview of the people, places, and discoveries that have imbued paleoanthropology with such fascination, romance, and mystery.

vii

Reviewer's Notes
KRISTI L. LEWTON

Barbara Welker’s History of Our Tribe: Hominini fills an important gap in current mid-level undergraduate
human evolution texts. It is the only book of its kind to offer both an introduction to and a concise synopsis
of human evolution broadly, including paleoanthropological methods (dating, classification, etc), morphology and behavior of extant and extinct primates, and encyclopedic entries on all known species of human
ancestors. The book uses images from open access internet sources, as well as original drawings. In addition, links to useful websites where more information can be sought are included throughout the text.
The general layout and organization of the text are intuitive and the sequence of topics follows a logical
progression that would nicely suit a typical undergraduate human evolution course. Background topics are
introduced and explained as needed in a concise format that does not distract from the main themes and
emphases of the text.
One very useful feature of this text is the complete, encyclopedic entries for each fossil hominin species.
The entries for each species follow the same layout, starting first with the geologic dates associated with
the taxon and important fossil sites and discoverers, followed by phylogeny, discovery and geographic
range, physical characteristics, and environment and way of life. Each species entry includes a summarized
list of the primitive and derived traits for that taxon, which will prove to be enormously helpful for students.
Dr. Kristi L. Lewton is an evolutionary anatomist and biological anthropologist. Dr. Lewton received her Ph.D.
in anthropology from Arizona State University, conducted postdoctoral research at Harvard University, and is
currently an Assistant Professor at Boston University. Dr. Lewton’s research focuses on the evolution of primate locomotor systems, the functional anatomy of the pelvis, and reconstruction of locomotor behavior in
fossil species.

viii

Acknowledgements
The proposal for this book was chosen by the Open SUNY Textbook program in March 2014. The book
represents nine months of writing and research. Three students helped me immensely during the project.
Tyler Blank spent an entire semester researching new discoveries and editing and indexing the manuscript.
Keenan Taylor spent a semester researching relevant ecology and anatomy in order to produce his beautiful
illustrations that greatly enrich the book. Finally, Blain Shinkle had the daunting task of bringing order to the
references that I cited. Many thanks to the external reviewer, Dr. Kristi Lewton, a biological anthropologist
and evolutionary anatomist at Boston University. She expertly edited the manuscript and greatly improved
it. Many times I was so caught up in thinking and writing that I neglected grammar and forgot the reader;
Kristi consistently and gracefully put me back on track.

ix

Introduction
Where did we come from? What were our ancestors like? Why do we differ from other animals? How do
scientists trace and construct our evolutionary history? I have attempted to answer those questions and
more.
The title of this book is a bit tongue-in-cheek. Primate taxonomy has changed immensely in recent years,
and while the changes make the subject more difficult to master, the classification of great apes is much
improved. Like it or not, we are great apes. We used to have our own family, Hominidae, as distinct from
the other great apes, making us the hominids. All great apes are now hominids. At the level of the subfamily,
the Asian great ape (the orangutan) splits off, leaving us and our fellow African great apes in the subfamily
Homininae. We are hominines. The gorillas then come out at the tribal level (Gorillini), leaving humans and
possibly chimps, depending on who is doing the lumping or splitting, as members of the tribe Hominini. We
are hominins. When we refer to hominins, we mean humans and our extinct bipedal relatives. Of course,
the title likely first conjures a cultural aspect of human social organization, that is, the tribe, because most
people are not familiar with new and improved human taxonomy.
That brings up my sense of humor. I am a naturally silly person, and I hope my nonsense will not be offputting to the reader.
I wrote this book to fill a perceived gap between basic texts in physical anthropology and advanced books
that cover paleoanthropology and fossil hominins in great detail. I designed it with my 200-level Human
Evolution course in mind. I wanted more than is available in an introductory text without overwhelming
students with the jargon, complex anatomy, numerous fossil sites, etc. of an advanced text. I also tried to
avoid the general tedium of textbooks, but I am not sure if I succeeded. The book can also serve as a supplemental text (since it’s free!) for any course that covers aspects of human evolution, such as Introduction
to Anthropology, Introduction to Physical Anthropology, Human Ecology, Old World Prehistory, etc.
After presenting an overview of the discipline of paleoanthropology, I introduce nonhuman primates so as
to show students where we fit and what we can learn from their ecology and behavior. I trace the evolutionary history of the primates, with a special emphasis on the ancestry of the hominins. An overview of
human and hominin anatomy is presented so that students can understand how bodies changed over time
as hominins came down from the trees, moved out of the forests, and began their globe-trotting adventures. The remainder of the book is dedicated to all of the extinct hominin species as well as the earliest
members of our own species, Homo sapiens.
The hominins are organized chronologically, and this book includes the following information where available: (1) brief introduction; (2) phylogeny or evolutionary history; (3) discovery and geographic range
wherein paleoanthropologists, sites, and famous discoveries are covered; (4) physical characteristics; and
(5) environment and way of life, including relevant aspects of behavior and culture. I have tried to keep the
hominin sections uniform and encyclopedic in nature so that students can quickly find what they need. Student aids and additional references are included.
And now, a little about why the crazy monkey lady (as students are wont to refer to me) wrote a book on
human evolution. I am an anthropologist, physical anthropologist, anatomist, primatologist, and behavioral
ecologist. I have thus been trained in both animal and human behavior, from a cultural and biological perspective. I have taught comparative primate and human anatomy. I have been teaching General Anthropology, Physical Anthropology, Human Evolution, Human Ecology, Human Osteology (skeletal anatomy), and
primate courses for 18 years. I have approached the topic of human evolution from the perspective of my
training and experience. Thus I have covered what I learned about the various species, in terms of fossils, paleoanthropologists, sites, anatomy, and cultural remains; I have also focused where possible on their
ecology and environment, the adaptive significance of their morphology and behavior, and their behavioral
ecology and socioecology, such as social organization, mating systems, male and female strategies, cogni-

x

tion and abilities, etc. My goal was to create a more holistic and enjoyable textbook by bringing the species
to life. I have learned from the paleoanthropologists and strived to understand past species from my own
perspective, founded in comparative primate anatomy, ecology, and behavior. My hope is that students will
gain both an evolutionary perspective and a more synthetic understanding of hominins and themselves.
I hope readers will enjoy and benefit from the book. I have tried to keep it interesting, accessible, and uniformly organized. In proposing to write an open textbook, I wanted to provide students with a useful reference at no cost. While I think of some textbooks as expensive sleeping aids, at least mine is free!

xi

PART I: AN INTRODUCTION TO
PALEOANTHROPOLOGY

1

1. Paleoanthropology

Figure 1.1 Human evolution. “Human Evolution Icon” by Magnetic Hyena is licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0.

WHAT IS PALEOANTHROPOLOGY?
Paleoanthropology, a subdiscipline of anthropology, is the study of extinct primates. While the majority of
researchers doing this kind of work are anthropologists, paleontologists (within the discipline of geology)
may also study fossil primates. The primary method used by paleoanthropologists is the analysis of fossil
remains. However, they increasingly rely on other scientific disciplines to gain a better understanding of
the environmental forces that played a role in our evolution, as well as the formation of the fossil record. For
example, geologists identify processes of sedimentation and fossilization, and date fossils and their associated sediments using a variety of techniques (see DATING TECHNIQUES below). A variety of disciplines
are involved in helping to reconstruct ancient environments and biological communities. Paleontologists
identify ancient floral and faunal fossils. Palynologists analyze particles in ocean and lake cores, as well as
pollen in terrestrial sediments (see Figure 1.2), to determine the predominant flora in a given area at a particular time. Taphonomists help determine how fossil assemblages were formed.

3

In the 1920s, Raymond Dart proposed that early hominins (bipedal primates, like ourselves) found in South
African caves had inhabited those caves. In addition, he interpreted puncture wounds found in some of the
skulls as evidence that those hominins made and used weapons for hunting and male-male aggression. The
taphonomist C. K. Brain argued in more recent times that either hominins fell through cracks into subterranean caves after having been cached in trees by leopards, or their bones were dragged in by rodents, such
as porcupines, for gnawing. We now realize that while those early members of our tribe likely used simple
tools, they were not big-game hunters or warmongers (see Chapter 15 for more information).

Figure 1.2 Pollen grains under scanning electron microscope. “Misc pollen
colorized” by Dartmouth Electron Microscope Facility, Dartmouth College is in the
public domain.

HISTORY OF THE DISCIPLINE
While paleoanthropology, as a formally recognized science, is fairly recent, questions and beliefs related to
our origins extend back to the earliest members of our species and possibly even earlier. All modern humans
living in traditional (e.g., hunter-gatherer bands, tribes, or chiefdoms) or state-level societies have a set of
beliefs associated with their origins. However, any ideas that fall outside the realm of science are part of a
culture’s religion and are termed creation myths.
The most influential fields to have contributed to the science of paleoanthropology are geology, biology,
and archaeology. Geologists (even those who were not recognized as such, e.g., Charles Darwin) are primarily responsible for the realizations that (1) the earth is ancient, and it formed via natural processes; (2)
the earth was originally covered with water, and life began in that “primordial sea”; (3) life on earth originated with simple forms, with some descendent species becoming more complex over time, as can be seen
in the fossil record; (4) species change or go extinct in response to environmental change; (5) new species
are the result of a portion of a population adapting to new or changed environmental conditions; (6) the
same forces, such as volcanic eruptions, that operate today are those that shaped the earth and caused
changes in the fossil record via extinctions and speciation events; and (7) layers and deposits are continually developing or eroding so that organisms are buried and fossils come to light, respectively. The idea that
the same forces that operate today are those that shaped the earth and caused changes in the fossil record
is termed uniformitarianism. Charles Lyell coined the term and is heralded as the father of modern geology. He greatly influenced Darwin and thus contributed to Darwin’s synthetic view of the evolution of life
on earth. Geologists use various methods to date fossils or fossil-containing sediments and have developed

4 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

a chronology (i.e., a timeline) for the earth as a whole, as well as depositional layers in areas where fossils
have been discovered.
Biologists and geneticists have refined the theory of evolution by means of natural selection by determining how traits are inherited. Scientists from a variety of disciplines have classified the known species of the
world based on evolutionary relationships (also see Chapter 2).

Figure 1.3 Charles Darwin. “Charles Darwin 01” by J. Cameron is in the
public domain.

Archaeology has played and continues to play a strong role in paleoanthropology via the study of the
archaeological record, that is, the record of past human activity via cultural remains and anthropogenic
(human-induced) changes to the environment. Thomas Jefferson has been referred to as the first archaeologist, in that his methods were more scientific than his fellow antiquarians. Antiquarians tended to be after
the “goods,” without regard for careful interpretation of the archaeological record. Most would be considered looters by today’s standards. They took items of great cultural and historical significance for personal
or museum collections. Some items have been returned to their countries of origin, but the damage is done
when the archaeological record is disturbed or destroyed. Once an item has been removed from the area
where it was found, scientists can no longer learn from its context, for example, from associated artifacts
or the location of the artifact in geographic space and time.
Archaeologists and geologists played a key role in recognizing that “stones and bones” were evidence of
earlier hominin activities. In addition, the fact that some of the bones were from extinct animals supported
the idea that humans had been around for a long time. Archaeological methods of excavation and analyses,
such as the provenience (i.e., the three-dimensional location within a site) and association of artifacts (i.e.,
portable human-made or altered objects), help archaeologists and paleoanthropologists reconstruct past

1. Paleoanthropology | 5

Figure 1.4 Eugène Dubois. “Eugene Dubois” is in the public domain.

behavior. Just as taphonomy plays a role in determining how fossil assemblages came to be, it is also useful
for archaeological assemblages.
According to Merriam-Webster Online, the first known use of the term “paleoanthropology” occurred in
1916. However, the earliest paleoanthropologists were not labeled as such and came from a variety of occupations, such as anatomists and physicians. The first hominin fossils discovered were the neandertals in
the 1800s. However, paleoanthropologists disagreed about whether neandertals were ancestors of humans
or were modern humans. Eugène Dubois was the first person to intentionally search for a fossil hominin.
He went to Asia with the sole purpose of finding evidence that humans evolved there, as was the reigning belief in Western Europe. In 1891, he discovered a skull cap (known as a calotte) and femur on the Solo
River in Trinil, Java. More discoveries in China and Java during the first half of the 20th century supported
the Asian origin theory until Raymond Dart and his contemporary, Robert Broom, began discovering much
more ancient material in South African quarries and caves. Further discoveries by Louis and Mary Leakey
in East Africa cemented Africa as the birthplace of humanity, and the race to find human origins and ancestors was on.

6 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 1.5 Louis Leakey. “Louis Leakey” is in the public domain.

RECONSTRUCTING PALEOENVIRONMENTS
A variety of tools can be used to determine the type of environment past species occupied. As mentioned,
paleontologists can use floral and faunal analyses and what they know about ancient species or their extant
relatives to determine environment type, for example, the presence of aquatic-, grassland-, and/or forest-dwelling species. Palynologists examine particulates in aquatic and terrestrial strata (i.e., layers or sediments) to do the same, primarily focusing on floral analyses. A variety of isotopic tools can be used to
categorize floral and/or faunal communities at a given site, such as hydrogen, oxygen, and carbon isotope fractionation and nitrogen isotope ratios. For example, calcium-rich remains such as eggshells, bones,
and teeth can be analyzed isotopically to determine what types of vegetation those animals consumed and
hence, the type of environment in which they lived. The strontium-to-calcium ratio in bones and teeth can
be used to determine the amount of animal versus plant matter in the diet. Based upon that technique,
scientists now believe that paranthropines, a group of hominins in East and South Africa dating from the
early- to mid-Pleistocene (see Chapter 16), ate some animal matter. However, whether they were consuming insects or larger prey is not known.
For more information on the aforementioned methods, consult Henke W, Tattersall I. 2006. Handbook of
paleoanthropology. New York (NY): Springer.

DATING TECHNIQUES
Dating techniques fall into two categories, relative and absolute. Relative dating techniques (1) ordinally
rank strata relative to one another through time (see Figure 1.6) or (2) use what is known about deposits in
1. Paleoanthropology | 7

one area, such as volcanic ash or lava, to relatively date deposits in another area. Jefferson is credited with
the Law of Superposition, which posits that as you go deeper into the earth, layers get older, as long as
strata have not been disturbed due to human, animal, or geological activity. Thus artifacts or fossils found
in one layer are either older or younger than those in a deeper or shallower layer, respectively. Absolute
dating techniques use similarities in (1) floral and faunal assemblages or (2) sedimentary and/or chemical
composition of deposits in order to match those of unknown age with those of known age and/or order the
progression of environments, organisms, and climatic and geological activity within or between regions.

Figure 1.6 Diagram illustrating cross-cutting relations in geology. These relations can be used to give structures a relative
age. Explanations: A – folded rock strata cut by a thrust fault; B – large intrusion (cutting through A); C – erosional angular
unconformity (cutting off A & B) on which rock strata were deposited; D – volcanic dyke (cutting through A, B & C); E – even
younger rock strata (overlying C & D); F – normal fault (cutting through A, B, C & E). Cross-cutting relations by Woudloper
is licensed CC-BY-SA.

Absolute or chronometric dating techniques yield approximate dates in years BP (before the present) or
BCE (before the Common Era). BCE and CE (Common Era) retain the BC/AD system of dating without the
religious connotation. An abbreviated way to refer to a certain number of years ago, especially when considering the fossil record, is kya or mya (thousands or millions of years ago, respectively), thus eliminating all of those ungainly zeroes! While BP makes more sense in that you do not need to add 2,000+ years
to the date, most people are accustomed to the BC/AD system, thus explaining the common use of BCE.
The best-known absolute dating techniques are radiometric dating methods, for example, Carbon-14 (14C).
They are used to measure the half-life or replacement of radioactive elements in organic or fossil material
or the layers in which they are found. Since those methods are time-limited and/or context-specific, the
most appropriate technique(s) must be chosen based on a variety of parameters. The following techniques
use radioactive decay for dating purposes:
[NOTE: For more information on the following methods, consult Henke and Tattersall (2006), Handbook
of Paleoanthropology; and/or Davis (2009), “Other Dating Methods”: http://www.geo.arizona.edu/palynology/geos462/11datingmeth.html.]
Carbon-14 dating (≤60 kya) measures the remaining 14C in organic materials (i.e., carbon-containing). Since
plants use carbon dioxide for photosynthesis, they contain all three isotopes of carbon (12C, 13C, and 14C) in
the approximate ratios present in the atmosphere. Animals eat plants and thus, at any particular time, they
will all have approximately the same amount of 14C. Once they die, they no longer accumulate carbon. The
level of the more stable 12C can then be compared to the remaining 14C in organic remains to determine

8 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

when they died. The half-life of 14C is ~5,700 years, that is, half of the 14C will have been lost in a specimen
in that amount of time.
Uranium series dating (≤500 kya) examines the relative levels of two elements, Uranium-234 and Thorium-230, resulting from the former’s decay into the latter. It is used to date calcium carbonate in coral and
shells.
Potassium-Argon (K/Ar) and Argon-Argon (Ar/Ar) dating both measure the ratio of one isotope to another
via the process of radioactive decay, Potassium-40 → Argon-40 and Argon-40 → Argon-39, respectively.
They are often used to date volcanic layers but can also be used on other soil components, such as clay.
While the age range for both methods may be reported to be unlimited, K/Ar dating is not useful for
“young” materials because the half-life of potassium is so long—1.26 billion years.
Other methods that also rely on radioactivity are:
Electron spin resonance (ESR) (up to “a few” mya) examines the pattern of electrons that have “spun” out of
their original location in mineral compounds (e.g., calcium compounds), leaving empty spaces behind, due
to exposure to environmental radiation. Tooth enamel is the most useful application of ESR in paleoanthropology, but ESR can also be used to date quartz particles in sediments (Wagner 2006).
Fission track dating (20 mya—>10 kya) measures the number of “tracks” (pitting) in mineral compounds that
result from the energy released when Uranium-238 spontaneously fissions over time. This method can be
used to date a variety of minerals, such as mica, as well as products of volcanic (e.g., obsidian) and meteoric
activities (Davis 2009; Wagner 2006).

Figure 1.7 Apatite crystals can be used in fission-track dating. “Apatite crystals” by OG59 is in the public
domain.

Thermoluminescence (300–1 kya) measures radioactive decay particles in mineral compounds. It is useful
for compounds that were exposed to intense heat (e.g., volcanic eruption) at some known point in time,
when the “radioactive clock” was reset to zero and decay began anew. Thermoluminescence can be used
to date artifacts (e.g., ceramics) and features (e.g., hearths), as well as products of sedimentation (e.g.,
speleothems, which are mineral deposits that form in caves) and volcanic activities (e.g., tephra, which are
fragments from volcanic eruptions) (Davis 2009).
The following methods do not rely on radioactive activity but rather organic processes:

1. Paleoanthropology | 9

Dendrochronology uses tree rings in fossil or charred wood to date artifacts or fossils found in association
with the wood. Each year, trees produce a new layer of peripheral tissue. When climatic conditions are
favorable, more tissue is deposited and a thicker ring results, and vice versa. A cross-section of the tree tells
the history of its growth (see Figure 1.8). However, in order to use dendrochronology as a dating method, a
chronology (temporal record) needs to be constructed for a given region, in this case a map of the annual
growth rate back through time. Living trees and dead wood can be used as long as there is overlap in ring
patterns between them.

Figure 1.8 Dendrochronology: tree ring dating. “Dendrochronologie” by Stefan Kühn is licensed under
CC BY-SA 3.0.

Amino acid racemization (2 mya–2 kya ± 15%) measures the ratio of two forms of an amino acid, one produced while an organism is alive and the accumulation of a second form after death. If the ambient temperature at the time of death can be approximated, the specimen can be dated and vice versa (Davis 2009).
Paleomagnetism (hundreds of thousands–millions of years, Fagan 2000) measures past changes in the
earth’s paleomagnetic fields that are preserved in some common minerals found in rocks and sediments.
Since scientists have established a chronology of those changes, the materials can then be given approximate dates as to when they formed. When paleomagnetism is used to date archaeological materials, it is
termed archaeomagnetic dating.
Obsidian hydration (100–1 mya) is used to date volcanic glass, that is, obsidian, by examining the amount of
hydration that has occurred due to exposure to the elements. It is useful in dating obsidian artifacts as well
as glacial and volcanic activities (Davis 2009).
Surface or Cosmogenic Nuclide Exposure Dating measures the amount of time that rocks have been
exposed to the elements. It can be used to date glacial, lava, and rockslide movements and damage from
extraterrestrial activities (e.g., solar flare-ups or meteorites) (Davis 2009; Wikipedia contributors 2015i).

10 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

ADDITIONAL STUDENT RESOURCES
Henke W, Tattersall I, editors. 2006. Handbook of paleoanthropology. New York (NY): Springer;
[accessed 2015 Aug 15]. http://www.evolbiol.ru/large_files/handbook_paleoanthropology.pdf.

1. Paleoanthropology | 11

2. Primate Classification
SYSTEMATICS: THE SCIENCE OF CLASSIFICATION
There are two means by which scientists classify organisms, classic taxonomy and cladistics. Paleoanthropologists are trained in evolutionary theory, and both biologists and paleontologists rely principally upon
cladistics. There is definite utility in using a combination of both systems, that is, the binomial nomenclature (genus and species) of classic taxonomy combined with the cladistic arrangement of species in terms
of shared characteristics. Classic taxonomy is based on the system begun by John Ray and elaborated by
Carolus Linnaeus: kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, species, etc. It classifies organisms based
on descent from a common ancestor, using similarities in physical characteristics. We are Homo sapiens,
as distinct from other members of our genus, such as Homo neanderthalensis (i.e., Neandertals). Note that
since the “h” in neanderthalensis is silent, it is sometimes omitted from the common name. Cladistics refines
classic taxonomy by linking organisms, based on the presence or absence of unique characteristics, into
“grades.” For example, if three species share a suite of characteristics but only two of them have a particular
trait that is not present in more distantly related species, those two are more closely related and would be
depicted as a separate grade. Figure 2.1 depicts five primate grade.

Figure 2.1 “Cladogram of Primates” by Petter Bøckman, CC BY-SA 3.0.

The following terms are used to delineate characteristics in cladistics:
• Plesiomorphy—a primitive trait that is present in the ancestor as well as descendent species, for
example, pentadactyly (five digits) in primates is an ancient trait seen in amphibians and reptiles.
• Apomorphy—a derived trait that is not found in the ancestor but is present in descendent species, for
example, nails in primates.
• Autapomorphy—a unique derived trait present in member species of a particular grade, for example,

12

the lack of a tail in apes.
• Synapomorphy—a trait inherited by members of two or more grades from their common ancestor,
wherein the trait was an apomorphy, for example, bipedalism in the various grades within our tribe,
Hominini.
• Homoplasy—a trait in more than one grade that evolved independently, for example, brachiation
(swinging by one’s arms) in some New World monkeys and apes.

PRIMATE CLASSIFICATION
We are primates, that is, members of the order Primates (prī-mā’-tēz). The pie chart in Figure 2.2 shows the
various orders of animals within the class Mammalia. We are most closely related to tree shrews (order:
Scandentia) and colugos (order: Dermoptera, also known as flying lemurs). Primates are distinguished by
a suite of characteristics known as evolutionary trends (see table below). However, we do not exhibit all
of them to the same degree, and some are absent in certain species or lineages. For example, prosimians
retain a claw on the second digit of their feet, whereas anthropoids do not (more about the two primate
groups later). These trends were first proposed by Napier and Napier (1967) and Le Gros Clark (1959), and
more recently primatologists have refined and added to the list.

Figure 2.2 Orders within the class Mammalia. “Mammal species pie chart” by Aranae is in the public
domain.

2. Primate Classification | 13

PRIMATE EVOLUTIONARY TRENDS
• Generalized, unspecialized skeleton:
◦ No loss of limb bones from the ancestral condition.
◦ Presence of a clavicle that allows greater mobility.
◦ Capable of varied movement and locomotion.
• Large, complex brain (relative to body size), especially cerebral cortex.
• Decreased reliance on olfaction:
◦ Reduction of snout and olfactory bulb in frontal cortex.
• Increased reliance on vision:
◦ Enlarged visual cortex, greater visual acuity, and color vision.
◦ Forward-oriented, overlapping fields (binocular) of vision, and excellent depth perception.
• Prehensile (grasping) hands and feet and opposable thumb and big toe.
◦ Nails instead of claws.
• Long pre- and post-natal life periods with greater reliance on learning.
• Tendency toward diurnality.

Taxonomic charts of the living primates can be found below. The primates are divided into two major taxonomic groups: strepsirrhines, which retain primitive characteristics, such as the lemurs of Madagascar
and the bushbabies of Africa, and the more derived haplorrhines, that is, the tarsier, monkeys, and apes.
The older terms for the suborders that are still in popular use are Prosimii (see figure 2.3) and Anthropoidea. However, tarsiers (small, nocturnal prosimian from the islands of the Southeast Asian archipelago)
have characteristics of both groups. The strepsirrhine primates have more typical mammalian noses or rhinaria (see Figure 2.4) that are moist and more complex. They have a larger olfactory bulb in the frontal
cortex of their brains and scent glands in various locations on their bodies. They use those glands to communicate to other members of their species. We haplorhines have simpler, dry noses and do not smell as
good!

14 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 2.3 Prosimian classification.

Figure 2.4 Prosimian noses (A through D) and the nose of a
New World monkey (E). “Prosimian noses” by Reginald Innes
Pocock is in the public domain.

As we learn more about biochemical and evolutionary relationships among the various groups of primates,
primate taxonomy is changing. The New World monkeys (see Figure 2.5) have changed substantially in
recent years, with the creation of multiple families that were formerly grouped into two or three.
The Old World anthropoids (monkeys and apes) and New World monkeys are also distinguished by our
noses. Old World anthropoids have more ovoid, downward-facing nostrils, whereas New World monkeys’
nostrils are round and forward-facing.

2. Primate Classification | 15

Figure 2.5 New World anthropoid classification.

The Old World monkeys (see figure 2.6) are divided into the cercopithecines, with their cheek pouches
and more generalized diet, and the leaf-eating colobines, with their complex guts. Think baboon (Africa)
or snow monkey (Japan) for the former and black-and-white colobus (Africa) or Hanuman langur (primarily
Indian subcontinent) for the latter. When asked, most people are more familiar with the cercopithecines,
but if they see a picture of a black-and-white colobus (also known as a guereza) leaping through the air with
its white mantle of fur and tail flying (or not…see Figure 2.8! I couldn’t find an action shot!) or a Hanuman
langur sitting on the steps of a temple (OK, a fort . . . see Figure 2.9!) in India, they usually recognize them.
The taxonomy of the apes (see Figure 2.7) has finally been updated. Until recently, humans were separated
from the other great apes at the “family” level. All great apes are too closely related to be separated into different families. The lesser apes, i.e. the gibbons and siamangs of Southeast Asia, are still separated into their
own family, the Hylobatidae. All of the great apes are now in the family Hominidae, formerly our exclusive
domain. The orangutans come out at the subfamily level, leaving the African great apes in the subfamily
Homininae. The gorillas have their own tribe, Gorillini (using the genus Gorilla to form the name) and if the
chimps (genus Pan) are taken out of our tribe (Hominini), they are assigned the tribe Panini! I did not make
that up! Some experts suggest that chimps and humans should be included in the same genus.

16 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 2.6 Old World monkey classification.

APE CHARACTERISTICS
“Why are sleeves always too short for me?”
We apes share a suite of characteristics (in varying degrees), and we humans have radically changed as we
abandoned a more typical ape habitat and adapted to a more open terrestrial landscape. The table below
lists great ape characteristics.

Great Ape Characteristics
• Relatively large brains.
• Y-5 molar—apes have a characteristic pattern of cusps and fissures on one or more mandibular molars.

2. Primate Classification | 17

Figure 2.7 Ape classification.

• Honing complex consisting of large canines that are sharpened (honed) on the first
lower premolar, termed a sectorial premolar.
• Upright trunk posture.
• Short, shallow, wide rib cage.
• High degree of mobility in joints of shoulders and wrists, termed the “suspensory hanging adaptation.”
• Long arms and short legs.
• Long, curved hand and foot bones.
• Variable degree of sexual dimorphism (i.e., differences between male and female morphology) in body size.

18 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 2.8 Black-and-white colobus monkey. “Colobus guereza
Mantelaffen” by Yoky is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Figure 2.9 Hanuman langur. “Langur-Amber Fort” by McKay
Savage is licensed under CC BY 2.0.

2. Primate Classification | 19

◦ Low in humans, moderate in chimps, high in gorillas and orangutans.
◦ Pronounced male prognathism (jutting jaws or muzzle) and large canines, depending
on species.
• Long life stages, especially the juvenile dependency period.
• Build nests.
• Capable of learning and using symbols.
• Tool use with some modification (e.g. chimps and orangutans preparing a stick for probing).

The ancestor of the great apes was an arboreal climber. At some point, apes deviated from the more
quadrupedal monkey-like morphology, in favor of (1) a more upright, shorter, broader, shallower trunk (just
think of our thorax versus a dog’s); (2) elongated upper limbs; and (3) more mobile shoulder and wrist joints.
While we cannot swing by our arms as well as the lesser apes (brachiation is the technical term), we great
apes retain the suspensory hanging adaptation and can swing to varying degrees, as long as the tree will
support us. Adult male gorillas do not swing because they are too massive!
As hominins, or bipedal apes, came to rely less on an arboreal environment, the bones of our ancestors’
hands and some foot bones became shorter and straighter and our legs became longer and more efficient
for covering long distances on African landscapes. Beginning with the emergence of our own genus: Homo
(~2 mya), we became increasingly encephalized (i.e. an increase in brain size relative to body size), leaving
our fellow great apes behind. While all great apes are sexually dimorphic in terms of body size (i.e., males
are larger than females), humans are less so and the trend began even prior to our own genus. Depending
on which fossil hominins we include in our lineage, male canines were either monomorphic (i.e., male and
female canines were the same size) or became less dimorphic over time. This is significant because male
canine dimorphism is associated with competition for females, i.e. males bite one another! If we accept, for
example, that we are descended from the ardipiths (see Chapter 8) that lived over 4 mya, ancestral males
did not have large canines. However, there is better evidence that we are descended from the australopiths
and within that lineage, male canines were initially larger than females’ and became smaller over time.
Apes live a relatively long time and consequently all of our life stages are prolonged as well, especially our
juvenile dependency period. Of the nonhuman primates, orangutans win. Female orangutans have an interbirth interval (i.e. a period of time in between births) of eight years and juveniles do not even start wandering off until they are seven. That is not good news from a conservation perspective!
All great apes build nests and scientists speculate that our ancestors likely did as well, at least until they left
the trees. We also use tools. Chimps are the champs when it comes to tool use, e.g. nut cracking, ant fishing,
etc. Orangutans are very adept at tool use as well, but their thumbs are short and more distant from their
fingers, so that their opposability is poor. Consequently, they use their mouths to trim sticks and manipulate
them for the desired task. In captivity, they also use their mouths to draw and paint. While gorilla tool use
had been known from observations of gorillas in captivity, the use of a tool in the wild was finally recorded
in 2005 when a female used a stick to test water depth. Of course, we humans are on a whole different level
and we can trace the development of hominin technology in the archaeological record to over 3 mya.
We have two language centers in our brain, Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas (see Figure 2.10). Broca’s area is
found in all Old World monkeys and apes; it plays a role in the motor control involved with speech production. As we well know from language studies, all nonhuman great apes are capable of learning and using
symbols and have even made up a few. Washoe, the famous chimp that was taught American Sign Language,
strung together the signs for “water” and “bird,” when she saw a duck for the first time. Where they fall
short is in using syntax; they are poor at correctly stringing symbols together into meaningful sentences.

20 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

However, Kanzi, the super bonobo at Sue Savage Rumbaugh’s lab, does pretty well. Check him out in the
video below.

Figure 2.10 Kanzi and Novel Sentences by Iowa Primate Learning Sanctuary https://youtu.be/2Dhc2zePJFE

It is pretty convincing that he understands some syntax with following her commands, such as putting the
pickles inside the vacuum cleaner versus the vacuum cleaner inside the pickles! Okay, I made that one up
but the things she has him do, in order to convince us that he understands, are amusing and amazing! We
and our ancestors, beginning with the genus Homo, also have Wernicke’s area. While a homologous area is
present in monkeys and apes, ours has much broader interconnections and is uniquely involved with speech
comprehension. At what point our ancestors began to speak is a highly contested topic but the archaeological record provides some clues (see Chapters 23 and 28).

Figure 2.11 Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas (left side of brain).
“BrocasAreaSmall” by the National Institutes of Health is in
the public domain.

2. Primate Classification | 21

Great ape social organization varies by species. The chimps and bonobos (genus: Pan) are most like the
majority of human traditional societies in that they live in male philopatric, multi-male/multi-female communities. Philopatry refers to the sex that remains in their natal group, i.e. the group into which they were
born. This type of social organization is seen in some ripe fruit specialists, such as the chimps and bonobos of Africa and the New World spider monkeys. Since fruit is an ephemeral resource, females cannot
cooperatively defend it. Groups of related males cooperatively defend a home range against outsider males.
Females emigrate from their natal community and join a different community when they reach sexual maturity. Group members come together intermittently into larger aggregations wherein they may interact. This
grouping pattern is termed fission-fusion. Since males patrol and protect the area and females are relatively large and powerful and can climb, the danger of predation is relatively low and they therefore have
less of a need to congregate. The mating pattern is termed polygynandry, meaning that males and females
are promiscuous and may have multiple sexual partners. Males may attempt to monopolize and coerce
females to mate but females are adept at getting around bullying males and may even mate with males outside of their group.
Orangutans are considered to be solitary foragers and their prominent mating pattern is polygyny (males
have multiple mates), wherein females in a given area usually mate with the resident, large, dominant male.
Smaller males who are sexually mature but lacking the pronounced secondary sexual characteristics, such
as facial pads (termed flanges) and an enlarged throat sac for loud calls, may try to forcibly copulate with
females. Females are thought to monitor the dominant male’s location so that they can stay within calling
distance if they are being harassed by subordinate males.
Gorillas live in one-male groups, except for the mountain gorillas, where two males may reside, an older
dominant and younger subordinate. Both sexes tend to leave their natal group. Females join a male who
may or may not already have other female mates. Thus the mating system is also polygynous. Males defend
their females and offspring from outsider males who may be infanticidal. In mountain gorillas, females are
thought to prefer groups with two males as they provide better protection for her offspring.
It can thus be seen that there are characteristics of the human sexes in all three great ape genera (plural of
genus): male defense and mate-guarding, female choice for dominant males and good genes, male philopatry with females maximizing resources for themselves and offspring in chimps and bonobos, etc.

22 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

3. Primate Evolution

Figure 3.1 Anthropoid Evolution by Keenan Taylor.

While we have no primate fossil material prior to the Eocene Epoch, the first primates are thought to have
evolved prior to the Paleocene Epoch (66–56 mya), possibly as far back as 90 mya, during the Late Cretaceous Period. With the extinction of the dinosaurs at the end of the Cretaceous, many terrestrial niches
became available and predation pressures were somewhat relaxed. In addition, temperatures were higher
than in the recent past (see Figure 3.2) and the angiosperms (flowering plants) were undergoing an adaptive
radiation, i.e. relatively rapid speciation, and spreading globally. The spread of flowering plants resulted in
an adaptive radiation of insect pollinators and herbivores (plant-eaters), as well as insectivorous and herbivorous arboreal vertebrates.
The earliest primates likely descended from a small, nocturnal, insectivorous mammal. The tree shrews and
colugos (also known as flying lemurs) are the closest living relatives to primates. The tree shrew is used as
a living model for what the earliest primates, or primate predecessors, might have been like. At some point,
primates or their ancestors moved into the trees and adapted to an arboreal environment. Two theories
regarding the evolution of some primate characteristics, such as grasping or prehensile hands, forwardoriented eyes, and depth perception, are the Arboreal and Visual Predation Theories. The Arboreal Theory
posits that primate characteristics, such as grasping hands and feet and the presence of nails instead of
claws, are the result of moving into and adapting to an arboreal environment. (Imagine the casualties!) The
Visual Predation Theory asserts that characteristics that were well-suited to scurrying around in trees and
visual features in particular, such as convergent orbits, are adaptations to insect predation. Short of a butterfly net, grasping hands, visual acuity, and depth perception are essential for catching insects, but I guess
they would be kind of handy for using a butterfly net as well!
While primates are thought to have evolved in Asia, the majority of the early fossil material is found in North
America and Europe, dating to the Eocene Epoch (~56–34 mya). The map in Figure 3.6 indicates both living
23

Figure 3.2 Temperature change over time. “65 Myr Climate Change” by Robert A. Rohde is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.
Notes: Pal = Paleocene, Eo = Eocene, Ol = Oligocene, Mio = Miocene, Pli = Pliocene, and Plt = Pleistocene

Figure 3.3 Primate phylogeny. “Primate phylogeny” from “Strepsirrhini” in Wikipedia is licensed CC-BY-SA

and fossil strepsirrhine sites. They are divided into two superfamilies, Adapoidea and Omomyoidea. In general, the adapoids were diurnal, lemur-like animals that are thought to be the ancestors of the strepsirrhine
primates, i.e. the lemurs of Madagascar and the lorisids of Africa and Southeast Asia (i.e. bushbabies and
pottos of Africa and lorises of Southeast Asia) (see Figure 3.7). The smaller, nocturnal omomyoids are good
candidates for the ancestors of modern-day tarsiers. However, due to the early dates for ancestral tarsiers,
it is possible that the omomyoids and tarsiers were sister lineages.

24 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 3.4 Tree shrew. “Tupaia cf javanica 050917
manc” by W. Djatmiko is licensed under CC BY-SA
3.0.

Figure 3.6 Range of living strepsirrhine primates (green) and Eocene-Miocene fossil sites
(red). “Extant strepsirrhine range with fossil sites,” a derivative work by Maky, is in the
public domain.

During the Eocene Epoch, the early strepsirrhine-like primates experienced an adaptive radiation and
expanded into numerous niches over a broad geographic area. The northern expansion of early primates
into Europe and North America was possible because Eurasia and North America were joined as the large
landmass known as Laurasia and, as mentioned, it was warm enough for tropical animals to move into
northern latitudes. Due to subsequent global cooling, the early primates in North America and Europe eventually went extinct. Strepsirrhine primates spread into Africa after it docked with Laurasia. They are also
hypothesized to have “rafted” on floating mats of vegetation to Madagascar, where they evolved into the
great diversity of extinct and extant lemur species.

3. Primate Evolution | 25

Figure 3.5 Hands and feet of apes and monkeys. “Hands and Feet of Apes and Monkeys” by Richard
Lydekker is in the public domain.

26 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 3.7 Strepsirrhini. Notes: Top left: ring-tailed
lemurs (Madagascar); top right: diademed sifaka
(Madagascar); top middle left: aye-aye
(Madagascar); top middle right: ruffed lemur
(Madagascar); bottom middle left: mouse lemur
(Madagascar); bottom middle right: slow loris
(Asia); bottom left: slender loris (Asia); bottom right:
greater bushbaby (Africa).

By at least the late Eocene, the first anthropoid primates had evolved. There is debate over the origin of
the anthropoids, i.e. the ancestor of the monkeys and apes. There are four different theories of our ancestry, each with its share of supporters: (1) adapoid, (2) omomyoid, (3) tarsier, or (4) independent origin as yet
undiscovered. Remains of early anthropoids dating to the late Eocene are found in Africa and Asia. A possible stem or basal anthropoid, meaning the original ancestor of all monkeys and apes, comes from the
Shanghuang deposits of China. Termed genus: Eosimias (see Figure 3.8), it was as small as the smallest living
anthropoid, the pygmy marmoset monkey of South America. While ring-tailed lemurs have striped tails, I do
not know of any other striped primates so am not sure why the artist gave them stripes … but it sure is an
intriguing little creature! Other late Eocene fossils have been discovered in Myanmar (genus: Pondaungia),
Thailand (genus: Siamopithecus), Libya (genus: Biretia), Algeria, and the Fayum Beds of Egypt.
During the Oligocene Epoch (~34–23 mya), the anthropoid primates underwent a great adaptive radiation.
The richest location for Oligocene anthropoid fossils is the Fayum Beds of Egypt. Oligocene anthropoids are
divided into three families: Parapithecidae, Oligopithecidae, and Propliopithecidae, from most primitive to
most derived over time. The New World monkeys are thought to have branched off from the parapithecids,
with which they share some characteristics. Genus: Apidium is a prime contender for a possible ancestor.
Once again, a rafting hypothesis is proposed for the migration of that ancestor from Africa to South America.
The ancestors of the Old World monkeys and apes diverged from the family: Propliopithecidae. The propliopithecid, Aegyptopithecus zeuxis (also known as Propliopithecus zeuxis) is thought to be a common
ancestor of the ape and Old World monkey lineages (see Figure 3.9). While the earliest anthropoids were

3. Primate Evolution | 27

Figure 3.8 Eosimias sinesis. Illustration by Keenan
Taylor.

more monkey- than ape-like, the apes (or hominoids) were the first to successfully adapt to changing environmental conditions in Africa.

28 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 3.9 Aegyptopithecus or Propliopithecus zeuxis. “Aegyptopithecus NT” by
Nobu Tamura is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Figure 3.10 “Proconsul NT” by Nobu Tamura is licensed under CC BY-SA
3.0.

For years, people have asked me, “Barbara, you don’t really believe that we came from monkeys, do you?”
and I always answered, “No, we came from apes!” However, our common anthropoid ancestor was more
monkey- than ape-like…. So, “YEAH, I suppose I do!”
During the Miocene Epoch (~23–5.3 mya), the adaptive radiation of the apes or hominoids can be observed
in the fossil record. The earliest fossils are from Kenya and Uganda. There were 20 or more genera of apes
during the Miocene and they exhibited a wide range of body sizes and adaptive strategies. Proconsul is a
possible stem ape, dating to ~18 mya (see Figure 3.10 and 3.11). The ancestry of the lesser apes is unclear but
they are thought to have branched off 18–16 mya. The great apes diversified and spread from Africa to Asia
and Europe. The ancestors of the orangutans, the sivapithecines, moved into western and subsequently
eastern Asia. Remains in Turkey have been dated to 14 mya. The largest primate that ever lived, i.e. the now
extinct genus: Gigantopithecus (known only from isolated dental and mandibular fragments), also had a sivapithecine ancestry. Dryopithecine apes moved into Europe during the late Miocene. Generally referred to
as “dental apes,” due to the scanty remains of jaws and teeth, that evolutionary side branch eventually went
extinct due to global cooling, as with the earlier strepsirrhines in the northern latitudes.
While there were Old World monkeys in the Miocene Epoch, such as genus: Victoriapithecus from Kenya,
the adaptive radiation of the Old World monkeys lagged behind the hominoids. However, the same envi3. Primate Evolution | 29

ronmental conditions that drove most ape genera to extinction in Africa led to an explosion of monkey
species. Monkeys could more quickly adapt due to their shorter life stages and greater number of offspring.
A baboon can give birth every two years versus four or five years for gorillas and chimps, respectively. While
the leaf-eating ancestor of the colobines stayed in the trees, the ancestor of the cercopithecine or cheek
pouch monkeys, such as macaques and baboons, adapted to traveling on the ground as well as in the trees.
The ability to exploit both arboreal and terrestrial resources expanded their niche and they survived and
thrived in Africa and Asia. With only two extant genera, the African colobines did not diversify to the same
extent, having been confined to forests. However, the Asian colobines did not experience the same forest
loss as their African cousins did and are thus much more diverse. When African forests later expanded, the
ancestors of some cercopithecine species, such as the colorful arboreal guenons, went back to the trees.
It has been difficult to trace the origin of the human/chimp/gorilla lineage during the mid-Miocene due
to a paucity of fossils from that time and many conflicting viewpoints. Some of the contenders for the
stem African great ape are Nakalipithecus (10 mya) and Samburupithecus (9.5 mya) from Kenya. Other possible ancestors or related species are Afropithecus (18–16 mya) and Nacholapithecus (15 mya) from Kenya and
Otavipithecus (13 mya) from Namibia.
The chimp and human lineages are thought to have diverged by the late Miocene. Global cooling in the
latter part of the Miocene led to the extinction of all ape genera in northern latitudes. Forest cover in
Africa was vastly reduced over time due to climatic fluctuations and while most apes went extinct, the
newly emerged hominins thrived. Hominins experienced an adaptive radiation during the Pliocene Epoch
(~5.3–2.6 mya), and late in the Pleistocene Epoch (~2.6 mya–11.7 kya) our own species, Homo sapiens, evolved
(≤200 kya).

Figure 3.11 Proconsul africanus by Keenan Taylor.

30 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

4. Primate Social Organization

Figure 4.1 Stump-tailed macaques. “Macaca arctoides” by Frans de Waal is licensed
under CC BY 2.5.

Most primates live in groups. The best explanation for why animals form groups and endure the costs of
feeding competition is to minimize the risk of predation. Grouping patterns are tied to diet and the defensibility of resources. Females are out to maximize resources for themselves and their offspring, so as to maximize their reproductive success. If a species eats grass or leaves, it does not make sense to defend those
resources. However, there is safety in numbers and those species (especially arboreal species) will normally
be found living or foraging in small groups. If a species specializes on ripe fruit, they cannot defend them
because of the patchy nature of fruit in geographic space and time. In the case of the few primate ripe fruit
specialists, such as chimps and spider monkeys, males defend a home range that contains resources that
females need, and thus females are attracted to join them. While orangutans are also preferentially frugivorous, they are solitary due to their large size and strict arboreality, which limits resources to those that are
accessible from supporting branches. Finally, if a species can eat a variety of things that come in variablesized patches, they can band together and defend those resources as they come across them in their daily
ranging. In that case, females stay together in their natal group (termed female philopatry) and cooperate
in resource defense.
Social organization involves several aspects of group life, such as (1) the average numbers of individuals
in terms of age and sex; (2) whether group members remain in their natal group at maturity or leave, and
hence whether individuals have relatives in the group; (3) whether those animals that join a group in adulthood stay permanently or tend to leave after a period of time; (4) the pattern of interactions between individuals, e.g. whether there is a dominance hierarchy and if so, if an individual’s position in the hierarchy is
permanent or temporary; and (5) the number of potential mates to which an individual has access. While
we tend to categorize species by their grouping pattern or social organization, it is increasingly apparent
that there is variability within primate species. Some species share our pattern of living in multi-male/
multi-female groups. Other categories of primate social organization are solitary, male-female pairs, and
one-male/multi-female groups. Interestingly, all of the mating systems seen in primates, i.e. monogamy,
polygyny (one male mates with multiple females), polyandry (one female mates with multiple males), and
polygynandry (both males and females are promiscuous), are also seen in humans. Some men and women
marry or mate for life; some men have multiple wives or partners, and the same goes for some women. I

31

Figure 4.2 Bushbaby of Africa. “Bushbabies” by Wegmann is licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0.

will discuss each type of social organization and mating pattern seen in the primates, along with example
species.

SOLITARY AND DISPERSED POLYGYNY
Except for the orangutans, solitary foragers are small nocturnal prosimians that forage primarily for insects
and fruit. Examples of solitary foragers are the bushbabies (see Figure 4.2) and pottos of Africa, most of
the nocturnal lemurs of Madagascar, and the lorises of Asia. I am going out on a limb (too much?) to suggest that our earliest primate ancestors were as well, since we are thought to be descended from a small,
insectivorous, nocturnal mammal. Prosimian solitary foragers either avoid predation by stealth (i.e. the slow
climbers, such as pottos and slow lorises) or a form of locomotion termed vertical clinging and leaping
(e.g., bushbabies) that allows for quick getaways. Females usually forage alone and either park their young
nearby or leave them in a “nest,” such as a tree hole. Sleeping groups may consist of female relatives and
their young and/or females, young, and males, depending on the species and female-female tolerance. Male
home ranges often overlap multiple female home ranges, and males monitor female sexual cycles by “making the rounds” and monitoring their scent, hence the use of the term “dispersed polygyny,” i.e. one male
and multiple dispersed females. One male may dominate other smaller or less dominant males in an area
and may suppress them from breeding, via pheromonal activity.
As mentioned, orangutans are the odd man out. They are large and arboreal so they do not need to group
for protection. They need a lot of resources to support them and at some sites, they suffer periodic food
shortages, so that grouping would hinder foraging. Females and their dependent offspring forage together.
Females maintain proximity and mate with a dominant male with developed secondary sexual characteristics, i.e. large size, a throat sac for loud calls, and facial flanges. Until there is an opportunity for males to
acquire females, such as when a large male dies, males stay small and mate opportunistically. Scientists are
stymied at how they can delay maturation and then facultatively develop into the larger morph.

32 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 4.3 Gibbon of Southeast Asia. “Gibbon Hoolock de l’ouest” by Programme
HURO is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

TERRITORIAL PAIRS AND MONOGAMY
While a few species of primates are commonly referred to as monogamous, extrapair copulations have
been observed in every one of them. The last primate to have lost the title of true monogamist was the night
monkey of Central and South America. Prior to that revelation, it was always fun to ask my students who
the only true monogamous primate species is and see if they answered, “humans.”
Monogamy begs the question, “why?” While females may benefit from a monogamous relationship, if their
mate supports them or their offspring in some way, it is difficult to understand why males would tie themselves to one mate when mating is not costly for them. There are several theories regarding the adaptive
significance of pairing in primates. First is the idea that the female needs help defending a territory in order
to obtain enough resources for herself and her offspring. Couples may actively and/or passively defend
their territories (hence the more appropriate term “territorial pair”) via threats, fighting, and/or duetting,
i.e. calling together to indicate that the territory is occupied by a bonded pair. In the majority of species,
males help by carrying offspring. The second theory suggests that monogamy is a way for males to protect their offspring from infanticide. In those species that form one-male groups (see next section), when a
new male takes over, he may kill nursing infants. Once nursing is interrupted, a female undergoes hormonal
changes and may return to estrus (fertile period). It is in the new male’s best interest to impregnate females
as soon as possible, in the “hope” that some of his offspring will make it to the juvenile stage before the next
male comes in and wipes out the infants. Why would females mate with a homicidal maniac, you ask? It is
not in their best interest to wait to reproduce either. That is the way natural selection works! Those traits
that maximize fitness, i.e. reproductive success, are favored. In addition, a male offspring that grows up to
be infanticidal will be in a better position to reproduce, if he has what it takes to take over a group.
There are territorial paired species within the prosimians (indris and wooly lemurs of Madagascar and the
tarsiers of the Southeast Asian archipelago), New World monkeys (night, titi, saki, and some marmoset monkeys of Central and/or South America), and the lesser apes (gibbons and siamangs of Southeast Asia—see
Figure 4.3). We are learning that the lesser apes are much less monogamous than was previously thought.
Females of some gibbon species tend toward polyandry and thus males are polygynous, making those
species polygynandrous. We are the only great ape to have a tendency for monogamy, in that we tend to “fall
in love” with one person at a time.

4. Primate Social Organization | 33

ONE-MALE GROUPS AND POLYGYNY
In some species, one male with one or a few females is the grouping pattern. However in other species
(Hamadryas baboons, geladas, mandrills, drills, and some odd-nosed monkeys, such as snub-nosed monkeys), one-male units (OMUs) congregate into larger and larger groupings, in a multi-tiered or nested
fashion, depending on their current activity. I will discuss this more complex grouping pattern after the discussion of one-male groups (OMGs). Except for the gorillas, all OMG species are Old World monkeys. The
majority of the colobines form OMGs, e.g. African colobus monkeys of the genus: Colobus and Asian langurs
and leaf monkeys. Cercopithecines of the genus: Cercopithecus (commonly known as guenons—see figure
4.4) and patas monkeys (Erythrocebus) are also OMG species.

Figure 4.4 De Brazza’s monkey, a type of guenon of Africa. “Lightmatter guenon” by
Aaron Logan is licensed under CC BY 1.0.

In the majority of OMG species, females are related but as groups get larger, they split along matrilines,
meaning that a group of closely related females may splinter when competition increases. In addition,
females may move between groups, especially in the colobines. Males fiercely compete for access to groups
and infanticide occurs during takeovers. In those species that are seasonal breeders, it is difficult for the
male to monitor and mate with all of the females and outsider males may sire some of the offspring. One
guy can only do so much and females only have a small window of opportunity.
While the OMG makes sense for the colobines and their high leaf diet, it is not as clear why the more generalist guenons exhibit the same pattern. Like the colobine monkeys of Africa and Asia, it is possible that
the ancestor of the extant arboreal guenons never left the trees and thus did not evolve the tendency for a
larger grouping pattern in response to terrestrial predators. In addition, if they remained arboreal in relict
forests, they may have enjoyed a more stable resource base. They are small- to medium-sized monkeys and
thus can subsist on a variety of foods, primarily insects and fruit, both of which are indefensible food items,
from a female perspective. Thus while a group is beneficial, it does not need to be large. It may be a bit of
an oversimplification that female resources drive primate social organization, but it is a useful model with
demonstrated heuristic value.
For those species with a nested grouping pattern of OMUs, I will describe the system in Hamadryas baboons
(see Figure 4.5) and contrast it with geladas (see Figure 4.7). Both species consist of OMUs that congregate into three larger group levels. For some strange reason (as if there are not enough terms in a primate course), some primatologists use different terms for the levels in each of the species. The basic unit
is the OMU. The next level is termed the clan; it consists of several OMUs, along with bachelor males, and
the members tend to forage together (see Figure 4.6). The third level is the band, and that is the result
of several clans congregating to forage over a large area. While Hamadryas bands are somewhat stable,
34 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 4.5 Hamadryas baboons of East Africa and the Arabian Peninsula.
“Hamadryas harems” by Brian Jeffery Beggerly is licensed under CC BY 2.0.

gelada bands are not. Finally the troop (Hamadryas) or herd (gelada) is a combination of multiple bands
that come together to sleep on cliffs in the mainly treeless regions where both species live, primarily
in Ethiopia. Troops consist of hundreds of animals, over 700 in the Hamadryas and slightly fewer in the
geladas. This odd grouping pattern is related to their harsh environment. Hamadryas live in subdesert conditions in Ethiopia and the Arabian Peninsula. They are generalists that eat whatever they can find. They
fission and fuse (i.e. come together and separate again) into the various grouping levels as resources allow,
but predators abound and shelter is scarce, so there is safety in numbers via vigilance. The geladas’ situation is a bit different. They live in high-altitude conditions in Ethiopia and eat a lot of grass and grass
products, such as seeds and corms. Again, there is safety in numbers but resources are ubiquitous so they
spread out a bit and mooch and munch (new foraging category!), i.e. sit-eat-move, along the ground. The
strangest aspect of the two species (other than their bizarre faces!) is that Hamadryas are male philopatric
and geladas are female philopatric. While the gelada pattern makes sense, considering their relatedness to
female-philopatric baboon species, Hamadryas are even more closely related to those baboons yet appear
to deviate from the pattern. However, the females do not go far; they transfer at the clan or band level and
thus are not far from kin. Thus the real question is why do male Hamadryas stay?

Figure 4.6 A depiction of a gelada or Hamadryas baboon clan.
Note: OMUs =red circles and bachelors = blue Xs.

4. Primate Social Organization | 35

Figure 4.7 Grazing geladas. “Geladas” by Alastair Rae is licensed under CC BY-SA
2.0.

While there are regular takeovers in gelada OMUs, as would be expected, they are not as frequent in
Hamadryas, primarily due to the facts that males have control over their small group of females and OMUs
are surrounded by male relatives. Hamadryas females are usually coerced away from their mothers when
they are young and then herded and punished by their new male leader until they learn to obey and not
stray. Female geladas have a say in male takeovers; they either side with the resident male and help keep
the new male out or they do not and the resident male is on his own. It is interesting that if a new male
becomes established in the group, the former male may stay and help defend his offspring from becoming
the victims of infanticide, but he can no longer breed.

ONE-FEMALE GROUPS AND POLYANDRY

Figure 4.8 Emperor tamarin. “Emperor Tamarin SF ZOO” by Brocken Inaglory is
licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

36 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

This type of social organization is seen only in the callitrichids, i.e. the tamarins (see Figure 4.8) and marmosets of Central and South America. Within those groups, there is usually only one breeding female and
one or two breeding males. Females gestate as many as five fetuses but on average, only two survive. Hence
we talk about “twinning” in the callitrichids. Those groups with an extra male have better offspring survival.
At birth, the offspring average one-fourth of the female’s weight and thus foraging to support them is a fulltime job for the females. The females nurse the young and the males carry and nurture them.
Females pheromonally suppress cycling in their daughters and while sons become fertile, they have no
mating options in the group. Mature daughters and sons also help with the care of their younger siblings.
Helping behavior, while delaying their direct fitness (genes they pass on via reproduction), increases their
inclusive fitness (genes they share with relatives). Full siblings share half of their genes (the same as
between parents and offspring) and half siblings share one-fourth, on average. While the proximate causation (current stimulus or condition favoring the behavior, versus ultimate causation, i.e. the behavior was
favored by natural selection due to its fitness benefits) for older siblings to stay is unclear, it is likely adaptive in some situations to delay reproduction. For example, it may be difficult for young animals to compete
for territory or mates, and they are small and inexperienced and thus easy prey.

MULTI-MALE/FEMALE GROUPS AND POLYGYNANDRY
There are two types of multi-male/female groups (MMF). The first is the more common. They are medium
to large groups of related females (female philopatric) with a sex ratio skewed in favor of females. Outsider
males may congregate in all-male bands. Females and males are promiscuous, the mating pattern known
as polygynandry. Many New World monkey species and most of the Old World cercopithecines (e.g.
macaques—see Figures 4.1 and 4.9) exhibit this type of social organization. Females cooperate in resource
defense and males may have a more peripheral position within the group, except during the mating season
in seasonal breeders. Many semi-terrestrial species exhibit this type of social organization, e.g. baboons
(Hamadryas are the exception) and macaques. Terrestriality is associated with larger body and group size,
likely for predation avoidance. With more females, come more males and with more males, females can
benefit from seasonal breeding. There are enough males to go around and the glut of offspring that are
then born reduces the probability that any one of them is eaten; i.e. the dilution effect. In addition, related
females help keep watch over the young that then have playmates. Seasonal breeding is tied to environmental conditions, so that females benefit by timing events to coordinate with resource availability.
The second type of MMF is commonly called a community social organization. Species that exhibit this
type of social organization are male philopatric ripe fruit specialists. As mentioned, females cannot defend
fruit, so they do not band together into matrilines. Related males defend a territory that contains enough
resources to attract females. Females and their offspring forage independently but group members come
together periodically into larger aggregations, hence the other term for this type of social organization, fission-fusion. New World spider and muriqui monkeys and the chimps and bonobos of Africa (see figure 4.10)
are all categorized as community species.

4. Primate Social Organization | 37

Figure 4.9 Long-tailed (also known as crab-eating) macaque. “Ngarai Sianok
Sumatran monkey” by Sakurai Midori is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Figure 4.10 “Bonobo group hug.” “Bonobo group hug” by Magnus Manske is licensed
under CC BY-SA 2.0.

38 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

5. What is a Hominin
We are hominins, as are all those bipedal apes that came before us. Figure 5.1 shows most of the hominin
species through time, some of which we are descended from and some that are side branches in our tribal
tree!

Figure 5.1 Hominin species through time. “Hominin species distributed through time” from “Paleoanthropology” in
Wikipedia is licensed CC-BY-SA

ANATOMICAL TERMS
In order to adequately understand a discussion of hominin evolution and appreciate changes over time,
some basic anatomical information is necessary. It is also necessary in order to distinguish primitive or
ape-like skeletal characteristics from those that are derived, i.e. those that arose later in time.
Any discussion of anatomy assumes that one is speaking of a body in anatomical position, i.e. facing forward
if standing or supine (face up) if lying down, with palms forward or up (see Figure 5.2—5.4). When referencing particular structures or regions of the body, we make use of the following terms:
•
•
•
•

Superior—closer to the top of the head.
Inferior—closer to the soles (or plantar surfaces) of the feet.
Medial—closer to the midline of the body.
Lateral—closer to the far right or left of the body, relative to the midline.

The following two terms are used in reference to the limbs:
• Proximal—closer to the base of a limb.
39

• Distal—closer to the end of a limb.
You may hear your professor use the above terms when describing aspects of human or fossil specimen
anatomy.
Note: If you are thinking about a career in paleoanthropology, get as much training in anatomy as possible,
even while an undergraduate. Anthropology and biology departments may offer courses in human anatomy,
human osteology, forensic anthropology, and the like. Finds like “Lucy” (Australopithecus afarensis, see
Chapter 11) come along once in a lifetime. Most discoveries consist of little pieces of fossilized bone or teeth
and thus knowledge of human anatomy is crucial for recognizing possible landmarks on the remains.

HUMAN GROSS SKELETAL ANATOMY
The terms gross anatomy and macroscopic anatomy refer to the study of structures that are visible to the
naked eye. In this section, we will consider whole bones versus the individual parts of bones and only those
bones that are external, as those are most relevant in a discussion of bipedalism and human evolution.
While the anatomy of the lower limb takes precedence in a discussion of bipedalism, other parts of the body
also changed over time. The anatomy of the skull is particularly important because the skulls and faces of
hominin species changed over time and geographic space.

Figure 5.2 Human axial skeleton (shaded). “Axial skeleton
diagram” by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal is in the public domain.

40 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 5.3 Human appendicular skeleton (shaded).
“Appendicular skeleton diagram” by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal
is in the public domain.

We will begin with regional anatomy. The axial skeleton consists of the head and torso. Regionally it is
divided into the skull, thorax, and spinal column. The spinal column is divided into the seven cervical (neck),
twelve thoracic (thorax/chest), five lumbar (lower back), five sacral (also known as sacrum), and four coccygeal (also known as coccyx or tailbone, they may also number three or five) vertebrae. The limbs and
shoulder and hip regions make up the appendicular skeleton. The upper limb is also known as the arm or
forelimb. It is divided into the arm (upper arm), forearm, wrist, and hand and fingers. The lower limb is also
known as the leg or hindlimb and is made up of the thigh, leg (equivalent of forearm), ankle, and foot and
toes.
Individual bones of the axial and appendicular skeletons are labeled in Figure 5.4. They will not be discussed
here.

5. What is a Hominin | 41

Figure 5.4 Human skeleton. “Human skeleton front en” by Mariana Ruiz Villarreal is in the public domain.

42 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

THE EVOLUTION OF BIPEDALISM

Figure 5.5 Running man. “Nude Man Running” by Eadweard Muybridge is in the
public domain.

There are a variety of theories as to how bipedalism evolved and why it proved to be so successful for early
hominins. One early idea suggested that by standing up, our ancestors would have been able to see above
the grass and thus avoid predation. Baboons and patas monkeys provided living models for hypothesizing
the environmental stresses early hominins might have faced on the open plains of Africa. While they likely
traveled through open areas, we now know that the earliest hominins were exploiting forest resources, as
evidenced by their thinner molar enamel, relative to later hominins. There were also theories that involved
the freeing up of the hands to make and use tools and for carrying resources to a safe place or home base.
C. Owen Lovejoy believes that bipedalism allowed males to provision mates with resources (Lovejoy, 1981).
Those males with the most advanced bipedal capabilities would have had an increased chance of mating
and possibly offspring survival, and thus bipedalism would have spread throughout the population. While
Lovejoy makes a good case for how a trait could be favored in a population, it is not clear why females would
have needed to be provisioned unless their offspring had already lost their ability to hang on with their feet,
and hence became a burden to foraging. We now know that ardipiths, while bipedal on the ground, had a
divergent hallux, so that young animals could likely have hung on to their mothers in trees like modern primates. Although we cannot know for sure whether they were covered with hair, I can only speculate that
when on the ground, young infants may have hung by clasping the fur on their mother’s ventrum (anterior
aspect of the trunk) while the mother supported their bottom. As the baby matured, it may have clasped
its hands around the mother’s neck or chest and hung on to her fur with its feet and later ridden “piggyback” like modern quadrupedal monkeys and apes. Eventually, it would have walked beside her from place to
place. However, if resources had become extremely scarce, bipedal males may have ventured out onto dangerous ground for resources with which to provision their mates. Another theory that sees males as being
the impetus for bipedalism suggests that males may have been more terrestrial and females more arboreal,
i.e. a case of niche partitioning, like gorillas and the mandrill and drill monkeys, where males forage on the
ground and females and young spend more time in the trees. Other theories also suggest that bipedalism
was a response to the changing nature of the resource base. For example, Meave Leakey and Kevin Hunt

5. What is a Hominin | 43

(a theory known as Hunt’s Postural Feeding Hypothesis, Hunt 1996) believe that the ability to stand on two
legs for long periods of time would have facilitated picking fruit from the terminal branches of low, scrubby
trees in the increasingly open habitats of East Africa. While the aforementioned theories are not mutually
exclusive and there was likely a synergistic effect that resulted from our ancestors’ changing locomotor
capabilities, a highly plausible model suggests that it was our ability to break out of the “ape habitat” that
facilitated our evolutionary success.

The following items will help us to better understand this great
“step” in our ancestry:
• Apes are descended from an arboreal climber from the early Miocene of Africa.
• The ancestor of the African great apes possessed a suspensory hanging adaptation and thus
had an upright trunk that was wide and shallow; mobile shoulder and wrist joints; long arms
relative to leg length; long, curved hand and foot bones; and an opposable big toe (hallux).
The next section explains how that thoracic morphology facilitated our ancestors’ bipedalism.
• The common ancestor of chimps and hominins was likely a semi-terrestrial quadruped that
was adapted to climbing, feeding, and sleeping in trees, as well as moving and foraging on
the ground.
• The late Miocene of Africa was marked by climatic change that spurred floral and hence faunal changes. Equatorial Africa was cooler and increasingly drier than in earlier times. The
Indian subcontinent continued to move north, resulting in the uplifting of the Himalayan
mountain chain that produced a rain shadow, i.e. moisture-laden clouds that would have
previously drifted down into Africa now lost their moisture on the mountains. Drying winds
and cooler temperatures resulted in forest reduction and fragmentation in Africa, splitting
and isolating resident faunal populations.
• The majority of African ape species went extinct due to loss of habitat.
• Bipedalism is an efficient means of locomotion for covering distance on fairly level ground.
• A more vertical posture reduces the surface area exposed to solar radiation in a more open
environment. It also raises a large percentage of the body away from the hot ground, where
it is exposed to cooling breezes.
• The ancestors of the hominins adapted to the changing environment by becoming bipedal on
the ground. Over time they developed a more efficient heat exchange system for their bodies
(sweating) and brains (large venous sinuses for rapid blood movement) and lost much of their
body hair.
• Based upon early hominin teeth, they were generalists like chimps, likely getting the majority
of their carbohydrates and fats from fruit, protein from young leaves, and possibly fat and
protein from animal matter, e.g. social insects (chimps and gorillas eat a lot of ants and termites) and animals caught opportunistically. No early hominins exhibit the same degree of
canine size or sharpness as chimp and gorilla males. Their canines stay sharp via a honing
(sharpening) action with the first lower premolar, termed a sectorial premolar due to its unicuspid morphology. The combination of the action and morphology of the two teeth is
termed a “honing complex”. Males’ canines are exceptionally large and, in combination with

44 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

their high degree of sexual dimorphism, are used to compete with other males for access to
females. Of course, they are also useful for predator defense. Thus, if the common ancestor
of chimps, gorillas, and hominins possessed a premolar honing complex, as seems likely, the
early hominin fossil evidence suggests that they were losing their fighting teeth. In addition,
fossil hominins do not exhibit the same degree of sexual dimorphism as seen in chimps and
especially gorillas. Later chapters contain more information on hominin socioecology.

Most apes went extinct as their habitats dwindled and they competed for limited resources. However,
with an efficient means of locomotion to move between forest patches when resources became depleted,
hominins could continue to exploit those resources to which they were adapted. They also likely evolved
new capabilities for exploiting newly encountered food items as they moved through and between ecozones. Loss of habitat and resources often leads to local extinctions. By expanding their home ranges and
dietary niches, hominins survived while the majority of their close relatives did not.

BIPEDAL ANATOMY
See Figure 5.4 for individual bones.
The majority of bipedal characteristics involve the hip (or pelvic girdle) and lower limb. However, as will be
seen below, certain skull and trunk characteristics are also adaptations for bipedal locomotion. In addition,
we have inherited many aspects of our upper bodies from our ape ancestors and those will all be discussed
in the following sections.

SKULL
The skull consists of the bones of the braincase and face and the mandible (lower jaw). The foramen magnum is the hole in the occipital bone situated in the base of our skulls (see Figure 5.6). It is where our spinal
cord exits the cranial vault. In hominins, the foramen magnum is positioned more anteriorly than in the
other apes because our head sits on top of our vertebral column. Thus while the earliest hominins had very
ape-like faces, the position of the foramen magnum shows that they were bipeds.

5. What is a Hominin | 45

Figure 5.6 Foramen magnum indicated from inside skull vault. “Crane4
Foramen magnum” by Didier Descouens is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Figure 5.7 Bones of the skull. Plate 188 from Gray’s Anatomy. “Side view
of the skull” by Henry Vandyke Carter is in the public domain.

46 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

VERTEBRAE
Ape spines are not as flexible as monkeys’ spines, giving us better upper body support since we are more
upright than most other primates. Our vertebrae increase in size and robusticity from top to bottom so that
our lumbar vertebrae are very large; they sit on the fused vertebrae of the sacrum, which is firmly attached
to the hip bones. The sacrum is large and broad and curves inward (as does the coccyx) to help support the
organs. Thus our spinal column is a strong supporting structure for the upper body. We hominins have two
larger curves in our backs relative to the other apes, the cervical curve and the lumbar curve. The fact that
our heads are more upright than nonhuman apes means that the cervical vertebrae must form a more concave curve, i.e. the superior aspect of our neck is arched back relative to theirs (see Figure 5.8). The more
pronounced lumbar curve forms when we stand up and begin toddling about. The joints between the lumbar vertebrae are easily strained and it is thus important to maintain strong back and abdominal muscles
throughout life, to aid in the stability of the region.

Figure 5.8 Chimp (left) vs. human spine (right). Illustration
by Keenan Taylor

THORAX
The thorax consists of the sternum, ribs, and thoracic vertebrae. The ape thorax is adapted to climbing
and swinging in trees. It is wide (right to left) and shallow (front to back) relative to quadrupedal monkeys,
which have a narrow and deep thorax like those of dogs. While the morphology of the thorax was originally
adapted to arboreal climbing, the upright trunk also allowed for bipedal locomotion. In addition, the shallow
nature of the thorax brings the center of gravity closer to the vertebral column for better weight concentration and transfer. Apes are better bipeds than most nonhuman primates. They can walk bipedally for short
to moderate distances, depending on the species, but it is not efficient and they cannot maintain it for very
long.

SHOULDER GIRDLE
The shoulder girdle consists of the clavicle, scapula, and humerus. The shoulder joint of extant nonhuman
apes and early hominins is and was angled upward, demonstrating the arboreal ancestry of those hominins
5. What is a Hominin | 47

and, in combination with their long, curved fingers, it suggested that they could ascend and climb about
in trees. Our clavicles stabilize our shoulder joints for swinging and hanging. The triangular shape of the
scapula (shoulder blade) is more equilateral than that of a quadrupedal monkey’s, which is more elongated.
Our scapulae are more mobile than those of a typical quadruped and the articular surface of the scapula,
i.e. where the round head of the humerus articulates (makes contact), is shallow and allows us to rotate our
arms at the shoulder. This suspensory hanging complex of clavicle, scapula, and humerus morphology (also
elbow and wrist adaptations—see below), along with the muscles and connective tissue involved, allows us
to climb, hang, and swing by our arms.

UPPER LIMB
The upper limb consists of the humerus of the arm, the radius and ulna of the forearm, the eight carpal
bones of the wrist, the five metacarpals of the body of the hand, and the phalanges of the digits (three per
finger and two per thumb, or pollex). As mentioned, the head of the ape humerus is round, resulting in a
very mobile shoulder joint. We can fully extend our arms at the elbow in order to hang or swing, whereas
quadrupeds cannot. In addition, we can supinate and pronate our forearm, i.e. move our hand palm up
or palm down. This movement is possible because the head of the radius is a concave disk that rotates
on a ball-like structure termed the capitulum on the distal humerus (see Figure 5.9). Our wrist joints are
very flexible, allowing us to rotate and twist our hands in a variety of ways. Early hominins had short legs,
long arms, and curved fingers. Over time, hominin legs lengthened so that their intermembral index (IMI)
became reduced. The intermembral index is the ratio of armlength to leglength, calculated by the following
equation:

If an animal has long legs and short arms (like us), they have a low IMI and vice versa; if fore- and hindlimbs
are approximately equal in length, such as in terrestrial quadrupeds, the IMI will be close to 100.

HIP OR PELVIC GIRDLE
Our shoulders are somewhat analogous to our butts! This is because muscles originating from outside the
limbs are crossing the joints to insert upon and move the limbs. Because we are bipeds, it is not as apparent
as it is in quadrupeds, whose fore- and hindlimbs move similarly. However, if you compare the humerus and
femur and the muscles that cross the respective joints (deltoids and gluteal muscles, respectively), you will
definitely see similarities.
Our pelvis is very unique and interesting. It has changed significantly from an ape pelvis (see Figure 5.10).
The pelvis is made up of three bones: the two lateral bones, termed innominates or os coxae, and the
sacrum. Collectively, they form a basin-like structure that holds our internal organs while providing support
for our upper bodies. Each innominate consists of three bones that fuse during development: the ilium,
ischium, and pubis (see Figure 5.13). They meet at the hip joint. Hominin innominates became shorter and
broader, so that the ilium wraps around laterally from an earlier, more posterior position. This changed
the orientation and action of our hip muscles, allowing for our striding gait and the ability to balance our
weight on one fully extended leg while the other leg is in the swing phase. A portion of the gluteus maximus
muscle inserts behind the hip joint in hominins (versus lateral in chimps), and thus instead of abducting the
femur (moving it out laterally, as when doing jumping jacks), it changed to a powerful hip extensor (backward motion) for running.

48 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 5.9 Human elbow. “Bones of the elbow” by Rob Swatski is licensed CC-BY-NC.

Figure 5.10 Left innominates of chimp (left), australopith (center), and human
(right). Illustration by Keenan Taylor.

Figures 5.11 and 5.12 illustrate the landmarks that are adaptations to bipedalism. The iliac crest is long and
curved, as the bone wraps around laterally. The iliac blade is short but expanded horizontally. The iliac
blades are buttressed or reinforced to handle the stress of our upper body weight. The thick section of

5. What is a Hominin | 49

Figure 5.11 Human pelvic morphology: The three fused bones of the
innominates (ilium, ischium, and pubis), sacrum, and coccyx. Plate 241
from Gray’s Anatomy. “Male pelvis” by Henry Vandyke Carter is in the
public domain.

bone, termed the iliac pillar, can be seen running from the iliac crest (at the iliac tubercle) down behind
the hip joint. The articular area, termed the acetabulum, is large and deep, providing a stable socket for
the ball-like head of the femur. The joints of the pelvis are very strong and relatively immobile (compared
to the shoulder joint). The sacroiliac joint (between the ilium and the sacrum) is large and more posterior
and proximal to the hip joint than in quadrupedal apes. Together with the strong pubic symphysis (anterior
joint where the pubis portions of the two innominates meet), these characteristics make for a very stable
supporting structure.

LOWER LIMB
The lower limb consists of the femur of the thigh, the tibia and fibula of the leg, seven tarsal bones of the
ankle, five metatarsals of the body of the foot, and phalanges of the digits (three per toe and two per big toe
or hallux). The head (proximal ball-like structure) of the hominin femur is large. The femur angles medially
(inward) from hip to knee, so that our upper body weight is transferred down through our hip joints to our
knees. This is termed the carrying or bicondylar angle. The knees of quadrupedal apes are directly below
the hip joint, so there is more strain on the knee joints when they walk bipedally (see Figure 5.13). We have
two bulbous structures on the bottom of each femur, termed condyles. The innermost condyle, the medial
condyle, has lengthened in hominins so that the femur sits on top of the flat tibial surface. If this were not
the case, the medial condyle would not make contact with the tibial plateau, due to the bicondylar angle.
Weight is transferred through our innominate, hip joint, and lateral condyle of the femur (see Figure 5.13,
“Human”). Unlike apes’ knees that are chronically flexed, our knees are capable of full extension; each locks
into place when the other leg is in swing phase, giving us a stable supporting leg. Each gluteus medius muscle alternately supports the opposite side of the torso and pelvis, so that it does not slump on the unsupported side.

50 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 5.12 Ossified joints of the bones of a left innominate (lateral view).
Plate 237 from Gray’s Anatomy. Note where the ilium, ischium, and
pubis articulate at the acetabulum.
“Plan of ossification of the hip bone” by Henry Vandyke Carter is in the
public domain.

Figure 5.13 Pelvic girdle and weight loading on knee joint. Illustration by Keenan Taylor.

5. What is a Hominin | 51

Figure 5.14 Human foot bones. Plates 290 and 291 from Gray’s Anatomy. “Skeleton of foot. Medial aspect”
and “Skeleton of foot. Lateral aspect” by Henry Vandyke Carter are in the public domain.

Our feet (see Figure 5.14) have changed dramatically from a mobile, grasping structure to a rigid, supporting
one. The tarsal bones of the human ankle are large and robust for support. The joint between the distal
tibia and fibula is fairly immobile, so that the two bones are firmly lashed together. Together, they articulate
with the talus (most superior tarsal bone) in a hinge joint. We have lost much of the mobility of an ape foot
and thus have become less agile in climbing over time. The calcaneus or heel bone is very large and robust
and, along with the ball of the foot (distal end of the first metatarsal) and the area below the baby toe (fifth
metatarsophalangeal joint), forms a tripod structure. Our feet have three arches for support, shock absorption, and forward propulsion; they are the medial and lateral longitudinal arches and the transverse arch.
Hominin toes became shorter and less curved over time. While shorter, the hallux became more robust and
lost its degree of divergence and opposability, by coming into alignment with the lateral four toes, i.e. digits
II through V.

HOMININ EVOLUTIONARY TRENDS
Just as there are evolutionary trends that characterize primates, there are also trends that characterize the
hominins, i.e. traits that developed over time and occur to varying degrees in the various hominin species
(see Table 5.1). While all of the morphological changes involved with bipedalism are hominin trends, there
are also relevant characteristics in other parts of the body.

52 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Table 5.1 HOMININ EVOLUTIONARY TRENDS
Bipedalism and related morphological adaptations.
Encephalization and corresponding prolonged juvenile dependency.
Loss of craniofacial robusticity and muscle attachments.
Reduced prognathism.
Reduction in size of dentition.
Molarization of premolars.
Increased manual dexterity.
Elongated legs and increased stature.
Increased reliance on culture, technology, and language.
Increased reliance on meat in the diet.

Most notable, our ancestors and their relatives became increasingly more intelligent. Our brains have
increased in size more than four-fold, from a more chimp-sized brain (<400 cc) in the earliest hominins to
a mean of ~1400 cc. This likely occurred in response to environmental stresses as well as competition with
other hominins for resources. Skull size and shape changed in response to encephalization, i.e. increasing
brain size.
Brains are very costly organs and researchers believe that in order for brain size to have increased, there
would have had to have been a corresponding decrease in some other costly organ system. It is hypothesized that a higher quality diet allowed the hominin gut to shrink and, in turn, the brain to expand.
Marked encephalization in the hominin lineage began with the first members of our own genus: Homo.
While there is some evidence that earlier species (e.g. australopiths) manufactured tools, there is solid evidence that early Homo did, and the archaeological record suggests an increasing reliance on meat in their
diet. While the dimensions of the thorax remained wide and shallow, the shape of the rib cage changed
from a more conical, ape-like thorax that could accommodate a large gut, to our more barrel shape. As
our brains became bigger, our ancestors gave birth to increasingly altricial (helpless) young that continued their development outside of the womb. Our offspring require protection and care for a much longer
period than those of the other great apes, i.e. we have a prolonged juvenile dependency period. At least by
the time of the earliest members of the erectus grade at 1.8 mya (see Chapter 27 and subsequent chapters),
it is thought that infant requirements necessitated assistance from mates and/or relatives.
Many of the early hominins had pronounced, forward-oriented jaws, termed prognathism (pro = forward;
gnath = jaw). Over time, hominins became more flat-faced, or orthognathic. While extant African apes
retain primitive prognathism and the shearing/honing dental complex, hominins lost those pronounced
canines, as well as the gaps in the corresponding tooth rows—termed canine diastema (singular) or
diastemata (plural)—that allow apes to close their jaws. The hominin first lower/mandibular premolar developed into the characteristic bicuspid (two-cusped) morphology over time, as opposed to the apes’ unicuspid sectorial premolar. The loss of the honing complex may have been in response to reduced competition
for females as a result of male-female pair-bonding. Once the jaws no longer locked into place, our ancestors were free to grind their food, aiding in its digestion.

5. What is a Hominin | 53

Figure 5.15 Temporalis muscle: Originates on frontal, parietal, and
temporal bones and inserts on mandible. (Zygomatic is shown as having
been cut to reveal underlying muscle. Plate 382 from Gray’s Anatomy.
“The temporalis” by Henry Vandyke Carter is in the public domain.

The size of jaw and neck muscle attachment sites on the skull became reduced in the hominin lineage over
time, along with a reduction in the size of the teeth and craniofacial robusticity. The action of the powerful
temporalis muscle (a muscle of mastication) changed from primarily acting on the front of the jaw, allowing
apes to clamp their jaws powerfully shut during fighting, to acting on the molar region for grinding food
(see Figure 5.15). The origin of the temporalis muscle moved over time from the midline of the top of the
skull to a more inferior position on the lateral aspect of the frontal and parietal bones (see Figure 5.15), due
to the reduction of the sagittal crest and decrease in temporalis power in hominins.
Leglength increased as our hominin ancestors came to rely less on an arboreal environment and became
primarily terrestrial. The pronounced increase in leglength and stature seen in the erectus grade (see Chapter 27), relative to past species, allowed them to cover vast distances efficiently and they moved from Africa
to Asia in a relatively short period of time.
Hominin fingers became shorter and lost their curvature over time. By the time of the australopiths, hands
had become more dexterous. There is evidence that Australopithecus africanus possessed a “power” thumb,
giving them increased abilities for holding objects in one hand while manipulating or working them with
the other hand. This was necessary for our ancestors to have made and efficiently used tools. The first
metacarpal was adapted for such activity, and the intrinsic thumb muscles (within the hand versus extending from the forearm into the hand) were well-developed. There is some controversial evidence that by the
time of the later robust australopiths, or paranthropines, expanded fingertips had appeared. Thus they may
also have possessed the enlarged tactile pads and increased sensitivity and vascularization that allows for
modern humans’ fine degree of manual dexterity.
Finally there is the cultural side of things. We are like no other species that has ever lived. We are unique
in our ability to practice, produce, and pass on culture. Our brains are predisposed to the acquisition of
language and culture. Thus, the final evolutionary trend seen in the hominins is an increased reliance on
culture and language over time.

54 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

HOMININ GROUPS
The hominins can be divided into five groups that will be covered in subsequent chapters, based on shared
characteristics and/or phylogenetic affinity:
1. Earliest bipeds: Orrorin and possibly Sahelanthropus.
2. Forest-adapted bipeds with relatively thin molar enamel: ardipiths.
3. Bipeds that exploited a more open and drier niche with thick molar enamel: gracile australopiths, such
as Australopithecus anamensis and afarensis.
4. Descendants of gracile australopiths with heavy masticatory apparatus, adapted to exploit tough or
hard foods when necessary: paranthropines, also known as robust australopiths.
5. Hominins that retained the gracile masticatory apparatus of their australopith ancestors and exhibited
a trend for encephalization and increasingly complex culture: Homo species.

5. What is a Hominin | 55

PART II: MIOCENE EPOCH
THE MIOCENE EPOCH (~23–5.3 mya)

Figure II.1 And, on this side of “the pond”: Miocene North
American fauna. “Miocene” by Jay Matternes is in the public
domain.

Relative to the Oligocene Epoch, the Miocene was initially warmer and by the mid-Miocene, primates had
once again ventured into the northern latitudes. This time they were apes, versus the prosimians of the
Eocene. However, like those earlier primates, the northern apes would eventually go extinct due to global
cooling that began ~14 mya.
Whenever there is climatic change, floral and faunal changes follow. Much of the dense equatorial forests
became more open, and grasslands and deserts expanded so that the African landscape became more of a
mosaic environment, versus deep, dark jungle. Initially the apes were very successful at diversifying and
expanding into new niches; as mentioned in Chapter 3, this was the time of the hominoid adaptive radiation. Over time, however, as the landscape continued to change and forests became increasingly fragmented, the majority of ape species went extinct, leaving only a handful of species in Africa.
In recent years, three new genera of hominoids have been discovered in Africa. While there is debate as to
whether the oldest, i.e. Sahelanthropus, is a true hominin, Orrorin and Ardipithecus are generally accepted
as true hominins.
Caution must be exercised in the interpretation of the fossil record. It is tempting to formulate a linear
history for our species, e.g. species A gave rise to Species B which gave rise to Species C, etc. The fossil
record is extremely incomplete and we may get only a glimpse of the species that lived at a particular time
and place. Paleoanthropologists are continually revising their theories as new discoveries are made and old
material is reinterpreted in light of new discoveries, methodologies, and working hypotheses.

57

6. Sahelanthropus tchadensis
Sahelanthropus tchadensis (<7mya)
(“human from the sahel” / Chad)

Figure 6.1 Sahelanthropus tchadensis by Keenan Taylor.

59

Figure 6.2 Cast of the Sahelanthropus tchadensis holotype
cranium. “Sahelanthropus tchadensis – TM 266-01-060-1” by Didier Descouens is
licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

SITES
Toros-Menalla, Chad

PEOPLE
Michel Brunet

INTRODUCTION
The Sahelanthropus tchadensis specimen (see Figure 6.2) was discovered in 2001 at the site of TorosMenalla, in the Djurab Desert of northern Chad, by Michel Brunet and associates. Brunet’s incredible
years-long quest for hominins in that area is documented in the NOVA series, Becoming Human
(www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/evolution/becoming-human.html). The species name translates to “human
from the sahel of Chad.” The sahel is the region of dry grasslands south of the Sahara desert. The skull has
been nicknamed “Toumai” in the Dazaga language, meaning “hope of life.”
The location of the fossil material came as a surprise in that only one species of hominin had ever been
discovered west of the Great Rift Valley of East Africa, i.e. Australopithecus bahrelghazali (see Chapter 12).

60 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 6.3 Toros Menalla site, Chad. “Sahelanthropus tchadensis – TM 266 location” by 120 is in the public domain.

However in 1998, Noel Boaz speculated that, contrary to the Rift theory for the origin of the hominins, a
portion of the ancestral stock that gave rise to the chimp and human lineages became isolated in a riparian
(i.e. riverine or gallery) forest zone in Chad that was surrounded by arid, open land. At a later point in time,
a forest corridor allowed their movement into East Africa. Part of the problem at that point in paleoanthropology was that no species of hominins, prior to the australopiths, had been discovered in East Africa. They
seemingly appeared de novo in the fossil record, beginning about 3.5 mya, with no intervening stages or
“missing links” in evidence. We now have much older hominin species from Kenya and Ethiopia, i.e. Orrorin
tugenensis and Ardipiths, respectively.

PHYLOGENY
While the phylogeny of S. tchadensis is unknown, some researchers believe that it may represent a stem or
basal hominin, i.e. one of the earliest members of our tribal tree. (Note: Once a genus is used the first time
in a document, it can subsequently be abbreviated.) Just as we do not know the ancestry of the species, we
do not have any species that are good contenders for its descendants.

6. Sahelanthropus tchadensis | 61

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
As mentioned, the holotype (the fossil(s) from a particular individual that are assigned to and used to define
the characteristics of a species) was discovered at the desert site of Toros Menalla (see Figure 6.3). Unless
fossils are discovered elsewhere, it is impossible to speculate about the extent of the geographic range of
the species.

Figure 6.4 Sculpture of S. tchadensis by
Élisabeth Daynès.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
The skull of S. tchadensis is very robust, with a chimp-sized brain and pronounced ape-like muscle attachments. While only fragmentary postcranial material has been discovered, some researchers claim that the
foramen magnum is anteriorly oriented, suggesting an upright and bipedal hominin. Pronounced brow
ridges are also concordant with early hominin status. The facial profile is surprisingly orthognathic and the
jaws lack the honing complex, leading some researchers to speculate that S. tchadensis may lie near the
base of our family tree, versus other phylogenetic scenarios. However, the pronounced posterior neck muscle attachments have led others to suggest that S. tchadensis may have been quadrupedal.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
Based upon fossilized faunal remains at the site, such as freshwater fish, rodents, and monkeys, it is likely
that S. tchadensis inhabited a forest environment in close proximity to an ancient lake (Wayman 2012). Their
way of life was likely that of a forest-dwelling ape. Like ardipiths (see Chapter 8), their molar enamel was
thinner than that of the later australopiths and they thus likely had a chimp-like diet consisting of fruit,
young leaves, and tender shoots.

62 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

7. Orrorin tugenensis
Orrorin tugenensis (~6 mya)
(“original” / Tugen hills)

Figure 7.1 Drawing of Orrorin tugenensis fossil
material. “Orrorin tugenensis” by Lucius is licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0.

SITES
Aragai and Kapsomin in the Tugen Hills of Kenya

PEOPLE
Brigitte Senut and Martin Pickford

63

INTRODUCTION
In 2000, the team of Brigitte Senut and Martin Pickford discovered fossil material (see Figure 7.1) from the
Lukeino Formation in the Tugen Hills of Kenya. Nicknamed “Millenium Man” due to its timely discovery,
the fossils were dated to ~6 mya and given the taxonomic classification, Orrorin tugenensis (“original man
from the Tugen hills”). Initially many paleoanthropologists were skeptical, especially since the fossils were
not made available to the scientific community. While there is still debate, O. tugenensis is increasingly presented in published texts as a hominin.

PHYLOGENY
The ancestry of O. tugenensis is unknown. Senut and Pickford believe that Orrorin is ancestral to humans.
They suggest that the hominin tribe split prior to 6 mya with Orrorin and some species of australopiths
(specifically Australopithecus anamensis and Australopithecus afarensis, which they place in the genus Preanthropus) in the human lineage and ardipiths and robust australopiths, or paranthropines (including Australopithecus africanus), on another branch that died out.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
There are only two known sites for the species, Aragai and Kapsomin, both of which are in the Tugen Hills
of Kenya (see Figure 7.2).

Figure 7.2 Ororrin tugenensis sites, Kenya. “Orrorin localities”
by Chartep is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Few body parts have been recovered. The fossils consist of a partial humerus, femur, and mandible; a distal
thumb bone (phalanx); and some teeth. Primitive characteristics include remnants of a honing complex,
with large canines and a “semi-sectorial” premolar. The molars were covered with thick enamel like those
of later hominins, and while they were small like our own, they were not as laterally expanded. Senut and

64 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Pickford assert that the femur of O. tugenensis is very human-like, with its large head and hominin-like carrying/bicondylar angle, and thus is part of the human lineage.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
It is generally accepted that O. tugenensis was bipedal, and that they likely practiced a similar way of life
as the ardipiths and australopiths. Thus, they were likely semi-terrestrial, foraging both in trees and on the
ground and using trees for sleep and safety. However, their more human-like femur and thick molar enamel
allies them more with the australopiths and they thus likely spent more time on the ground than the ardipiths and exploited a greater percentage of terrestrial resources that cause more tooth wear. In addition, like
Australopithecus afarensis, O. tugenensis exhibits vestiges of the honing complex and thus may be ancestral
to australopiths.

7. Orrorin tugenensis | 65

8. Ardipithecus ramidus, Ardipithecus
kadabba
GENUS: Ardipithecus (“ground ape”)

Figure 8.1 Ardi by Keenan Taylor.

Deposits within the Afar triangle/depression of Ethiopia (see Figure 8.2) have yielded multiple hominin
species within the genera Ardipithecus and Australopithecus. This hotbed of hominin fossils is the northern
limit of the East African Rift Zone, where the Arabian and African plates converge. The first species of
ardipith to be discovered in the area was Ar. ramidus (4.4 mya), and the second and even older species was
Ar. kadabba (5.8 mya). When Ar. kadabba was discovered by Yohannes Haile-Selassie, he believed that it

66

Figure 8.2 The East African Rift Zone. The Afar triangle is featured in darker pink at the most
northerly limit (see ‘Erta ‘Ale site). “EAfrica” by the USGS is in the public domain.

was similar enough to Ar. ramidus that he included it in the same genus and species, thus warranting subspecies classification. Since Ar. ramidus was already named, its classification became Ar. ramidus ramidus,
in the same manner that we became Homo sapiens sapiens when it was decided that Neandertals should
be included in our species and they became Homo sapiens neanderthalensis. The original name is always
preserved for the original fossil(s). It becomes known as the “type specimen” or “holotype” and is used to
describe the characteristics that define the species. The older subspecies then became Ar. ramidus kadabba.
Since that time, they have been split into two species within the genus: Ardipithecus. Each will be discussed
below.
Some paleoanthropologists have suggested that Ardipithecus may be a better candidate for our ancestry
than one or more of the australopiths. It has also been suggested that australopiths are descended from
Ardipithecus or that the ardipiths are a separate but related branch.

8. Ardipithecus ramidus, Ardipithecus kadabba | 67

Ardipithecus ramidus (4.4 mya)
(“ground ape” / “at the root” in Afar language)

Figure 8.3 Map showing the fossil sites of the earliest hominids. “Map of the
fossil sites of the earliest hominids (35.8-3.3M BP)” by Kameraad Pjotr and
Sting is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

SITES
Aramis, Ethiopia

PEOPLE
Tim White and colleagues

PHYLOGENY
The phylogeny of the ardipiths is unknown. We do not know if they left any descendants, but it is thought
that Ardipithecus ramidus is likely descended from Ardipithecus kadabba.

68 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
During the early 1990s, fossils were unearthed at the site of Aramis in the Middle Awash region of the Afar
Triangle of Ethiopia (see Figure 8.3). Since that time, material from more than 50 individuals has been recovered, in particular the famous “Ardi” skeleton (see Figures 8.4 and 8.5) that is ~50% complete. Prior to the
discovery, all or most early African hominin fossils were considered to be australopiths. Tim White and his
colleagues determined that the material was distinctive enough to warrant new genus classification.

Figure 8.4 Digital reconstruction of Ardipithecus ramidus
specimen. “Ardi” by T. Michael Keesey is licensed under CC BY
2.0.

Fifteen years after its discovery, Ardi was presented to the world in a frenzy of media coverage. She shook
the world, not just within paleoanthropology, but for anyone interested in our past. She was an upright
ape! Yes, we are all apes, but Ardi looked like what we think of as an ape. She had an ape face, small brain,
long and strong arms and fingers, and ape-like feet. However, she stood upright with straight rather than
flexed legs. The film Discovering Ardi (2009, Discovery Communications) showcases her discovery, fossil
processing and analyses, the artist’s skeletal and full-body reconstructions, biomechanical computer-generated graphics, etc.—everything for the modern tech-appreciative student!

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Ardipiths were likely arboreal climbers, like the ancient “basal” proconsulids. However, when they were on
the ground, they walked bipedally, albeit with rather clumsy-looking feet. Characteristics that were initially
used to designate hominin status were an anteriorly placed foramen magnum, aspects of the innominate
and ulna, and especially the morphology of the humerus that suggested that it was not weight-bearing and
therefore not involved in terrestrial locomotion.
Primitive characteristics of ardipiths can be seen in many body regions. Their brains were small. Depending
on the source, their cranial base (the inferior portion of the occipital bone) was either flat like chimps and
gorillas, or angled and tucked under the upper part of the cranium (termed flexed cranial base or basicranial flexion). The enamel on their molars was thin like that of chimps and other extinct forest-dwelling
apes. They retained several primitive characteristics that are related to arboreal climbing:
• Elevated shoulder joints for reaching up for branches, etc.

8. Ardipithecus ramidus, Ardipithecus kadabba | 69

Figure 8.5 Artist’s representation of Ardipithecus ramidus. “Ardipithecus Gesamt1”
by Ori~ is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

• Long arms and long, curved fingers.
• Mobile wrists.
• Poorly differentiated thumb, meaning that they had poor opposability.
Orangutans are the only great ape with a similar thumb morphology and hence have poor manual dexterity.
Ardipiths’ divergent hallux (i.e. the big toe diverges away from the lateral four digits, like our thumbs) would
also have been adaptive for climbing.
Derived postcranial characteristics of ardipiths are all in the hip and lower limb. While Ardi’s species had
short legs and long arms (i.e. high intermembral index), the morphology of their hip and leg bones reflect
bipedality, according to Tim White, Owen Lovejoy, and other members of their team. The innominate and
foot morphology combine adaptations for climbing and bipedalism. They were capable of full extension at

70 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

the knee, unlike the flexed knee seen in extant apes. Their feet were stable and supported their body weight
and the divergent hallux facilitated grasping and climbing.
Body mass is estimated from Ardi’s skeleton and thus no estimate for males of the species is possible. Ardi
is estimated to have been 3′11” (120 cm) tall and weighed about 110 lb (50 kg) (Gibbons 2009). The absence of
both a honing complex and pronounced prognathism suggests to some researchers, such as C. Owen Lovejoy, that males were not competing for females and may have formed pair-bonds with them.

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• Small brain and flat cranial base.
• Thin molar enamel.
• Climbing complex of upper limb:
◦ Elevated shoulder joint.
◦ Long arms.
◦ Long and curved fingers.
• Low manual dexterity.
• Divergent hallux.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Anteriorly oriented foramen magnum.
• Bipedal hip, leg, and foot characteristics.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
The sites where ardipith fossils have been recovered were a mosaic environment consisting of wood- and
grasslands during the late Miocene and early Pliocene. Those ancient apes likely subsisted on a combination
of arboreal and terrestrial forest resources. Their thin molar enamel suggests that, like chimps and orangutans, their diet consisted of relatively soft food items, such as fruit, young leaves, and shoots and possibly
ants and termites. They could locomote within and between trees when foraging, or climb down and travel
between trees or forested areas. Since all great apes build nests, ardipiths may have made a new arboreal
nest every night.

8. Ardipithecus ramidus, Ardipithecus kadabba | 71

Figure 8.6 Ardipith by Keenan Taylor.

Some scientists see the lack of canine sexual dimorphism and honing complex as evidence for pair-bonding. There is good evidence from the animal literature to relate sexual monomorphism (no difference in size
between males and females) and pair-bonding. As mentioned in Chapter 4, while there are several groups
of primates that exhibit that grouping and mating strategy, they are all arboreal. The lesser apes are arboreal, medium-sized (<6 kg) primates that form territorial pairs. Their mode of locomotion is brachiation,
i.e. swinging under branches. While that is a more efficient means by which to avoid predation relative to
ardipiths climbing around in the trees, the latter were larger and heavier and thus were likely fairly safe.
When they descended to the ground, however, pairs would have been fair game for predators.

72 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

The idea that male provisioning, in combination with pair-bonding, was the evolutionary stimulus for
bipedalism is also problematic. As I discussed in Chapter 5, I do not understand why females would need to
be provisioned unless their babies could no longer hang on. I just do not see males risking life and limb to
bring food back to females. I know of no examples in nature of a mammalian male provisioning his mate. It
is more likely that resources became fragmented to the point that upright locomotion was the most efficient way to move between trees and forest patches. Bipedalism was an adaptation to enable continued
reliance on forest resources while minimizing competition. Ardipiths could move to another forest patch
when resources became scarce. I think of them as being semi-terrestrial apes like chimps and gorillas but,
unlike those extant species, they had less of a stable resource base. They thus evolved a more efficient locomotor strategy for expanding their home range.

Figure 8.7 Ardipith Parenting by Keenan Taylor.

Ardipithecus kadabba (5.8 mya)
(“ground ape” / “oldest ancestor” in Afar language)
Yohannes Haile-Selassie discovered the second ardipith species in the Middle Awash region of the Afar
Depression (see Figure 8.3). The species is thought to be ancestral to Ar. ramidus. Dental characteristics are
more ape-like than those of Ar. ramidus. While the fossils are very fragmentary, a toe bone suggests bipedal

8. Ardipithecus ramidus, Ardipithecus kadabba | 73

Figure 8.8 Ardipith by Keenan Taylor.

foot movement involving the “toe-off” motion, i.e. when we push off with the toes of one foot as we plant
our other foot following its “swing” phase.

74 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

PART III: PLIOCENE EPOCH
THE PLIOCENE EPOCH (5.3–2.6 mya)

Figure III.1 Pliocene fauna of North America. “Pliocene” by Jay
Matternes is in the public domain.

The Pliocene Epoch (~5.3–2.6 mya) was characterized by global cooling and weather disruptions due to
the formation of the Panama land bridge and resultant changes in ocean currents. The polar ice caps
were expanding and sea levels had already begun to drop, as the Pleistocene Epoch (~2.6 mya–11.7 kya)
approached. The geologic record shows us that Africa was subject to cooling and drying trends, with seasons becoming more pronounced. Grasslands were expanding and thus forest cover was shrinking. Intermittent wet and dry periods changed the African landscape. Lakes formed and dried and filled once again.
All of the ardipiths and most australopiths went extinct during this epoch and by ~2.0 mya genus Homo
appeared in the fossil record. The most tantalizing question with regard to the earliest members of our
genus is what drove the encephalization process. By the time of the more derived paranthropines [Paranthropus boisei (2.5–1.4 mya) and robustus (1.9–1.3 mya)] and genus: Homo (≥2 mya), cranial capacity had
increased ~100 cc and 200 cc, respectively, from the earlier hominins. It has generally been hypothesized
that competition for resources was the driving force, and while that may be so, recent research has illuminated just how radical climatic changes were in East Africa. The film Becoming Human (2009, Discovery
Communications) provides a nice overview of how scientists have pieced together the Pliocene environment of that region of the world from the local geology.

75

PLIOCENE HOMININS

Figure III.2 Foraging paranthropines in South African grasslands. Artwork by
Walter Voigt.

The Pliocene Epoch can be considered the time of the great adaptive radiation of the hominins, when
more than a dozen species evolved in the hominin corridor from Ethiopia to South Africa. While the ardipiths died out, concurrent with the reduction in forest cover during the late Miocene and early Pliocene,
many australopiths came and went over the course of almost 3 mya of the Pliocene. The australopith lineage
may pre-date the Pliocene; there is possible australopith material (possibly Australopithecus anamensis or
afarensis) from the late Miocene from several Kenyan sites (e.g. Lothagam and Tabarin) for which no taxonomic designation has been established. While there is debate as to how much time australopiths spent
outside of forested environments, they certainly filled distinctive niches, as evidenced by changing craniofaciodental morphology as well as more versatile hands that afforded them greater manipulative abilities.
As we discover more about australopith limb morphology, it is apparent that some were more adapted to
an arboreal environment whereas others were less so. Of even greater interest is that the East African australopiths (i.e. Australopithecus anamensis, afarensis, and garhi) may represent a different clade than those
from South Africa (i.e. Australopithecus africanus and sediba). The East African species may have been more
adapted to a terrestrial environment, while the South African forms may have retained or reverted to more
primitive climbing adaptations. The various species may have walked differently as well.
The question remains: from which group are we descended? Some researchers have suggested that Au.
sediba from South Africa may be part of our lineage; this confounds matters for some researchers as to
how the older East African species were seemingly less primitive in some ways than the more recent South
African forms. We need to realize that we are only seeing part of the picture. Just as the ape population
levels exploded on three continents in the Miocene, the same was apparently true for African hominins in
the Plio-Pleistocene. Discoveries of new species of African apes and hominins are accelerating. We need to
break out of our linear mindset and realize that there were numerous species adapting to localized conditions, so we should not expect to see uniform changes across time and geographic space. In addition,
the same may hold true for grouping and mating practices. We should not jump to conclusions or get too
caught up in how the various species were related and who begat whom! While everyone would like to be
the person who found one of our long lost relatives, the history of paleoanthropology is fraught with those
claims and debunks.

76

Figure III.3 Modern landscape of Olduvai Gorge. “Panoramic view of Olduvai Gorge” by ‫ רנדום‬is licensed under CC BY-SA
3.0.

Upper limb morphology suggests that australopiths retained adaptations for climbing trees that were likely
used for food and safety. However, when on the ground, they were habitual bipeds, albeit with some differences from ourselves.

77

9. Gracile Australopiths

Figure 9.1 Australopith fossil sites. “Map of the fossil sites of the early hominids
(4.4-1M BP)” by Kameraad Pjotr and Sting is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Genus Australopithecus (“southern ape”) was first used in 1924 by Raymond Dart for the “Taung Child,” a
juvenile Au. africanus specimen from the quarry site of Taung, in South Africa. Au. anamensis, afarensis,
africanus, and sediba (depending on the evolutionary schema of individual paleoanthropologists) are popularly known as gracile australopiths, due to their more gracile masticatory apparatus relative to the robust
paranthropines.

79

Figure 9.2 An australopith outlook. By Keenan Taylor, CC-BY-NC-SA.

80 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

10. Australopithecus anamensis
Australopithecus anamensis (4.2 mya)
(“southern ape” / from the “lake” in the Turkana language)

Figure 10.1 Distal humerus of Australopithecus
anamensis. “Australopithecus anamensis bone (University of Zurich)” by
Nicolas Guérin is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

SITES
Allia Bay and Kanapoi, Kenya

PEOPLE
Meave Leakey and Alan Walker

INTRODUCTION
Australopithecus anamensis is the earliest known australopith. We do not know nearly as much about the
species as about other australopiths due to a paucity of fossil material.

81

PHYLOGENY
Au. anamensis may be descended from the ardipith lineage or a heretofore undiscovered group. Lucy’s
species, Au. afarensis, may be descended from Au. anamensis.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
Multiple paleoanthropologists (most notably Meave Leakey and Alan Walker) are credited with the discovery
of Au. anamensis material. The species name refers to the Lake Turkana area of Kenya where the fossil sites
of Kanapoi and Allia Bay are located (see Figure 10.2). There are also newer fossils from the Middle Awash
area of the Afar Depression of Ethiopia (see Figure 10.2). The Ethiopian material is close in time and geographic space to an Ardipithecus ramidus site, lending some support to the possibility of their phylogenetic
relatedness. There is some controversy over the lumping together of material from different levels and locations in Kenya that could have confounded the description of the species’ characteristics.

Figure 10.2 Australopithecus anamensis sites. “Anamensis localities” by
Chartep is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
The species is thought to have been highly sexually dimorphic in body and canine size.
Much of the morphology is ape-like, and hence primitive. The jaws and teeth are the most primitive of any
australopith, which is not surprising since it is the oldest. Unlike the parabolic tooth arrangement in the
jaws of later hominins, Au. anamensis had an apelike, U-shaped dental arcade wherein the cheek teeth are
nearly parallel (see Figure 10.3). Their jaws were also prognathic and their canines were larger than descendent species. However, the molars were expanded with thick enamel and low cusps like later hominins. In
addition, aspects of the elbow, knee, and tibia were more derived, indicating its bipedal mode of locomotion.

82 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 10.3 Jaw of extinct ape illustrating U-shaped dental arcade.
“Rangwapithecus gordoni jaw” by Ghedoghedo is licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0.

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• High degree of sexual dimorphism.
• Prognathic jaws with ape-like parallel cheek teeth.
• Larger canines than subsequent species.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Expanded molars, low cusp relief, and thick enamel.
• Bipedal adaptations of elbow, knee, and tibia.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
Fossils have been found in a variety of paleoenvironmental settings, such as lakeside, woodland, and more
open areas. The species likely slept in trees and foraged both in trees and on the ground, as they moved
bipedally around their home range in search of resources and mates. The high degree of sexual dimorphism
and the presence of the honing complex suggest a polygynous or polygynandrous mating system. The former may have involved a one-male/multi-female social organization and the latter, a multi-male/female
pattern. A one-male system may have looked more like that of gorillas, where both males and females tend
to leave their natal group. However, if we use chimps and bonobos as a model of our ancestral social orga-

10. Australopithecus anamensis | 83

nization, it was more likely a multi-male/female social organization, with males staying in their natal group
(i.e. male-philopatric) and females leaving at sexual maturity to join another. While it is easy to use our more
closely related relatives to reconstruct our past behavior, we must remember that social organization is a
function of both phylogeny and ecology. Taking both into consideration, in combination with their anatomy,
it is more likely that Au. anamensis were more chimp-like. Their teeth do not have the higher cusps of the
more folivorous gorilla, so their diet was likely more chimp-like and hence a combination of fruit, tender
greens, and opportunistic animal matter. As mentioned in Chapter 5, that type of diet is harder to come
by and females may have needed males to defend a territory for their nutritional needs and those of their
offspring. Interestingly, isotopic analyses of Paranthropus robustus (robust australopith from South Africa)
fossil material show that while males were from the area where the fossils were found, females were not.
Thus we now have a fourth line of evidence favoring male philopatry.

84 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

11. Australopithecus afarensis
Australopithecus afarensis (4.2 mya)
(“southern ape” / Afar region of Ethiopia)

Figure 11.1 Forensic facial reconstruction of Australopithecus afarensis.
“Australopithecus afarensis” by Cicero Moraes is licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0.

SITES
Ethiopia: Afar Depression (e.g., Hadar and Dikika)
Tanzania: Laetoli
Chad: Bahr el Ghazal

PEOPLE
Donald Johanson, Mary Leakey, Zeresenay Alemseged

85

INTRODUCTION
Australopithecus afarensis, or the “southern ape from Afar,” is a well-known species due to the famous
“Lucy” specimen. It has been extensively studied by numerous famous paleoanthropologists. As mentioned,
it is categorized as a gracile form of australopith. The species survived for over a million years in the changing East African landscape, covering a broad geographic range. The famous Laetoli footprints are attributed
to Au. afarensis (see Figures 11.5 and 11.6). They provided support for the then controversial idea of habitual
bipedalism, as well as the species’ presence in a more open environment.

PHYLOGENY
The most logical ancestor for Au. afarensis is Au. anamensis. The two species overlapped in time and geographic space. Some paleoanthropologists have always believed that genus: Homo is descended from Au.
afarensis. Over time, others have changed their taxonomic scenarios from Au. africanus to Au. afarensis
(which would formerly have been a sister lineage to Au. africanus) as our ancestor, and made Au. africanus
a side branch of the robust forms. Part of the argument for classifying Au. afarensis outside of our lineage
had to do with aspects of their anatomy being more derived than our own, e.g. the lateral flare of their ilia
(the plural of ilium). Since the discovery of Au. sediba (Chapter 21), some scholars are back to favoring Au.
africanus in our ancestry.

Figure 11.2 “Laetoli recreation.”
“Laetoli recreated” by
Wapondaponda is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
The geographic range of Au. afarensis extends over 1,600 km from the site of Hadar in the Afar Depression
of Ethiopia to the Laetoli site in Tanzania (see Figure 11.3). The holotype comes from Laetoli. There is conjecture as to whether the Ethiopian and Tanzanian material should be attributed to the same species, since
the sites are distant from one another and separated in time by 800 kya. In addition, if Au. bahrelghazali is included as a geographic variant of the species, their range expands 2,500 km westward into Chad
(McHenry 2015). Thus this species was very successful at exploiting a variety of environments.

86 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 11.3 Map showing the major fossil sites where specimens of
Australopithecus and Paranthropus have been found. From
Clement and Hillson (2013), licensed under CC BY 3.0.

With the discovery of “Lucy” (3.2 mya) (see Figure 11.7) in 1974 by Donald Johanson’s crew at the site of Hadar
in the Afar Depression of Ethiopia, paleoanthropology gained momentum and the rush was on in East Africa
to find more evidence of human origins. Certainly Louis and Mary Leakey recognized the importance of
the Great Rift Valley, but Johanson “upped the ante” with his 3.2 mya find. In addition, since Lucy’s skeleton
was almost 40% complete (making it one of the six most complete fossilized hominin skeletons older than
100 kya), much could be said about her anatomy and locomotor capabilities.
Site AL 333 at Hadar yielded remains of 13 individuals, referred to as the “First Family.” Some researchers
speculated that they may have died together and thus possibly represent a social group. However, recent
examination of the deposition pattern at the site suggests otherwise (see Behrensmeyer 2008).
The more recently discovered “Dikika Baby” (3.3 mya) (see Figure 11.4), also known as “Selam” (meaning
“peace” in the Afar language) has contributed greatly to our knowledge of development in early hominins.
Dikika, meaning “nipple” in the Afar language, is the name of the nipple-shaped hill at the site of her discovery. Discovered by Zeresenay Alemseged in 2000, the three-year-old female has also been dubbed “Lucy’s
Baby” due to its proximity to Hadar where Lucy was discovered. Selam is now the oldest, most complete
fossil hominin. It took five years to extract the fossils from the surrounding sandstone matrix in which they
were embedded. Thus we can see that not only is there difficulty in locating fossils, along with their living
conditions in the desert environments of East Africa, the fossils may take years to process before all of their
secrets can be revealed.
Even more recent material from the Woranso Mille site in the Afar region has some scientists questioning
whether the the Au. afarensis hypodygm (all fossil material attributed to a particular species) might represent at least two species. Australopithecus deyiremeda has been suggested for the newer material.

11. Australopithecus afarensis | 87

Figure 11.4 Dikika Baby.
“SelamAustralopithecus” by Jlorenz1 is
licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Figure 11.5 Laetoli footprint cast. “Australopithecus
afarensis footprint” by Tim Evanson is licensed
under CC BY-SA 2.0.

Mary Leakey discovered the first and oldest (4.2 mya) Au. afarensis material at Laetoli, Tanzania, and the
holotype (type specimen) comes from that site. Her team recovered fossil material from 23 individuals, as
well as the famous Laetoli footprints. The trail of footprints extends for almost 25 m. They were made by
two individuals walking side by side, with a possible third, smaller individual hopping within tracks already

88 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 11.6 Replica of Laetoli footprints. “Laetoli footprints replica” by Momotarou2012 is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

made by one of the adults. The prints were formed when the hominins walked through wet ash that had
erupted from a nearby volcano.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Note: Distinguishing primitive versus derived characteristics is difficult because we do not have all body
parts to compare from one species to the next. In order to determine what changed, I am considering those
aspects that are more Homo-like as derived characteristics, regardless of whether predecessors possessed
them. In other words, it is not perfect science!
All body parts are represented in the hypodigm, i.e. all fossils assigned to a particular species. While some
debate surrounds the gait and locomotor efficiency of the species, it is fairly well accepted that they were
habitual bipeds that retained some arboreal characteristics in the form of upward-oriented shoulder joints,
an ape-like scapula, a high intermembral index, and curved finger bones. Their innominates and lower limbs
were unquestionably those of a biped, and the big toe, while slightly divergent from the other four digits,
was not nearly the grasping digit seen in apes. The buttressing of their ilium, in the form of the iliac pillar,
shows that weight was being transferred through the bone in the same manner as our own. While there is
evidence of the bicondylar or carrying angle of the femur, the femoral head was small and the neck (narrowing below the head) was longer in australopiths and paranthropines (i.e. robust australopiths—see Chapters
16–19), relative to Homo species. Lovejoy believes that the degree of lateral iliac flare and long femoral neck
in australopiths were associated with increased leverage of the deep gluteal muscles so that they were more
biomechanically efficient than modern humans (Lovejoy 1988). As we gave birth to larger-brained infants,
our pelvic aperture had to expand laterally so that the femoral neck became shorter and the deep gluteal
muscles became less biomechanically stable relative to australopiths. The bony elements of the Homo pelvis
and hip had to become more robust to handle the increased force that the gluteal muscles generated on
the bones (discussed in Lovejoy 1988 and Cartmill and Smith 2009). Based upon the Laetoli footprints, it
appears that the feet of Au. afarensis were slightly inverted, which would have helped with climbing.
Au. afarensis had a prognathic, ape-like face (see Figure 11.8), a primitive skull morphology, and a small brain
averaging 420 cc. They exhibited a slight sagittal crest for attachment of the temporalis muscle and a more
pronounced nuchal crest, where their nuchal (posterior neck) muscles inserted on the posterior skull. The
two crests were compound—a compound sagittal-nuchal crest—meaning that the sagittal crest converged
at the center of the nuchal crest. Their teeth were large and their dental arcade was U-shaped, and thus
more ape-like. The lower first premolar suggests a transitional phase, termed semisectorial, between the

11. Australopithecus afarensis | 89

Figure 11.7 “Lucy.” “Lucy Mexico” by danrha is in the
public domain.

honing, sectorial (single-cusped) premolar of the apes and our more bicuspid premolars. The canines were
monomorphic. Like Au. anamensis, their molars were expanded.
While their hands were capable of a precision grip, they did not have the same degree of mobility in their
thumbs as later species of australopiths and paranthropines. The conical thorax is linked to climbing and a
large gut, and possibly the degree of lateral flare of the iliac blades.
The Dikika Baby (see Figure 11.4) revealed inner ear adaptations that allowed them to distinguish their head
from their torso; this is important for running. Her brain was of similar size to that of a same-aged chimp.
This indicates that they had a more prolonged developmental period, since the adult brain was, for the most
part, larger than those of chimps. While chimps’ brains are ~380 cc, Au. afarensis’ were on average 434 cc,
and ranged from 342 to 540 cc. She had both deciduous and developing permanent teeth in her jaws. Finally,
her ribs were in anatomical position, which confirmed the conical thorax.
Au. afarensis exhibited pronounced sexual dimorphism, with males and females averaging 4´11˝ and 3´5˝ tall,
respectively. Weights ranged from 64 to 99 lb. While the differences in size and morphology between the
sexes might suggest that they were promiscuous and that males competed for females, their canines were
monomorphic, suggesting pair-bonding. This is also supported by the change in the first mandibular premolar to being semi-sectorial.

90 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 11.8 Australopithecus afarensis reconstruction.
“Australopithecusafarensis reconstruction” by Durova is
licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• High degree of sexual dimorphism.
• Low cranial capacity.
• Compound sagittal-nuchal crests:
◦ Slight sagittal crest.
◦ Pronounced nuchal crest.
• Flat cranial base.
• Prognathic jaws with U-shaped dental arcade and large ape-like incisors.
• Arboreal characteristics:
◦ Upward-oriented shoulder joints.
◦ Ape-like scapula.
◦ Long arms relative to legs.
◦ Curved finger bones.
• Conical thorax.
• Some divergence of hallux.

11. Australopithecus afarensis | 91

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Inner ear adaptations allowed for more efficient running.
• Low cusp relief and thick enamel on molars.
• Loss of honing complex:
◦ Semi-sectorial premolar.
◦ Monomorphic canines.
• Precision grip adaptation in hands.
• Bipedal hips and lower limbs.
• Prolonged juvenile dependency and brain growth.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
This species inhabited a mixed woodland environment that is thought to have been more open than previous hominin habitats. They could thus have exploited arboreal resources and moved between trees and
forested areas in a fairly efficient manner. They are considered to have been scavenger-foragers, collecting
wild plant foods, opportunistically hunting animals, and scavenging large game from carnivore kills. There is
evidence of stone tool use at the Dikika, Ethiopia, site. Since Au. afarensis are the only known hominin from
that time and location, the tool use has been attributed to them. Researchers found cut marks on bones of
two large animals that were dated to 3.4 mya. Even more exciting is the recent discovery of 3.3 mya tools
in association with hominin fossil material at the West Lake Turkana, Kenya, site of Lomekwi 3. While it
was commonly accepted that australopiths used tools, this is the first evidence that they made them. The
tools have been designated as the Lomekwian industry and have displaced the Oldowan as the earliest tool
industry, preceding it by 700,000 years (Harmund et al. 2015). The tools consist of anvils, cores (stones from
which flakes for cutting are removed), and flakes (see Homo habilis: “Environment and Way of Life” for more
information on stone tools and their production). Like extant great apes, they also would almost certainly
have used biodegradable materials for tools, such as wooden, ivory, or antler digging sticks.
Au. afarensis exhibited premolar molarization and thick molar enamel for masticating a tougher, more dryadapted diet, such as tubers (large edible roots, e.g. yams). However, they were not yet able to grind their
food as well as later hominins whose jaws could move laterally due to the reduction in canine size.
The brain of Selam shows that the juvenile dependency period was prolonged relative to chimps and hence
the chimp/hominin ancestor. In addition, once infants could not hang on with their feet, mothers would
have had to put their babies down periodically. Dean Falk has suggested that this pattern of mother-infant
care may have led to language, in the form of what she refers to as “motherese” (Falk 2009).
It is interesting that female chimps use tools more often than do males. In addition, “woman the gatherer”
should share the limelight with “man the hunter,” as women in most traditional societies collected a larger
share of their family’s food. Is it possible that women invented tools? How about language? For how long
have we heard about the male provisioning model for the evolution of bipedalism, “man the toolmaker,”
“man the hunter,” men romancing women with the first language? Let’s stir up that cooking pot!!!
As mentioned, we are unsure of their mating and thus grouping pattern. Regardless of whether the First
Family died together and represented a social group, Au. afarensis likely lived in groups for protection and
possibly cooperation. Males were much larger than females but had lost the large canines and honing com-

92 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 11.9 Selam reconstruction at the National Museum of Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia. “Selam” by Highrey is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Figure 11.10 Lucy by Keenan Taylor.

plex of Au. anamensis. Thus while the degree of sexual dimorphism was much greater than in our own
species, their monomorphic teeth suggest that they were transitioning toward pair-bonding while retaining polygynous tendencies. While females may have mated polyandrously, like a fair proportion of females
in our own species, it may have been in their best interest to stick with their mate for help in raising their
offspring, and not jeopardizing their safety with extra-pair copulations.

11. Australopithecus afarensis | 93

12. Australopithecus bahrelghazali
Australopithecus bahrelghazali (<3.4 mya)
(“southern ape” / Bahr el Ghazal [Arabic: river of gazelles], Chad)
Note: Au. bahrelghazali is out of order here, in terms of date, because of its affinity to Au. afarensis.

Figure 12.1 Bahr el Ghazal site, Chad. “Bahr el Ghazal, Chad;
Australopithecus bahrelghazali 1995 discovery map” by En rouge is
licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

SITES
Bahr el Ghazal, Chad

PEOPLE
Michel Brunet

94

INTRODUCTION
While it is possible that Au. bahrelghazali was a distinct species, the majority view is that it was a geographic
variant of Au. afarensis. If that is the case, one can see how far the species ranged, from the horn of Africa,
south to Tanzania, and west to Chad (see Figure 12.1). The Chad population was close in time to the material
from the Afar Depression in Ethiopia, e.g. Lucy at 3.2 mya and Selam at 3.3 mya, versus the older material
from Laetoli, Tanzania, that is dated to as old as 4.2 mya. Remember also that some researchers believe that
the Ethiopian and Tanzanian populations were too far removed in geographic space and time to be considered the same species and/or to be using the holotype from Laetoli for the other populations. The partial
mandible that was discovered by Michel Brunet at Bahr el Ghazal differed from Au. afarensis only in having
been less prognathic. A premolar was also found at the site. The ancient environment has been compared
with that of Hadar (Lucy’s site), i.e. a mosaic environment consisting of wood- and grasslands.

12. Australopithecus bahrelghazali | 95

13. Kenyanthropus platyops
Kenyanthropus platyops (3.5 mya)
(“Kenyan human” / “flat-faced”)

Figure 13.1 Kenyanthropus platyops reconstruction.
“Kenyanthropus platyops IMG 2946” by Rama is in the public
domain.

SITES
Lake Turkana, Kenya

96

PEOPLE
Meave Leakey

INTRODUCTION
A surprisingly “flat-faced” hominin came to light with Meave Leakey’s discovery and naming of Kenyanthropus platyops (“flat-faced human from Kenya”) in 1999. The degree of orthognathism was surprising for such
an early hominin.

PHYLOGENY
Since the skull was crushed and reconstructed (see Figure 13.1), some paleoanthropologists discount the
degree of orthognathism and would like to see the specimen assigned to genus: Australopithecus, and possibly to species: afarensis. Others feel that it is the base of our lineage, believing that a cladistic event
occurred at Au. afarensis, leading on the one hand to the robust forms (including Au. africanus) and on the
other hand toward humans. In the latter case, some would like to see K. platyops assigned to genus: Homo,
believing it to be the ancestor of Homo rudolfensis, with which it shares a similar orthognathic profile. Of
interest is that some have speculated that the species may have made the Laetoli footprints. However, if
the platyops fossils really belong in Au. afarensis, it would not be news!

Figure 13.2 Lake Turkana, Kenya. “Kenya relief location map”
by Uwe Dedering is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

13. Kenyanthropus platyops | 97

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
K. platyops is known only from a site in the West Lake Turkana region of Kenya (see Figures 13.2 and 13.3),
where Meave Leakey’s team found the crushed skull in 1999. The hypodigm consists of a reconstructed
skull, plus two partial maxillae and a temporal bone from other individuals.

Figure 13.3 Lake Turkana, Kenya. “LakeTurkanaSouthIsland” by Doron is licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
While possessing primitive ape-like molars (elongated mesiodistally, i.e. front to back) and sharing similarities with Au. anamensis and afarensis, the lower face of K. platyops is surprisingly (and possibly mistakenly)
orthognathic for its early date. The cranial capacity of K. platyops is also suspect due to the reconstruction
but if accurate, it was fairly high relative to other species of the time, at 400–500 cc.

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• Elongated ape-like molars.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Possibly more orthognathic.
• Possibly encephalized relative to previous and contemporary species.

98 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

14. Australopithecus prometheus or
africanus
Australopithecus prometheus or africanus
“Little Foot” (~3.6–3.2 mya)
(“southern ape” / Prometheus / Africa)

Figure 14.1 Tarsals and metatarsal portion of “Little
Foot.” “Little Foot 01” by Tobias Fluegel is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0.

SITES
Sterkfontein and possibly Makapansgat, South Africa

99

PEOPLE
Ronald Clarke

INTRODUCTION
The controversial material that has come to be known as “Little Foot” is an almost complete skeleton from
the site of Sterkfontein (see Au. africanus for more information on Sterkfontein). The story is remarkable in
that the skeletal components were discovered at two different times. The earlier material was catalogued
and stored as “cercopithecoid” (Old World monkey) remains. Fifteen years later, the rest of the skeleton was
found at the same location at Sterkfontein (Silberburg Grotto) and matched to the previous material. The
only other case that I know of where something like that happened was at the Swanscombe, England, site
where three skull bones from a Homo heidelbergensis individual were found in three different years.

PHYLOGENY
Ronald Clarke believes that there were two species of australopith at Sterkfontein. He has assigned the
species name Australopithecus prometheus to the Little Foot material, as well as two individuals that others
assign to Au. africanus, one from Sterkfontein and the other from Makapansgat. While the phylogeny is
unknown, Little Foot precedes and may be the ancestor of Au. africanus.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
The “cercopithecoid” material was discovered by Ronald Clarke in a storeroom at the University of the Witwatersrand. Once he realized that the bones were hominin and had thus been miscatalogued, he sent his
two assistants, Stephen Motsumi and Nkwane Molefe, out to the original site to see if they could find more
… and they did! The species’ geographic range is presently limited to the Sterkfontein area of South Africa
(Duke 1998).

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Little Foot is characterized as a climbing biped, as it had both arboreal and bipedal characteristics. Arboreal
characteristics consisted of upward-oriented shoulder joints; ape-like arms that were, however, shorter
than those of other southern australopiths; and curved hand and foot bones. Surprisingly, the few foot
bones that were recovered are more complete than in any previous australopith specimen (see Figure
14.1). The morphology is transitional in that they retained some ape-like morphology. The hallux displayed
the same degree of divergence as other australopiths. The upper limb combined both ape- and humanlike characteristics. While the upper limb was shorter relative to australopiths, the hand bones remained
curved. While the Little Foot specimen was ~4′ tall, males and females are estimated to have been 3′6″ and
4′6″ tall and 60–120 lb in weight, respectively.

100 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
The environment of Sterkfontein is discussed in the section on Au. africanus.

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• Climbing adaptations:
◦ Upward-oriented shoulder girdle.
◦ Ape-like arms.
◦ Curved hand and foot bones.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Shorter arms relative to australopiths.

14. Australopithecus prometheus or africanus | 101

15. Australopithecus africanus
Australopithecus africanus (3–2 mya)
(“southern ape” / Africa)

Figure 15.1 Cast of Taung Child fossils. “Australopithecus
africanus – Cast of taung child” by Didier Descouens is
licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

SITES
Taung, Makapansgat, Sterkfontein, Drimolen, and Gladysvale, South Africa

PEOPLE
Raymond Dart, Robert Broom, and C. K. Brain

INTRODUCTION
Australopithecus africanus was the first fossil hominin discovered in Africa. In 1924, Raymond Dart (see his
biographical sketch this chapter) identified the face, mandible, and endocast as being that of a juvenile
bipedal ape (see Figure 15.1). Eugène Dubois’s discovery of the Javanese Homo erectus fossils in 1891 refuted
the reigning belief that “we got smart before we stood up.” Once Dart’s claims were accepted, the world

102

realized the extent to which that idea was false. The small-brained Au. africanus showed that early hominins
were bipedal apes as opposed to quadrupedal humans.
Unlike East African material that can be dated using a variety of techniques, primarily due to past volcanic
activity, South African fossils and sites are much more difficult to date. Most dates can only be represented
as ranges; hence the date for the earliest Au. africanus specimens falls between 3 and 2 mya.

PHYLOGENY
Au. africanus is considered to be a gracile australopith by some and a robust australopith by others. Traditionally, the species was favored as the immediate ancestor of the Homo lineage, specifically of Homo habilis.
However, some researchers have always believed that Au. afarensis was the common ancestor of both Au.
africanus and the Homo lineage, suggesting a cladistic event had occurred at Au. afarensis. This schema has
gained popularity in recent years. However, with the new evidence being put forth for Au. sediba, it seems
that the Au. africanus → Homo scenario was closer to the truth in that Au. africanus and Au. sediba are
undoubtedly related and Au. sediba shares many characteristics with genus Homo. While there is some support for Au. africanus as ancestral to the more derived robust forms, that still leaves unresolved those characteristics shared between Au. aethiopicus and both P. boisei and Au. afarensis (see Au. aethiopicus, Chapter
17).

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
Au. africanus is known only from sites in South Africa (see map showing the major fossil sites in Chapter
11, Figure 11.3). Material from more than 200 individuals has been collected over more than 80 years. Most
of the fossils came from caves, some of which were discovered during mining and blasting activities. Those
caves formed via underground water activity. Fossilization was facilitated by water dripping on bones and
calcifying, just as stalagmites form. Over millennia, many of the caves filled in with mineralized deposits and
as the ground surfaces eroded, the underlying deposits were exposed and mined and then later excavated
for fossils.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH: RAYMOND DART (1893–1988) and
the “TAUNG CHILD”
Raymond Dart was the first to recognize a fossil hominin in Africa. While his claim to have discovered a human ancestor was not initially accepted by the scientific community, he was vindicated when Robert Broom began finding similar material at other South African sites. The work
of Dart and Broom played a pivotal role in directing attention to Africa as the birthplace of
humanity, as Charles Darwin had earlier predicted.
Raymond Dart was a renowned Australian anatomist who was teaching at the University of Witwatersrand in South Africa at the time of the discovery. I have read several accounts over the
years of the fateful day when the fossil material landed in Dart’s hands. The Taung material was
brought to him by either quarry workers or a colleague while he was dressing for the wedding
of his daughter or friend, depending on the source you read. He is said to have attempted to
use his wife’s knitting needles to extract the fossils from the surrounding matrix. I am not sure

15. Australopithecus africanus | 103

why we need to know what he was doing when he got his hands on the goods. We certainly do
not know what most paleoanthropologists were doing when they were presented with fossil
finds. However, it conjures up amusing possibilities in my mind!
The fossilized remains came from the Taung Quarry in the process of blasting for lime. When
presented with the material, Dart established that it was the face, mandible, and endocast (fossilized interior of the cranial vault) of a juvenile hominin. He based this on the anterior position
of the foramen magnum and aspects of brain morphology reflected on the interior of the skull
vault. Dart named his find Australopithecus africanus, meaning “southern ape of Africa,” and the
specimen became known as the “Taung Child.”

Figure 15.2 Raymond Dart.
“Smithsonian Institution Archives –
SIA-SIA2008-0845” from the
Smithsonian Institution Archives is
in the public domain.

The Taung child was two to three years old when it died. We now know that the caves of South
Africa were formed by underground water activity and hominins that dropped or were dragged
into those subterranean caves became fossilized during the process of speleothem formation.
Over millennia, the caves filled with mineral deposits, and via erosion, the mineralized contents
and underground cavities surfaced. Many fossils were likely destroyed during quarrying activities, but we are lucky that many were preserved.
Raymond Dart is also renowned for his “Killer Ape” theory and the osteodontokeratic (bonetooth-antler) culture. Dart believed that animal long bones and carnivore mandibles that were
found with australopith remains had been used as weapons to fight and kill one another. We
now know that was not the case. They were most likely opportunistically hunting small prey
and scavenging larger kills, and they were prey for larger animals.

Raymond Dart is credited with the 1924 discovery and naming of Au. africanus. His now famous “Taung
Child” came from the Taung quarry site. The two- to three-year-old juvenile is represented by its face, skull
fragments, and mandible, and an endocast of its brain. Dart also worked at the site of Makapansgat. His con-

104 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

temporary, Robert Broom (see biographical sketch below), worked at the caves at Sterkfontein (see Figure
15.4), where he discovered a complete, female cranium known as “Mrs. Ples”, along with other Au. africanus
material. Broom also worked at the sites of Kromdraai and Swartkrans; the latter is where he discovered the
first paranthropine, Paranthropus robustus. C. K. Brain, a famous taphonomist, also worked at Sterkfontein.
He discounted Dart’s views of the australopiths as “killer apes”. He believed that bones either dropped into
caves as part of large cats’ prey or were dragged in by rodents for gnawing. Some individuals are thought to
have accidentally been trapped in underground caverns. Some speculate that those individuals that show
no evidence of having been preyed upon, due to their degree of completeness (e.g. Sts 573 from Sterkfontein
and the Au. sediba party from the Malapa site), surely became trapped. The six Au. sediba individuals are
thought to have possibly been attracted to the cave by water. Drimolen, a more recently discovered site,
has yielded an almost complete cranium as well as material from approximately 80 individuals. A fifth site
associated with the species is Gladysvale.

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH: ROBERT BROOM (1866–1951)

Figure 15.3 Robert Broom. “Robert
Broom00” from the American Museum of
Natural History is in the public domain.

Robert Broom was a Scottish medical doctor and paleontologist who subsequently made a
name for himself as a paleoanthropologist, even though the term did not exist at the time. He
taught geology and zoology at a South African college until he was let go for his controversial
beliefs in evolution that were contrary to the religious teachings at the college. Subsequent to
his termination, his finances went downhill until Raymond Dart’s influence secured him a position at the Transvaal Museum. While his specialty was mammalian-like reptiles, he became
increasingly involved with fossil hominins. Together, Dart and Broom made paleoanthropologi-

15. Australopithecus africanus | 105

cal history, discovering the first and second species of African hominins, respectively. Broom
worked at the Au. africanus sites of Sterkfontein and the P. robustus sites of Swartkrans and
Kromdraai. All of those sites are now contained within the Cradle of Humankind World Heritage Site. He was the first to discover and name Paranthropus robustus, and his work with Au.
africanus helped to support Dart’s claims to have discovered a bipedal ape and human ancestor.
Broom’s most famous Au. africanus find was “Mrs. Ples” (possibly a male), which he originally
named Plesianthropus transvaalensis or “primitive human” of the Transvaal.
If accounts of Robert Broom are to be believed, he was a colorful character. He is said to have
worn semi-formal attire while excavating and when media were present, he conveniently happened upon important discoveries. Supposedly, one of his team buried an artifact that was
already labeled with a catalog number. Oh, to have been on the scene and witnessed what must
have been an embarrassing situation! Not to mention that, according to numerous online
sources, he thought nothing of stripping naked when it became “Africa Hot”! (I picked up that
term from a couple of comedy movies but it is now in the Urban Dictionary.)
It is interesting that Broom did not believe in Darwinian evolution but rather, what we would
now call Intelligent Design (Wikipedia contributors 2015h).

Figure 15.4 Sterkfontein Cave. “Sterkfontein Caves
16,” photograph by Mike Peel (www.mikepeel.net), is
licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

106 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Au. africanus was more derived than Au. afarensis. This is not surprising considering that they lived at least
one million years later, as well as the trend within the hominin lineage to become more encephalized and
manually dexterous over time. Au. africanus were habitual bipeds with all of the corresponding lower limb
adaptations. They also retained climbing characteristics, such as upward-oriented shoulder joints; long
arms relative to legs; and long, curved hand and finger bones. However, in general their hands were more
human-like than those of Au. afarensis.
While the brain was small relative to later species, Au. africanus was not only more encephalized than past
species, with a cranial capacity of 450 cc (range = 424–508 cc), but also possessed an enlarged cerebral cortex in the frontal and parietal regions (see Figure 15.5). Their encephalization quotient (EQ) was 2.7. The
quotient is a method for comparing brain size among species. Anything greater than 1.0 means that the
brain is larger than would be expected based on body size (FYI: our EQ is ~7.6). Broca’s area is an area of
the left lateral frontal cortex that is involved with the production of language (see Figure15.6). It is present
in all Old World monkeys and apes, but it is enlarged in Au. africanus relative to previous species. These
are all important developments, in that they herald the appearance of more complex thought processing
and likely communication skills. There is debate over whether the lunate sulcus (see Figure 15.7), a fissure
on both sides of the occipital lobe that is involved with vision, was more ape- or human-like. The sulcus is
smaller in humans than in monkeys and apes.

Figure 15.5 Lobes of the brain. “BrainLobesLabelled” by Camazine is licensed under
CC BY 3.0.

15. Australopithecus africanus | 107

Figure 15.6 Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas (see areas surrounded by dotted lines). “Blausen 0102
Brain Motor&Sensory” by Blausen Medical Communications, Inc. is licensed under CC BY
3.0.Blausen.com staff. “Blausen gallery 2014.” Wikiversity Journal of Medicine.
doi:10.15347/wjm/2014.010. ISSN 20018762.

Figure 15.7 Lunate sulcus, also known as the simian or lateral occipital sulcus, outlined in red.
“Gray726” vectorized by was_a_bee based on drawing by Henry Vandyke Carter is in the
public domain.

The external skull reflected the cerebral expansion by becoming more rounded and exhibiting more of a
forehead. In addition, the sagittal and pronounced nuchal muscle crests seen in Au. afarensis were not present. However, some males had convergent temporal lines that suggest that they may have had a slight

108 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 15.8 Basicranial flexion in four hominin species. Illustration by Keenan Taylor.

sagittal crest. There is debate over whether the cranial base was flexed (see Figure 15.8), or whether that
was a development seen only in more derived forms of Homo.
The species’ face was prognathic with a distinctive concavity in the midfacial region (see Figure 15.9). The
dental arcade was more parabolic, and the teeth were smaller than those of Au. afarensis. The first premolar
is considered to have been bicuspid, versus semi-sectorial in Au. afarensis. However, their faces were more
heavily buttressed for chewing a tougher diet, and some researchers thus consider them to be “robust” australopiths.

Figure 15.9 Concave facial profile of Mrs. Ples (Au. africanus).
“Australopithecus_africanus_STS_5-side_3204” by NCSSM is licensed
CC-BY-NC-SA

They retained the primitive condition of long arms and their finger bones were somewhat curved. However,
their hands were more human-like and they possessed our “power” thumb, giving them increased pinching
and gripping capabilities. This was accomplished via better developed intrinsic thumb muscles, i.e. within
the hand versus coming from the forearm to act on the thumb, and a specialized first metacarpal.
While they were considered to be habitual and very likely obligate bipeds, they still retained a divergent
hallux. According to McHenry and Berger (1998) and Green et al. (2007) they may have been more arboreal
than Au. afarensis.
Au. africanus were less sexually dimorphic than Au. afarensis, with males averaging 4′6″ (138 cm) tall and 90
lb (41 kg) and females at 3′9″ (115 cm) and 67 lb (29 kg).

15. Australopithecus africanus | 109

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• Somewhat prognathic.
• Arboreal characteristics:
◦ Upward-oriented shoulder joints.
◦ Long arms relative to legs.
◦ Long, curved metacarpals and phalanges.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Skull changes:
◦ More rounded skull vault.
◦ Increased encephalization.
◦ Frontal and parietal expansion.
◦ More of a forehead.
◦ Loss of sagittal crest and less pronounced nuchal crest.
• Facial buttressing.
• More of a parabolic dental arcade and reduced anterior dentition.
• Power thumb:
◦ Well-developed intrinsic thumb muscles.
◦ Specialized first metacarpal.
• Reduced sexual dimorphism.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
While there is some controversy as to how much time Au. africanus spent in open versus closed (forest)
environments, their facial robusticity and molars reflect a greater reliance on tougher, more dry-adapted
plant foods than earlier hominins. They retained climbing adaptations and thus could have used trees for
safety, sleeping, and food. When on the ground, it is thought that they were scavenger-foragers, foraging
for plant foods and small prey and scavenging remains of carnivore kills. Crude stone tools have been found
at the sites of Sterkfontein and Makapansgat, and while there is no evidence of tool manufacture, it appears
that they were using stones for hammering and cutting. They are thought to have relied on tubers for part
of their diet and they likely used digging sticks to unearth them, in much the same way as modern African
peoples, such as the San-speaking groups of the Kalahari Desert.

110 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

As mentioned, it is thought that hominins may have fallen through the surface into subterranean caves and/
or bones were dragged in by rodents for gnawing. While it is possible that they used open caves for shelter
from sun and rain, there is no evidence that they lived in caves.
In nature, extractive foragers have relatively large brains. Examples within the primate world include the
aye-aye (a prosimian of Madagascar) that hunts insects via a combination of audition (hearing) and extraction (see www.arkive.org for multiple videos); New World capuchin monkeys that steal young animals from
tree holes and rip bark from trees to get at insects; open-country baboons that dig for tubers; and the
brainy orangutans and chimps that use a variety of tools to extract a range of foods, from ants to honey (see
Figures 15.10 and 15.11 for videos of chimps and orangutan). Chimps have even been observed using sticks to
spear bushbabies (small nocturnal African prosimians) in tree holes (e.g. see “How Smart Are Planet’s Apes?”
on NationalGeographic.com). The same can be seen in some bird species, most notably tool-using crows
and nut-burying nuthatches. Since our last common ancestor with chimps and bonobos was already relatively smart, I believe that while bipedalism was in response to diminishing habitat and resources, encephalization was in response to having to locate and learn to process new foods. Beginning with Au. africanus
and the subsequent paranthropines, we see an upward trend for encephalization and expansion of those
portions of the brain involved with association, i.e. complex thought processing, as well as increasing manual strength and dexterity for manipulating tools and objects. Thus we stepped out and then had to find
and fix dinner!
We tend to think of “evolution by means of natural selection” as being a positive aspect of life, i.e. “survival
of the fittest.” However, when there is a “rapid” response to a changing environment, many individuals die
out while those few survive.

Videos

A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/the-history-of-our-tribe-hominini/?p=123

Figure 15.10 Ant dipping 1 by TheFriendsAndAi, https://youtu.be/ScqG54B4KtE

15. Australopithecus africanus | 111

A YouTube element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here: https://milnepublishing.geneseo.edu/the-history-of-our-tribe-hominini/?p=123

Figure 15.11 Orangutan using tool by Alain Compost, https://youtu.be/pXOTAgq-eiY

112 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

PART IV: PLEISTOCENE EPOCH
THE PLEISTOCENE EPOCH (~2.6 mya – 11.7 kya)

Figure IV.1 East African grassland and a local. Photo by the author.

The Pleistocene Epoch is commonly known as the Ice Age. The climate of Africa continued on the trajectory
that began in the late Miocene and continued throughout the Pliocene (see Figures IV.2 and IV.3). While the
Pleistocene was characterized as a period of global cooling, glacial advances, and dropping sea levels, the
cold periods were interspersed with interglacial periods when the ice retreated and sea levels rose (see Figures IV.2, IV.3, and IV.4). Even within glacial periods, the climate varied. Animals in northern areas that were
not adapted to arctic conditions went extinct or moved south when temperatures dropped and vice versa.
They pushed in and out of Africa, in response to those climatic pulses.

Figure IV.2 Global temperature fluctuations from Pliocene (5–1.8 mya), through Pleistocene (1.8–0.1 mya), to present. “Five
Myr Climate Change” by Robert A. Rohde is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Elizabeth Vrba claims that there was a pulse-like turnover in faunal populations in East Africa at ~2.5 mya,
in response to climatic change. Termed her “Turnover Pulse Hypothesis,” she finds evidence of an increase
in bovids (cow-like animals like wildebeests and water buffalo) and their predators and a decrease in forest-

113

Figure IV.3 Antarctic temperature changes during the last several glacial and interglacial cycles of the present ice age
and a comparison to changes in global ice volume. “Ice Age Temperature” by Robert A. Rohde is licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0.

dwelling ungulates, corresponding to an increase in dry savanna environment (see Vrba 1985 and subsequent publications). Based on deep sea cores, we know that by 1.8 mya, there was a definite increase in the
sahel-type of environment. Thus evidence from past flora and fauna supports the more robust craniofaciodental anatomy of species that lived during the early Pleistocene, e.g., Au. garhi, Au. aethhiopicus, P. boisei
and P. robustus. They would have needed stronger chewing abilities and thicker molar enamel to process
more dry-adapted vegetation. Once the more gracile (in term of their masticatory apparatus) Homo species
came on the scene, the East African hominins would come to represent an example of niche partitioning. Fossil sites suggest that P. boisei, H. habilis, and H. egaster could have been sympatric (i.e. overlapping
geographic ranges). Thus while Au. aethiopicus and P. boisei survived by what might be termed masticatory
brawn, the more encephalized Homo species used their brains and tools to consume a higher-quality diet.
We can thus see that hominins were some of the colonizing species of the African savanna.

114

Figure IV.4 Temperature reductions during last glacial maximum 18 kya. “CLIMAP” Robert A. Rohde is licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0.

115

16. Paranthropines
The paranthropines are three species of fossil hominins that exhibited hyper-robust masticatory apparatus,
as evidenced by their heavy faces and mandibles, huge molars, and muscle insertions. They were included in
the genus Australopithecus for many years, but the original genus invented by Robert Broom for the South
African form, Paranthropus robustus, has been revived for at least two of the species. Chronologically, the
earliest species was aethiopicus, and some researchers still assign them to Australopithecus. The second
oldest is Paranthropus boisei, and both Au. aethiopicus and P. boisei are from East African sites. The South
African and youngest species is P. robustus. The last of the paranthropines died out ~1 mya, 1.7 mya after
Au. aethiopicus’s first appearance in the fossil record. They were a very interesting and apparently successful group of animals that adapted to the changing African landscape by expanding their dietary niche. The
geographic range of the eastern species stretched down the “hominin corridor” from Ethiopia to Malawi,
whereas the South African form is known only from South Africa. While it is thought that their preferred
foods were similar to the more gracile forms, they could fall back on tougher and harder foods when
resources became scarce.

117

17. Australopithecus/Paranthropus
aethiopicus
Australopithecus/Paranthropus aethiopicus (2.7–2.3 mya)
(“southern ape” / “beside human” / Ethiopia)

Figure 17.1 Model of Paranthropus aethiopicus. “Paranthropus
aethiopicus” by Nrkpan is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

SITES
Ethiopia: Shungura Deposits
Kenya: West Lake Turkana

PEOPLE
Yves Coppens, Camille Arambourg, and Alan Walker

INTRODUCTION
Australopithecus aethiopicus is the most primitive of the robust species. I use genus Australopithecus
because it is thought to be descended from Au. afarensis. In addition, Paranthropus was the genus name

118

assigned to the South African robust form, P. robustus, and questions remain as to whether the two species
are related.

PHYLOGENY
There are multiple lines of evidence to support Au. aethiopicus as a descendent species of Au. afarensis.
While some believe that Au. aethiopicus gave rise to P. boisei, others link P. boisei with P. robustus in a different clade, with Au. africanus as their common ancestor. More recently discovered material within the geographic range of Au. aethiopicus supports the Au. aethiopicus → P. boisei evolutionary scenario. The dates of
the new fossils fall between the two species, and they possess intermediate or transitional characteristics.
Figure 17.2 shows one cladistic schema that illustrates how some researchers suggest these species were
related. This particular scenario shows the authors’ belief that Au. africanus is a robust form.

Figure 17.2 Cladistic analysis of early hominins.
“Cladistic analysis of early hominins” by Charles
T. G. Clarke is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
In 1967, the earliest Au. aethiopicus fossils were discovered by Yves Coppens and Camille Arambourg in the
Shungura deposits at the site of Omo in southern Ethiopia. They assigned them to a new genus and species,
Paraustralopithecus aethiopicus. While it was debatable as to whether they actually had a new species, the
discovery of the “Black Skull” (see Figure 17.1) in the West Lake Turkana region of Kenya by Alan Walker in
1985 put any doubts to rest. At that time, the species was added to genus Australopithecus because it was
thought to be descended from Au. afarensis. There were then three recognized species of robust australopiths in Africa, and efforts to determine their phylogenetic relationships began.
The Black Skull or KNM-WT (Kenya National Museum – West Turkana) 15000 was a magnificent find. The
almost complete skull was stained from manganese, but it is always fun to sing scary movie music to my
students when introducing … THE BLACK SKULL! (Figure 17.3 … for fun!)

17. Australopithecus/Paranthropus aethiopicus | 119

Figure 17.3 Skull and crossbones. “Crossbones (PSF)” by
Pearson Scott Foresman is in the public domain.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
A unique characteristic that ties Au. aethiopicus to P. boisei is a heart-shaped foramen magnum, as opposed
to the more ovoid form seen in Au. africanus and P. robustus. Primitive characteristics shared with Au.
afarensis are the flat cranial base, small brain (~410 cc), long molars (mesiodistally, i.e. front to back versus
side to side), and the degree of prognathism in the lower face. Because their faces were so broad and their
brains so small, they exhibit a high degree of postorbital constriction (also known as waisting), i.e. the area
between the face and braincase is narrow. Derived robust characteristics are buttressing of the skull, face,
and mandible. Their muscles of mastication were incredibly strong, as evidenced by the sagittal crest running down the midline of their skull where the temporalis muscle originated. The sagittal crest was higher
and more posteriorly placed than in the two more derived robust species. The zygomatics were large and
flared to allow for passage of the temporalis muscle from the sagittal crest to insert on the mandible and
to expand the attachment site for the masseter muscle, the other large muscle of mastication (see Figure
17.4). The zygomatics were more forwardly flared than in the other two robust species. They also had heavy
nuchal (posterior neck) muscles to support the weight of their heavy face and skull, and the attachment
sites of those muscles on the posterior skull was also an expanded crest that converged with the sagittal
crest, i.e. a compound sagittal-nuchal crest. Large brow ridges in the robust species offset the stress generated by biting down on hard foods. However, Au. aethiopicus’s brows were smaller than the other two
species. Their third maxillary molars were convergent, meaning they were positioned more medially than
the first and second. While some researchers disagree, others find evidence for a more derived venous
sinus system in the crania of the robust forms. The system consists of large collecting veins that ultimately
empty into the jugular veins, allowing for rapid, gravity-fed blood drain from the brain, in order to keep
fresh blood pumping in via several arterial systems. The largest and most superficial of those sinuses (see
Figure 17.5) leave impressions on the inside of the skull vault. Dean Falk’s “Radiator Theory” argues that our
ancestors needed to keep their brains cool as they increased in size in a hot, open environment. The system
became more complex after the time of the australopiths.

120 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• Flat cranial base.
• Small brain.
• Long molars.
• Prognathic.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Heart-shaped foramen magnum.
• Robust skull, face, and mandible.
• Large, compound sagittal-nuchal crest.
• Large brow ridges.
• Pronounced postorbital constriction.
• Large, powerful muscles of mastication.
• Large forwardly flared zygomatics with a large zygomatic arch.
• Convergent maxillary third molars.
• Possible derived venous sinus system.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
As mentioned, there is evidence that Au. afarensis was more terrestrial than the southern australopith clade,
suggesting that the classic ape environment had diminished. We know that grasslands were expanding and
woodlands were shrinking. Since it is assumed that Au. aethiopicus is descended from Au. afarensis, the
environment was favoring species with dietary adaptations that allowed them to survive.

17. Australopithecus/Paranthropus aethiopicus | 121

Figure 17.4 Muscles of mastication (Red=temporalis and
peach=masseter) Illustration by Keenan Taylor

Figure 17.5 Cranial sinus system (SIN. = sinus). Based on Gray’s Anatomy
Plate 488. “Gray488 blue” by Wikid77 is in the public domain.

122 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 17.6 “Australopithecus aethiopicus tool use” by Keenan Taylor.

17. Australopithecus/Paranthropus aethiopicus | 123

18. Paranthropus boisei
Paranthropus boisei (2.5 mya)
(“beside human” / Boise: surname of one of the Leakey’s financiers)

Figure 18.1 Paranthropus boisei. “Paranthropus boisei side
(University of Zurich)” by Nicolas Guérin is licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0.

SITES
Ethiopia: Shungura Deposits and Konso
Kenya: Chesowanja, West Lake Turkana, and Koobi Fora
Tanzania: Olduvai and Peninj

PEOPLE
Mary and Richard Leakey

INTRODUCTION
In the first course that I took in physical anthropology, I was most fascinated by the Paranthropus boisei
face from Olduvai Gorge (see Figures 18.1 and 18.5) and the Natron/Peninj mandible from the Peninj site
near Lake Natron. I still remember the first time I saw them, and the species has always been for me one
124

of the more interesting discoveries in paleoanthropology. Their faces, jaws, and cheek teeth were massive
and truly unforgettable. While the Olduvai material is attributed to Mary Leakey, it was her husband Louis
who announced to the world that he had his “man.” He had been finding tools of what are now termed the
Oldowan tradition and was hoping to discover who had made them when Mary discovered the first P. boisei
fossils. They were assigned to a new genus and species: Zinjanthropus boisei, or “human from East Africa.”
“Zinj” is a derivation of the archaic term “Zanj” for an area of the East African coast, and Boise was the surname of one of the Leakeys’ financial supporters (Wikipedia contributors 2015g). Louis claimed that they
had their toolmaker, but many did not agree with his conclusion. They thought he had found a big, dumb,
herbivorous, bipedal ape that would not have had the cognitive abilities to produce stone tools. Hand bones
have been attributed to the species by some researchers. If they are correct in their assignment, the species
may have been capable of tool manufacture and efficient use. However, while their brains were somewhat
larger than earlier species, we still do not know if they had the cognitive abilities and thus whether tools
from East African sites can be attributed to them.

Figure 18.2 Olduvai Gorge, by David Berkowitz, CC BY 2.0

Fossils from more than 100 individuals have been recovered in the last 55 years. Over time, the genus
has changed from Zinjanthropus to Australopithecus to Paranthropus, but some researchers are still using
genus: Australopithecus.

PHYLOGENY
Support for P. boisei being descended from Au. aethiopicus has steadily increased. However, some still group
P. boisei as a sister species of P. robustus and believe that they descended from Au. africanus. The two more
derived forms share a molar trait with Au. africanus, in that the second molar (M2) is larger than the third
(M3). Members of the latter group, such as Henry McHenry, contend that the more primitive Au. aethiopicus
is an example of homoplasy or convergent evolution, making the robust traits homoplasies. Paleoanthropologists have tended to be conservative in their acceptance of homoplasies; common ancestry is more
parsimonious.

18. Paranthropus boisei | 125

Except for the possible Au. aethiopicus → P. boisei scenario, the robust australopiths were evolutionary
dead-ends as far as we know.

Figure 18.3 Scientific reconstruction of Paranthropus boisei.
“Paranthropus boisei” by Lillyundfreya is licensed under CC
BY-SA 3.0.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
Mary Leakey discovered the first material in 1959 at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania (see Figure 18.2). Nicknamed
“Nutcracker Man,” “Zinj,” or “Dear Boy,” the skull and face were dated to 1.7 mya. Fossils attributed to the
species have since been found at other sites in Tanzania (Peninj), Kenya (Chesowanja, West Lake Turkana,
and Koobi Fora in the East Lake Turkana area), and Ethiopia (the Shungura Deposits and Konso). Richard
Leakey discovered the Koobi Fora fossils. Thus, like Au. afarensis, the species had a broad geographic range
and survived for over a million years.

126 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 18.4 Paranthropus boisei by Keenan Taylor.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
While the robust forms are somewhat larger than the gracile forms, they do not differ much postcranially.
It is their skulls that set them apart; P. boisei had the most pronounced masticatory adaptations, so that
relative to the other two species, they are termed “hyper-robust.” Along with the other robust forms, they
shared a buttressed skull, face, and mandible; large molars and premolars; a compound sagittal-nuchal
crest (not compound in P. robustus); large muscles of mastication and nuchal muscles to support their heavy
skulls; large, flared zygomatic arches; and a supraorbital torus to absorb the stress generated by chewing.
According to some researchers, they shared the following with P. robustus and Homo: flexed skull base; more
orthognathic face; lower face tucked under the braincase, thus increasing chewing force on the molars; a
18. Paranthropus boisei | 127

more parabolic dental arcade; and a longer thumb with broad, flat, distal phalanges that gave them better
opposition and gripping power. The sagittal crest in P. boisei and P. robustus was more anteriorly positioned
relative to Au. aethiopicus. In combination with less prognathism and the fact that their face was tucked
under the braincase, the action and strength of the temporalis muscle was concentrated on the cheek teeth.
The degree of robusticity and the size of craniofaciodental characteristics were unique to P. boisei. The
zygomatics were large, heavy, and widely flared, making their faces very broad and the temporal fossa (the
space between the zygomatic and the temporal bone) very deep. Again, this facilitated the passage of the
temporalis muscle to insert on the mandible and expanded the attachment and anchoring of the masseter
muscle. The mandible was massive, with a very robust and deep body and tall rami (vertical side portions),
and the temporomandibular (jaw) joint was exceptionally large. Their front teeth were so dwarfed by their
enormous cheek teeth, they almost look juvenile. Their premolars were molarized, and some had a third
root. The third molar exhibited a unique wrinkling pattern. Their megadontia quotient (MQ) was 2.7, meaning that their teeth were 2.7 times larger than would be expected. P. boisei had the largest supraorbital torus
of the robust forms. They were somewhat more encephalized than past species, with a cranial capacity of
514 cc (range = 494–537 cc). Like all australopiths, the species was sexually dimorphic, with males at 4’6″ (137
cm) tall and 108 lb (49 kg) and with more pronounced sagittal-nuchal crests and females at 4’1″ (124 cm) and
70 lb (34 kg).

Figure 18.5 Natron mandible. “Peninj mandible.
Paranthropus boisei” by Matt Celeskey is licensed
under CC BY-SA 2.0.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Same robust characteristics as seen in Au. aethiopicus with the following differences:
◦ More robust craniofaciodental characteristics.

128 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

◦ Sagittal crest more anteriorly placed.
◦ Large supraorbital torus.
◦ Huge molars and premolars.
◦ Large, heavier mandible.
• Encephalized.
• Flexed skull base.
• More orthognathic face.
• Molarized premolars.
• Lower face tucked under braincase, maximizing chewing force on molars and premolars.
• More parabolic dental arcade.
• Longer thumb with broad, flat distal phalanges.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
While they still had relatively long arms, one seldom hears anything about the arboreal habits of the robust
forms. In East Africa, that is not too surprising since the forests had receded and the grasslands had
expanded. By 1.8 mya, deep sea cores reveal an increase in the sahel type of environment, i.e. the area
south of the Sahara that consists of dry grasslands and scrub forest. Based on microwear evidence from
their molars, all or most of which are ground flat, P. boisei likely subsisted on open, dry-adapted plants.
Silt on terrestrial foods would have contributed to the wear patterns. The availability of high-quality foods
must have gotten even worse by the time of P. boisei, because their chewing and bite-force capabilities
were increased relative to Au. aethiopicus. They ate a high proportion of C4 plants, i.e. open and more dryadapted grasses and shrubs. It is thought that they likely survived on hard, tough, and brittle fallback foods
during periods of preferred resource scarcity. This is another possible example of niche partitioning, in that
sympatric Homo species may not have been able to utilize or digest either food category. Isotopic analyses
to calculate the strontium-to-calcium ratio in fossilized bones of Au. africanus and P. robustus have determined that they ate some animal matter. It is possible that P. boisei did as well. While we do not know if they
were scavenging or hunting animals, it is very possible that early hominins ate insects and insect larvae. All
extant great apes consume social insects (ants and termites), and they derive a surprising degree of nutritional value from them. In traditional human societies, larvae are a favored resource.
It seems likely that P. boisei lived in small groups … or did they? Living in a more open environment in equatorial Africa, there would seemingly have been safety in numbers. Since they were adapted to low-quality
savanna resources and could fall back on food items that were unavailable to other sympatric species, they
may have avoided strong within- and between-group feeding competition. We also know that pair-bonding
may have been necessary, as females were not as self-sufficient as their quadrupedal ancestors. They had
babies that could not hold on and were surrounded by males that could rape or commit infanticide. There
is an argument that monogamy is a male adaptation that increases paternity assurance while reducing the
risk of infanticide. We know that males compete for mates, and the high degree of sexual dimorphism in P.
boisei supports that fact. With all of the preceding arguments in mind, is it possible for apes with a tendency
toward monogamy to live together without all of the rules and laws seen in modern humans to keep male
competition and jealousy in check? While we could argue that they also could have lived in pairs with their
dependent offspring and never ventured far from trees, how did females climb with their infants? We still
have many unanswered questions about hominin behavioral ecology!

18. Paranthropus boisei | 129

Figure 18.6 Paranthropus boisei: “King of the termite mound” by Keenan Taylor.

130 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

19. Paranthropus robustus
Paranthropus robustus (2.3 mya)
(“beside human” / robust)

Figure 19.1 Paranthropus robustus. “Sterkfontein
Caves 66,” photograph by Mike Peel
(www.mikepeel.net), is licensed under CC BY-SA
4.0.

SITES
Swartkrans, Kromdraai, Drimolen, Gondolin, and Coopers Cave, South Africa

PEOPLE
Robert Broom and Andre Keyser

131

INTRODUCTION
In 1938, Robert Broom discovered the first Paranthropus robustus material at the site of Swartkrans, South
Africa. He later found material at Kromdraai, and because the molar teeth were more primitive at that site,
he changed the species name at Swartkrans to P. crassidens but used P. robustus for the Kromdraai material.
Molar characteristics from the more recent material from the Drimolen site are thought to be intermediate
between the Swartkrans and Kromdraai molars, and most researchers now consider the material from all
three sites to be species: robustus.

PHYLOGENY
Au. africanus is the favored ancestor of P. robustus. However, others believe that P. boisei and robustus are
descended from Au. aethiopicus. Of the former school, some believe that P. boisei is also descended from Au.
africanus and thus a sister species to P. robustus. The two species would then have inherited their flexed
skull base from Au. africanus. Like P. boisei, P. robustus appears to be an evolutionary dead end.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
The species is known only from sites within the Cradle of Humankind World Heritage Site in South Africa.
As mentioned in the introduction, Robert Broom discovered the first material at Swartkrans and subsequent
specimens at the site of Kromdraai. Andre Keyser discovered the jaw and dental material at Drimolen in
1994.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Like P. boisei, P. robustus exhibited buttressing of the skull, face, and mandible; orthognathism in that the
teeth were tucked under the cranial base; small anterior dentition; molarized premolars; large muscles of
mastication; large zygomatic arches for passage of the temporalis muscle; sagittal crests in males and a
nuchal crest that did not converge with the sagittal crest; tall mandibular rami to increase the strength of
the masseter and medial pterygoid (another muscle of mastication) muscles for their tough, fibrous diet and
a large mandibular body; and a high degree of postorbital constriction due to their large face (see skull cast
in Figure 19.1).
Characteristics shared with Au. africanus are a flexed skull base, megadontia (P. robustus’s molars were 17%
larger, but their MQ of 2.2 was lower), molarized premolars, a larger second than third molar, and facial buttressing. While P. robustus appears to have been more orthognathic than Au. africanus, they were not. Their
anteriorly oriented orbits and zygomatics reduced the distance between their midface and jaws, making it
appear so. The nasal bones were recessed relative to the forward-oriented zygomatics, so that they too had
a somewhat dish-shaped midface like Au. africanus. They had less of a forehead than Au. africanus because
of the forward-oriented orbits. Finally, unlike Au. africanus, where maximum force was on the molars, the
maximum force was on the premolars due to a combination of the forward placement of the zygomatics
and an enlarged anterior portion of the temporalis muscle that was offset by the positioning of the dental
arcade under the braincase (Cartmill and Smith 2009).
Average cranial capacity is estimated to have been 530 cc, giving them the highest EQ, 3.0, of any australopith (Cartmill and Smith 2009).
The postcranial morphology of P. robustus shares some similarities with Homo, such as broad distal finger
phalanges that are thought to indicate enlarged tactile pads and increased vascularization, sensitivity, and
motor control, as well as a large attachment for the flexor pollicis longus muscle that acts as a powerful
thumb flexor. They thus are thought to have had a great degree of manual dexterity and were likely capable
of making and certainly using tools. However, they retained some primitive australopith characteristics,
132 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

including long arms; small vertebral bodies, especially inferiorly; small sacroiliac and hip joints; more posteriorly oriented ilia; and a long femoral neck. Males of the species are thought to have stood 4′ (1.2 m) tall
and weighed 120 lb (54 kg) and females, 3′2″ (<1.0 m) and 90 lb (40 kg).

Review of Primitive Characteristics
Retain prognathism, concave facial profile, long arms, small vertebral bodies, small sacroiliac joints,
posteriorly-oriented ilia, and long femoral neck of Au. africanus.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Same characteristics as P. boisei, except not as robust and large.
• Maximum bite force on premolars.
• Encephalized.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
Like P. boisei, P. robustus are thought to have been generalist herbivores that may have consumed some animal matter and could fall back on hard and brittle items, such as nuts, seeds, and hard-skinned fruits, when
preferred items were not available. C. K. Brain found wooden digging sticks in association with P. robustus
remains. In addition, polish on bone and horn cores (bone interior of animal horns) attributed to P. robustus
is consistent with repeated digging, such as for tubers.
Of interest is recent research that indicates that they were more male- than female-philopatric, supporting
the notion that we have inherited the chimp and bonobo pattern of females relocating to join and range
with a group of males. Amazingly, isotopic analyses of strontium in their teeth indicates that females did
not grow up where their fossils are found (Copeland et al. 2011).

19. Paranthropus robustus | 133

20. Australopithecus garhi
Australopithecus garhi (2.5 mya)
(“southern ape” / “surprise” in the Afar language)

Figure 20.1 Reconstructed Australopithecus garhi skull.
“Musée national d’Ethiopie-Australopithecus garhi (2)” by
Ji-Elle is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

SITES
Bouri site in the Middle Awash area of the Afar Depression, Ethiopia

PEOPLE
Tim White and Berhane Asfaw

INTRODUCTION
In 1996, researchers recovered portions of the frontal and parietal bones as well as a maxilla that contained
teeth (see Figure 20.1). These materials were attributed to Australopithecus garhi. While nearby limb bones
could not be attributed to the species with absolute certainty, they have been used by some paleoanthro-

134

pologists to describe the species’ characteristics. Thus there is very little useful material to “reconstruct”
this species. Fossil-containing sediments also contained bones with cut marks and a few surface cores
(shaped and modified rock) and flakes (sharp pieces of rock struck from a core) were found, suggesting that
Au. garhi butchered animal remains and possibly made tools. However, tools in fossil-bearing layers would
be better evidence. Some believe that the manufactured stone tools at the nearby Gona, Ethiopia, site may
have been manufactured by Au. garhi.

PHYLOGENY
The species is likely descended from Au. afarensis, possibly directly so. Like Au. afarensis, Au. garhi is
thought to have been more terrestrial than the South African australopiths. As is the case for the rest of the
australopiths, some researchers believe them to be ancestral to genus Homo, and what little evidence there
is for tool manufacture accords with our lineage.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
The species was discovered in 1996 by Tim White’s crew, and later Berhane Asfaw became involved. The
only fossil material comes from the Bouri site in the Middle Awash region of the Afar Depression in Ethiopia.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
The maxilla and teeth are larger and more robust than those of Au. afarensis, and some researchers lump
them with the paranthropines. Thus like Au. aethiopicus and P. boisei, Au. garhi were adapted to a broader
dietary niche in response to environmental changes, particularly expanding grasslands. If the limb bones
are rightfully attributed to the species, they had longer, more humanlike legs than other australopiths. Their
arms were still apelike, based on the ratio of the arm to forearm length. The cranial capacity was 446 cc,
falling midrange within that of Au. afarensis.

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• Ape-like arms.
• Small brain.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Robust craniofaciodental characteristics.
• Possibly longer, more human-like legs.

20. Australopithecus garhi | 135

21. Australopithecus sediba
Australopithecus sediba (~2.0 mya)
(“Southern ape / “fountain or wellspring” in the Sotho language)

Figure 21.1 Australopithecus sediba holotype.
“Australopithecus sediba” by Brett Eloff is licensed under CC
BY-SA 4.0.

SITES
Malapa, South Africa

PEOPLE
Lee and Matthew Berger and subsequent colleagues

INTRODUCTION
My research on this interesting species showed me how little I knew! Since (1) many biological anthropologists who teach human evolution are not paleoanthropologists, (2) Au. sediba is a fairly recent discovery, and
(3) many textbooks have not as yet included much information about it, I have provided a more in-depth
overview of this species.

136

Six well-preserved individuals of a new species of Australopithecus were discovered, beginning in 2008, at
the cave site of Malapa, South Africa. Lee Berger’s crew is credited with the discovery after Berger’s nineyear-old son Matthew (see Figure 21.2) happened upon the fossils of a juvenile male (MH1) that became the
holotype for the species (see Figure 21.1). The other five individuals were an adult male, an adult female
(MH2) and, remarkably, an infant. It is of great utility in terms of interpreting morphology that much of the
fossil material was found in situ (i.e. where the body settled versus missing or scattered about), demonstrating that they became buried and began fossilizing fairly rapidly. It is thought that they fell into a cavern,
possibly lured by the presence of water in that then dry environment.

Figure 21.2 Nine-year-old Matthew Berger
with fossil discovery. “Matthew Berger with
Malapa Hominin 1” by Lee R. Berger is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0.

PHYLOGENY
Since Au. sediba shares characteristics with both Au. africanus and Homo, it is thought to possibly be intermediate between the two species. That scenario, of course, disagrees with Au. afarensis as being our direct
ancestor, with Au. africanus as a side branch. According to Berger et al. (2010), Au. sediba is more distinct
from Au. africanus than the latter is from Au. afarensis in hand, pelvis, foot, and ankle morphology. However,
the team working with the material believe it should stay within the genus Australopithecus because it lacks
the Homo encephalization trend. Surprisingly, Au. sediba is more similar to Homo erectus in some respects
than to Early Homo (H. habilis or rudolfensis). There has also been speculation that Au. sediba is a derived
form of Au. africanus, but it is problematic in that the Malapa specimens are only 100 kya more recent than
the youngest Au. africanus material. Furthermore, because the Malapa material is contemporary with Early
Homo material (H. habilis and rudolfensis), some insist that they cannot be ancestral to those species. However, Pickering et al. (2011) dispute that claim, since Early Homo material is still problematic, both taxonomically and spatiotemporally. Berger et al. (2010) have proposed four phylogenetic scenarios—that Au. sediba
was the ancestor of Homo habilis, Homo rudolfensis, or Homo erectus, or was a sister species to the ancestor
of the Homo lineage.

21. Australopithecus sediba | 137

Figure 21.3 Malapa site. “Malapa fossil site, August 2011 site of discovery
of Australopithecus sediba – view North” by Lee R. Berger is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
Because the “Malapa Party” (my term) discovery is such a great story, I used it to introduce the species and
will not repeat it here. Malapa (see Figure 21.3) is 9.3 km northeast of Sterkfontein and 45 km north-northwest of Johannesburg in the Cradle of Humankind World Heritage Site (see Figure 21.4) (Wikipedia contributors 2015f). No fossil material has been found elsewhere.

Figure 21.4 Malapa area indicated on map of South African provinces. “Map of South Africa
with provinces shaded and districts numbered (2011)” by Htonl is licensed under CC BY-SA
3.0.

138 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
In general, the species’ morphology is a mosaic of australopith- (especially Au. africanus) and Homo-like
characteristics, but there are multiple lines of evidence to support its classification as a separate species
(Berger et al. 2010). Since the Malapa material provides some of the best in situ evidence for many body
parts, relative to other contemporary and previous species, I will spend more time discussing the physical
and biomechanical significance.
The brain of Au. sediba was australopith-like in its size and “convolutional patterns” (Carlson et al. 2011).
However, derived aspects of the frontal lobe show that Homo-like reorganization preceded pronounced
encephalization (Carlson et al. 2011). This is an exciting discovery, in that we do not see so much of a gradual
increase in size but rather that the hominin brain evolved in a mosaic fashion and that an increase in the
association region was favored at the time. If cranial capacity alone was all that was available to infer cognition in Au. sediba, that important fact would be missed.

Figure 21.5 Lee Berger with MH1. “Lee Berger and
the Cranium of Australopithecus sediba MH1” by
Brett Eloff is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Like most areas of the body, the cranial morphology reflects australopith- (especially Au. africanus) and
Homo-like characteristics (Berger et al. 2010). Relative to Au. africanus, Au. sediba had smaller teeth and a
less robust face (see Figure 21.5). Of interest is that they are described as having an “incipient” nose, i.e. the
beginnings of a protruding nose (Berger et al. 2010). They share various mandibular and dental characteristics with Au. africanus, Early Homo, and Homo erectus (Irish et al. 2013; de Ruiter et al. 2013). Mandibular size
and shape and tooth size most closely resemble Early Homo, and while some tooth measures and growth
pattern are most similar to H. erectus, the overall growth trajectory is unique compared to other fossil
hominins (de Ruiter et al. 2013). Analysis of tooth shape, molar cusp patterns, and root number of the various teeth shows that Au. sediba and Au. africanus share five synapomorphies (shared traits among related
species), thus supporting a South African australopith clade. In addition, Au. sediba shares five synapomorphies with H. habilis/rudolfensis/erectus, suggesting a South African australopith ancestry for our lineage
(Irish et al. 2013).

21. Australopithecus sediba | 139

Au. sediba retained relatively long arms and elevated shoulder joints for climbing (see Figure 21.6) (Kivell et
al. 2011; Schmid et al. 2013). Except for three wrist bones and the distal phalanges of the four fingers, the
right distal forearm, wrist, and hand have been recovered intact for the adult female MH2. While the morphology of the hand is unique in some ways and they were still capable of strong flexion for climbing, some
traits are associated with tool production in Homo species, especially the longer, more dexterous thumb
and shorter fingers that facilitate our strong precision pinching. The only other hand that is well preserved
from the late Pliocene is that of OH 7, attributed to Homo habilis. However, the Malapa hand was better
suited to tool production and there is still speculation that OH 7 was actually P. boisei, a robust australopith
not in our lineage. Thus, Au. sediba may have been responsible for the tools that have been recovered at
South African sites (Kivell et al. 2011).

Figure 21.6 Australopithecus sediba compared with Lucy. From left to
right: MH1, Lucy, MH2. “Australopithecus sediba and Lucy” by Peter
Schmid is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

While determining the thoracic shape of fossil hominins has been a problem due to the lack of intact specimens, it is generally thought that australopiths had a conical thorax like extant great apes. A conical thorax
is involved with arboreal locomotion, whereas our barrel-shaped thorax is (1) adapted for endurance walking and running, (2) related to shoulder breadth and arm-swinging to counter trunk rotation and facilitate
our greater respiratory abilities, and (3) facilitated by a decrease in gut volume related to encephalization
and a less herbaceous diet (first reviewed in Bramble and Lieberman 2004 and later in Schmid et al. 2013).
The Au. sediba specimens support the notion of a conical shape to the upper thorax, but surprisingly, the
lower thorax is not as flared as was previously thought, being more human-like. Schmid et al. (2013) assert
that the “uncoupling” of the upper and lower trunk morphology in Au. sediba argues against a physiological
response, in favor of a biomechanical one. The conical upper thorax would have been useful for climbing
but would not have allowed for effective arm-swinging or heavy breathing and thus they were likely not
capable of exertive walking and running. Their gut must have been smaller than a typical ape’s, suggesting
a less herbaceous diet and setting the stage for the expensive tissue trade-off allowing for encephalization
in our lineage (Schmid et al. 2013).
Au. sediba likely possessed the modern number of regional vertebrae. While the vertebrae of all hominoids
increase in size from superior to inferior, earlier hominins lacked enlarged lumbar and sacral vertebral
bodies and our pronounced sacral curve (see Williams et al. 2013 for references). Au. sediba is the earliest
hominin to exhibit those characteristics, which are present in Homo erectus and all subsequent species.
While the vertebrae in the five regions of our vertebral column have distinctive characteristics, they morphologically grade into one another so that there are transitional vertebrae, e.g. the seventh cervical vertebra resembles the first thoracic vertebra and so on. Unlike humans, the transitional thoracolumbar vertebra

140 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

in Au. sediba, H. erectus (based on the Nariokotome specimen), and possibly Au. africanus is 11 versus 12.
Thus while vertebra 12 is rib-bearing, it also likely functioned to elongate the lumbar region, increasing
lower back flexibility (Williams et al. 2013).
The innominates were australopith-like in dimensions involved with childbirth but exhibited buttressing
and other characteristics of Homo, such as iliac shape and vertical positioning, shortened ischium, and so
forth (Kibii et al. 2011). The proximal femur was australopith-like with a small head and long neck, but the
bicondylar/carrying angle and insertion of the gluteus maximus were humanlike. The knee exhibits both
australopith- and human-like characteristics. Like us, they were capable of fully extending their knees during the swing phase of walking (DeSilva et al. 2013).
The partially articulated ankle and foot elements present a unique combination of primitive and derived
traits. Humanlike characteristics include the morphology of the distal tibia, Achilles tendon insertion (calcaneal tuberosity), possible valgus (medially inverted) knee indicative of the bicondylar angle, probable
arched foot, etc. Some aspects of the bones are more australopith-like, e.g. more gracile calcaneus; and
some are more ape-like, e.g. robust medial malleolus (distal fibula, what we think of as our medial ankle
“bone”) and some joints and muscle attachment sites (Zipfel et al. 2011).
Like in apes, initial ground contact was via the heel and lateral aspect of the foot, so that the foot was
inverted. They then hyperpronated the foot by transferring weight medially so that the ankle was inverted
and the plantar surface of the foot rolled medially and became everted. Modern humans with hyperpronation have problems with increased stress and wear on the joints, and the same is evident in Au. sediba
remains (DeSilva et al. 2013). Hyperpronation, along with a robust medial malleolus, flexible midfoot, and
upper limb adaptations, was apparently an adaptive response to bipedal terrestrial locomotion and retention of arboreal climbing abilities (J.M. DeSilva, personal communication with author, 2014). As in the ardipiths, the divergent hallux likely aided in climbing and would have given them more of a tripod foundation to
stabilize their upright stance when standing and walking (Lovejoy et al. 2009).
Taken together, the mosaic of lower limb characteristics suggest that Au. sediba may have practiced a form
of bipedalism unique from australopiths, or that they were descended from a more terrestrial ancestor and
they then reverted to a more semi-arboreal lifestyle (DeSilva et al. 2013).

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• Brain size and convolutions.
• Australopith-like growth trajectory of teeth and jaws.
• Climbing adaptations: elevated shoulder joint, long arms, and strong hand flexion.
• Conical upper thorax.
• Australopith-like femoral head and neck.
• Some primitive aspects of ankle and foot.
• Retention of semi-divergent hallux.

21. Australopithecus sediba | 141

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Reorganization of the frontal cortex.
• Small teeth and jaws and less robust face.
• Homo-like tooth shape and growth pattern.
• Humanlike lower thorax.
• Increased manual dexterity and precision grip.
• Longer, more dexterous thumb.
• Shorter fingers.
• Enlarged lumbar and sacral bodies and sacral curve.
• Buttressed and more vertical ilium.
• Homo-like carrying angle and gluteus maximus insertion.
• Full knee extension.
• Humanlike aspects of tibia, ankle, and foot.
• Possibly unique form of bipedalism, e.g. hyperpronation.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
The habitat of Au. sediba is thought to have been a mosaic environment of wood- and grasslands. Phytoliths
from their tooth enamel indicate that they had access to forest products. Phytoliths are species-specific
silica bodies in plants that can be used to identify what plant species were consumed. Fruit, leaves, wood,
and bark were identified, with the latter being a first for fossil hominins (Henry et al. 2012).
Unlike other australopiths and paranthropines, the diet of Au. sediba most closely resembled savannadwelling chimps and secondarily Ar. ramidus, in that they specialized on C3 plants, such as herbaceous
plants, shrub and tree plant products, and grasses, and possibly animals that consumed those items. We
know that C4 plants were available at the time because remains of those more open, dry-adapted plants
have been recovered in the same layers within which the Malapa material was found. In addition, C4-consuming rodents, horses, and bovids were resident at the time. Their diet was thus less “carbonically” (I made
that up for fun!) varied than contemporary hominin species inhabiting similar environments, such as Au.
africanus and Paranthropus robustus, as well as Homo species that had an even broader diet. Microwear
analyses show that the two Malapa individuals (MH1 and MH2) under study ate a greater percentage of hard
food items relative to other australopiths, being more similar to P. robustus or H. erectus (Henry et al. 2012).
Being C3 specialists in a C4-dominated environment may have involved more time invested in foraging,
or they may have favored a more closed environment for feeding. It is thus likely that there were enough
woodland or riverine environments to have supported the population. Additionally, they could have consumed hard items when available or as fallback foods.

142 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

22. Genus Homo
It is generally thought that by 2.5 mya, there were at least two species of Homo in East Africa, Homo habilis
and Homo rudolfensis. The inclusion of those fossils in our genus is not accepted by all and is somewhat
arbitrary. Some argue that H. habilis does not differ enough from australopiths to warrant different genus
designation. Its inclusion in Homo was prompted by the fact that they are thought to have made and used
tools and thus to have been cognitively advanced. H. habilis was more encephalized than the australopiths,
and the skull vault is flexed as in Au. africanus, P. boisei, P. robustus, and later species of Homo.
There is debate as to whether H. habilis or H. rudolfensis gave rise to Homo ergaster (African form of the
erectus-grade) and hence should be included in our lineage. Both species overlap the more derived H.
ergaster in time and geographic space. The size and architecture of the brain of H. habilis make it a contender in the minds of some researchers. However, their limb proportions, i.e. retention of long arms and
short legs, do not resemble H. ergaster. According to some researchers, H. rudolfensis possessed more modern femora (plural of femur), limb proportions, and a more orthognathic face, thus making them a better
candidate for the ancestor of H. ergaster. However, it has not been determined that postcranial remains
can be definitively assigned to the species, because postcrania are rarely found in association with cranial
material (from which species designation derives). In addition, the claim to a more orthognathic face has
been called into question based upon biometric impossibilities—the reconstruction of the face is impossible
in terms of the relative positioning of key features (Bromage et al. 2008). While some claim that H. rudolfensis were more encephalized than H. habilis, others believe that their relative brain size (i.e. brain size taking
into account body size) was lower and the temporal region, which is a conservative region of the skull, was
more primitive. They also had more robust faces and teeth, unlike H. ergaster.

143

23. Homo habilis
Homo habilis (2.3 mya)
(“human” / “handy,” “able,” etc.)

SITES
Ethiopia: Hadar (and possibly Omo)
Kenya: Koobi Fora
Tanzania: Olduvai Gorge
South Africa: Swartkrans and Sterkfontein

PEOPLE
Mary and Louis Leakey, Donald Johanson, Tim White, and others

Figure 23.1 Scientific reconstruction of Homo
habilis. “Homo habilis” by Lillyundreya is
licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

144

Of the two species of Early Homo, Homo habilis is the favored ancestor of Homo ergaster and all subsequent
hominin species.

PHYLOGENY
While the origin of Homo habilis has been in a state of flux in recent years, the discovery of Au. sediba has
raised more questions about the origin of our genus. The discovery of Lucy in the early 1970s led some
researchers to turn away from Au. africanus in favor of Au. afarensis as the ancestor of genus: Homo. In
recent years, the idea that a cladistic event had occurred with Au. afarensis, leading to Au. africanus and the
more derived robust forms on the one hand and genus Homo on the other, gained in popularity. Au. sediba now seems to have bridged the gap between the australopiths and genus Homo, sharing characteristics
with Au. africanus, H. habilis, and H. ergaster. The similarities with the two Homo species may help resolve
the problem as to which of the two species of “Early Homo” gave rise to H. ergaster. There are proponents
in support of each of the evolutionary scenarios, with their share of pros and cons.

Figure 23.2 KNM-ER 1813, Koobi Fora, Kenya.
“Homo habilis-KNM ER 1813” by Locutus Borg
is in the public domain.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
Louis and Mary Leakey discovered the first fossil material in 1960 at their site in Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania.
Louis had been recovering stone tools from the site for years, but the manufacturer of those tools had previously eluded him. He named the species Homo habilis or “handy-man.” Fossils attributed to H. habilis have
also been found at Hadar (and possibly Omo), Ethiopia; Koobi Fora, Kenya (see Figure 23.2); and the South
African sites of Swartkrans and Sterkfontein.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
H. habilis exhibited a high degree of sexual dimorphism, with males and females weighing 114 and 70 lb and
standing 5´2˝ and 4´1˝, respectively. Their skull, face, and dentition were more gracile than the australopiths.
Their teeth and dental arcades were very human-like. The skull base was flexed, as seen in Au. africanus
and the more derived robust australopiths and, relative to past species, the skull was rounder and higher,

23. Homo habilis | 145

reflecting architectural changes in the brain. Cranial capacity ranged from 500 to 800 cc with a mean of 631
cc. This gave them an EQ of 3.1–3.5. At this point in hominin evolutionary history, we see increased asymmetry in the two hemispheres of the brain, termed lateralization or left hemispheric dominance. The left
side of our brain is involved with language and analytical processes. Like all Old World monkeys and apes,
H. habilis possessed Broca’s area, which is involved with language production. However, it was larger than
in past hominin species, and they also possessed Wernicke’s area, which plays a role in language comprehension. They thus had the neural capacity for language. The left hemisphere is also related to right-handedness. They may have exhibited our tendency to hold objects with our left hand while working on them
with our right. The frontal lobe, important in association processes, was expanded and resulted in more of a
vertical forehead. The enlarged brain may have been facilitated by a decrease in gut volume, combined with
a higher-quality diet that resulted from increased cognitive capabilities and an expanded technology base.
H. habilis had a smaller supraorbital torus and its face was more orthognathic than its supposed ancestor,
Au. africanus, but they retained some prognathism in the lower face. They had fairly large ape-like incisors,
but their canines, premolars, and molars were reduced in size. The mandible was more gracile, reflecting
their reduced masticatory capabilities.
Like the majority of the australopiths, H. habilis possessed elongated arms, possibly suggesting continued
reliance on an arboreal environment. While the digits were still curved, they had increased gripping capabilities for tool manufacture and use, as evidenced by the pronounced attachment site for the flexor pollicis
longus muscle, which acts to flex the thumb.
The femoral head was enlarged and the neck shortened. Those changes are thought to have been the result
of increased strain generated by an expanded pelvis for birthing larger-brained infants. However, no fossilized pelvic fossils have been found. Their foot was more modern, in that the hallux was no longer divergent but rather aligned with the lateral four digits, and the toes were shorter. They had less mobility in their
feet, in that the foot had become more of a support structure like our own. The metatarsals were thick relative to modern feet, and the morphology of the third metatarsal suggests that they did not yet exhibit the
degree of weight transfer and propulsive capabilities seen in modern humans.

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• Some prognathism.
• Large incisors.
• Curved phalanges.
• Long arms and short legs.
• Thick metatarsals.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Gracile craniofaciodental characteristics:
◦ Thin skull vault.

146 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

• More globular cranium.
• Expanded frontal lobe.
• Left hemispheric dominance.
• Enlarged Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas.
• Reduced supraorbital torus.
• Smaller mandible, canines, and cheek teeth.
• Parabolic dental arcade.
• Increased manual dexterity.
• Larger femoral head (and hence acetabulum) and shorter neck.
• More stable foot:
◦ Loss of divergent hallux.
◦ Shorter toes.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
Certainly one of the most interesting things about H. habilis is the appearance of a much more extensive
archaeological record. The cultural period at that time, and extending through Homo erectus, is termed the
Early Paleolithic, or the early portion of the Old Stone Age. While other species apparently preceded H.
habilis in the manufacture of tools, it was thought for many years that they were the first to do so. The
Oldowan or Olduwan tradition (industry and technology are also used synonymously with “tradition”),
named after Olduvai Gorge, consisted of simple core tools and flakes. The technique involved the selection of a cobble (a workable-sized rock), followed by the use of a hammerstone to remove the outer rough
surface (see Figure 23.3) or “cortex” and then to shape it into a core tool, by the removal of flakes. The
flakes that are removed may be suitable for cutting and slicing. The process is called hard percussion, and
the shaping is known as lithic reduction. “Lithic” refers to stone and is also used to denote a stone tool.
Stone resources for the manufacture of tools were chosen for their suitability and transported across the
landscape. Of course, this indicates a level of cognitive complexity, but we must remember that chimps
and orangutans choose sticks and grass of particular widths and strengths, trim them to the appropriate
length, and transport them in their mouths to their site of intended use. Apes learn by trial and error, innovation and imitation, and cultural transmission, i.e. traits spread throughout a group by observation. Cultural transmission of innovations is even seen in monkeys, e.g. Japanese macaques washing sweet potatoes,
skimming grain kernels floating on the surface to separate them from beach sand, and bathing in volcanic
springs. While we do not know which species was the first to invent stone tools that were modified from
their original form via lithic reduction and shaping, we can see the precursors of innovation and cultural
transmission in our primate relatives. The real skill comes with having the manual dexterity to do so, making a tool that can accomplish a variety of uses, and the ability to teach others. I would argue that the earliest members of our genus had “theory of mind,” i.e. the realization of another’s thoughts. There is only
one example of teaching in nonhuman primates and that was a mother chimp in the Tai Forest of the Ivory
Coast that helped her daughter crack a nut, using their unique hammer and anvil technique. Our closest
relatives, with all of their intelligence, symbolic capabilities as demonstrated in language studies, and similarities to our own behavior, do not know enough to teach their children. They are not capable of realizing that “I know something that you don’t know” and vice versa. We go on and on about encephalization in
the hominin lineage and technological advancements in the archaeological record over time, but what may
have been the true dividing line between ourselves and the apes, whether bipeds or not, was the ability to
teach our young, kin, and other group members and thus increase their chance of survival. The vehicle for
developing a theory of mind is language. Human children develop a theory of mind at three or four years of

23. Homo habilis | 147

age. Prior to that time, they do not realize that they or others may have incomplete information. Here is a
fun anecdotal account that I always relay to my students:
My brother Michael was visiting my brother Jimmy. Jimmy was nowhere to be found when Michael realized
that Jimmy’s 18-month-old son had messed his diaper. Jimmy’s older son must have been about three years
old at the time. He helped Michael find everything that he needed to clean the baby. After Jimmy had reappeared and Michael had left for the day, the older boy remarked to his dad, “Uncle Mike is so dumb!” When
asked what he meant by that, he replied, “He didn’t know where the towels were; he didn’t even know how
to use the Diaper Genie® [a gizmo that turns dirty diapers into self-contained plastic coated links—truly
magical!].”
This indicates that my nephew had not developed a theory of mind. He did not understand that Michael did
not know things that he knew.

Figure 23.3 Hard hammer percussion. “Hard Hammer” by ZenTrowel is
in the public domain.

Homo habilis was the first species to exhibit enlarged Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas. They thus may have had
the motor control that allowed more lingual activity and the ability to comprehend the resulting sounds
they could produce. Great apes can comprehend symbols, i.e. this stands for that even though this bears
no resemblance to that. They have been taught American Sign Language, various computer languages, and
spoken language. Where they fall short is in syntax—they cannot string together symbols into meaningful sentences. I firmly believe that the descendant species of Early Homo, i.e. Homo ergaster, had theory
of mind, based on their stereotypical production of tools. There had to be teaching, learning, and training
involved in order to produce an implement that is readily recognized as an Acheulian hand axe (see Figure
23.4). Thus, since we see an earlier stage of tool production in Early Homo, I would argue that they had rudimentary language and theory of mind.
The Oldowan tradition lasted from approximately 2.5 to 1.5 mya but survived in some areas until 600 kya.
Tools consisted of crude choppers (see Figure 23.6) and scrapers, as well as simple flake tools, some of
which indicate that they were “retouched,” i.e. secondarily shaped and/or sharpened. In addition, there is
evidence of possible wooden digging sticks or spears at the site of Koobi Fora, in the East Lake Turkana
region of Kenya and possible bone tools at Olduvai Gorge.
Tools were likely used for acquiring and processing both animal (scavenging, butchering, disarticulation,
skinning, cutting flesh, chopping bones open, etc.) and plant (digging tubers, cutting stalks, pounding to
break down fiber, etc.) foods. Indications of hominins having butchered and scavenged animals comes from
several lines of evidence. First, tools have been found with H. habilis remains. Second, there are concentrations of tools and fossilized animal bones that exhibit signs of cutting, disarticulation, and marrow extrac-

148 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 23.4 Acheulian hand axe. “Bifaz en mano” by
José-Manuel Benito Alvarez is licensed under CC
BY-SA 2.5.

tion. Mary Leakey mapped one such area with a high accumulation of stone tools and bones, known as site
DK. Third, the high frequency of particular bones at some sites is indicative of the hominins having “brought
back the good stuff,” i.e. skulls for brain and limb bones for meat and marrow. Fourth, microscopic analyses
indicate that cut marks on some bones overlay predators’ teeth marks, showing that the hominins arrived
afterward. How they got meat away from scary scavengers is anyone’s guess. Finally, experiments with modern-made stone tools in the Oldowan style reveal (1) that it is possible to butcher an elephant and (2) wear
patterns that result from the butchering process match those found on ancient tools.
The following sites contain evidence of stone tools and their manufacture:
•
•
•
•
•

Lomekwi 3, Lake Turkana region, Kenya (3.3 mya): cores, anvils, and flakes.
Gona, Ethiopia (>2.5 mya): 3,000 stone artifacts.
Hadar, Ethiopia (2.4 mya): tools were found with a H. habilis mandible.
Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania (1.8 mya): numerous tools.
Koobi Fora, Kenya: high concentration of flakes suggesting repeated use.

H. habilis are thought to have been forager-scavengers that collected wild plant foods, hunted small animals
opportunistically, and scavenged carcasses from large predators. While there is evidence of “repeated-use”
sites, meaning that individuals returned to particular areas to meet, they are not thought to have settled
in any one area but rather moved about the landscape in their quest for food. They may have made use of
those sites for a variety of communal or individual activities, such as grouping for “central place foraging”
activities (from the animal literature, meaning to move out from and possibly return to a particular place),
making new and/or using cached tools, butchering carcasses, sharing food, etc. Mary Leakey believed that
her Site DK was indicative of a home base. While it is a romantic notion to look to modern hunter-gatherers
with modern intelligence and advanced weaponry as being able to stay in one place until resources became
scarce, it is not likely that those primitive hominins were camped out on a lake shore. It would have been a
very dangerous place to be for long periods of time.

23. Homo habilis | 149

Figure 23.5 Homo habilis Leopard Confrontation by Keenan Taylor.

While they could have climbed trees and made sleeping nests in trees or on the ground, we do not know
how much time they spent in the two microenvironments.

150 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 23.6 Oldowan choppers. “Pierre taillée Melka Kunture
Éthiopie fond” by Didier Descouens is licensed under CC
BY-SA 4.0.

THE FIRST FAMILY OF
PALEOANTHROPOLOGY: THE LEAKEYS
Louis Leakey (1903–1972) was born to British missionary parents residing in Kenya. He and his
wife Mary made names for themselves with their pioneering work, searching for and discovering fossil hominins in East Africa. Louis is credited with the discovery of three hominin species,
the first of which is considered to be a possible basal or stem ape, Proconsul africanus (“before
Consul” [a famous chimp at the London Zoo]/“from Africa”). Louis was an early believer in an
African human origin (Cartmill and Smith 2009). He became interested in the search for ancient
hominins after his discovery of stone tools that he attributed to human ancestors. The Leakeys
worked at Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania for many years. When Mary discovered the robust australopith that she named Zinjanthropus boisei (later to be changed to Australopithecus boisei
and later to Paranthropus boisei), Louis proclaimed to the world that they had found his predicted “man the toolmaker.” According to legend, he was ridiculed by some because they felt
that “Zinj” (also known as “Dear Boy” or “Nutcracker Man”), as the specimen came to be known,
was an herbivorous ape that would not have had the mental capabilities to manufacture the
tools that became known as the Oldowan technology. Louis was later rewarded with the discovery of fossils of a more derived hominin with a larger cranial capacity. He named the species
Homo habilis (“Handy man”) as the first tool makers. There was and still is some controversy
surrounding the classification of the species. He and his colleagues were accused of using cultural versus physical attributes to justify their inclusion of the fossil material in our genus
Homo. Some still believe the species should be assigned to genus: Australopithecus. Regardless
of the controversies, Louis made a name for himself and added to our knowledge of human

23. Homo habilis | 151

ancestry. At Olduvai, he also discovered the cranium (missing its face) of a 1.2 mya H. ergaster
individual. Another great accomplishment was sending the three “grand dames” of ape primatology into the field. He correctly believed that we can learn about ourselves from our closest
relatives. He thus funded Jane Goodall to study the chimps of Gombe, Tanzania; Dian Fossey for
her work with mountain gorillas in the Virunga Volcano region of Rwanda; and Biruté Galdikas
to study the orangutans of Borneo.
Mary Leakey (née Mary Douglas Nikol, 1913–1996) is described on the Leakey website
(www.leakey.com) as “one of the world’s most distinguished fossil hunters.” She is credited with
the discovery of two species of early hominins, Au. afarensis at Laetoli and P. boisei at Olduvai,
as well as the Laetoli footprints. (Laetoli is also in Tanzania.) Mary had an early interest in
archaeology and, like Louis, excavated stone tools; in her case in France as a mere child. By age
17, she was auditing university courses in archaeology and geology. She met Louis in 1933 and
accompanied him to Kenya to illustrate stone tools for a book he was writing. They married
several years later and had three sons, Jonathan, Richard, and Philip. Jonathan hunted fossils
along with his parents and discovered the first H. habilis specimen, a mandible known as
“Jonny’s Child.” Richard moved into Kenya to work at sites around Lake Turkana, and his team
discovered the oldest H. ergaster specimen (1.75 mya) in the West Lake Turkana region. In addition to his paleoanthropological work, he is a champion of wildlife conservation. His wife Meave
is a renowned paleoanthropologist with several hominin species discoveries to her credit, and
their daughter, Louise, is well on her way to making a name for herself (www.leakey.com).

152 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

24. Homo rudolfensis
Homo rudolfensis (2.4 mya)
(“human” / from Lake Rudolf)

SITES
Koobi Fora, Kenya; Chiwondo Beds, Malawi; possibly Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania

PEOPLE
Richard and Meave Leakey, Bernard Ngeneo

Figure 24.1 Homo rudolfensis holotype:
KNM-ER 1470 from Koobi Fora, Kenya.
“Homo rudolfensis” by Durova is licensed
under CC BY-SA 4.0.

153

INTRODUCTION
The second species of Early Homo to be discovered is now known as Homo rudolfensis, since it was discovered at the site of Koobi Fora on the east side of Lake Turkana, which was formerly known as Lake Rudolf.

PHYLOGENY
Homo rudolfensis may be a descendent of Kenyanthropus platyops. Those who favor that scenario would
either assign rudolfensis to genus: Kenyanthropus or move platyops into genus: Homo. There are proponents
on both sides of the argument as to whether H. habilis or H. rudolfensis gave rise to the earliest member of
the “erectus grade,” i.e. Homo ergaster in Africa, and its four descendent species: erectus in Asia, antecessor
in Western Europe, georgicus in the Republic of Georgia, and floresiensis on the island of Flores.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
The majority of Homo rudolfensis material comes from the Koobi Fora site where Richard Leakey discovered
the type specimen, KNM-ER 1470 (see Figure 24.1) (Kenya National Museum – East Rudolf), as well as subsequent material. Material has also been recovered from the Chiwondo Beds of Malawi, and there is possible
material at Olduvai Gorge. Thus, the species ranged from northern Kenya down through Tanzania and into
Malawi, along the north-south hominin corridor.
Leakey originally called the material Homo indet. (“indeterminate”) because he did not know in what, if any,
group to include it. The use of species: rudolfensis began to gain in popularity as researchers came to realize they were dealing with two distinct species. For a while, some were content with the two species being
geographic species, i.e. H. habilis at Olduvai and H. rudolfensis at Koobi Fora. However, habilis-like material
was discovered at Koobi Fora (KNM-ER 1813) and some material at Olduvai resembled H. rudolfensis. The
two species went through a tumultuous period when the species names were abandoned by some, in favor
of “Early Homo.” However, critics complained that it had become a “wastebasket” species. During that time,
Richard Leakey visited SUNY Geneseo, and I had the opportunity to chat with him about the taxonomic
problem. He was frustrated with the state of things and wished that paleoanthropologists would work out
exactly what characterized the two species. Over time, paleoanthropologists have seemingly become more
comfortable with the habilis designation for the majority of fossils from Olduvai Gorge, even if some of them
prefer genus: Australopithecus. The same is true for the type specimen, KNM-ER 1470, as H. rudolfensis.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
Relative to H. habilis, H. rudolfensis was larger and more robust, with a heavier face and jaws and larger
dentition. Their faces were long, and the lower face was thought to be somewhat orthognathic based on the
type specimen, KNM-ER 1470. New material discovered at Koobi Fora was thought to support the reconstructed facial morphology of KNM-ER 1470 and elucidate heretofore unknown aspects of the face and jaw.
However, Bromage et al. (2008) have conducted architectural constraints analyses demonstrating that the
degree of orthognathism would be biomechanically impossible. The molars were large with complex crowns
and thick enamel like other contemporary and descendant species, but they were mesiodistally long and
hence more primitive than H. habilis. The brain averaged 751 cc, but their encephalization quotient may have
been only 3.0, versus the 3.1–3.5 range estimated for H. habilis. As mentioned, it is not known for certain
that any of the postcranial material that some researchers assign to the species is justified. If the postcranial material belongs in the H. rudolfensis hypodigm, the following can be stated about the species: their
innominate, femur (larger head, shorter neck, and robust shaft), and limb proportions were more modern,
with longer legs and shorter arms, and the femoral robusticity corresponds to increased strain generated
by a wider pelvic aperture.

154 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• Robust craniofaciodental characteristics.
• Primitive temporal region.
• Long molars (mesiodistally).

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Long orthognathic face?
• Large brain.
• Human-like limb proportions, innominate, and femora?

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
While their environment did not differ from that of H. habilis, they may have been able to process tougher
food items with their more robust masticatory apparatus. While tools are known from the time period and
geographic region occupied by the species, tools have not been found in association with fossil material.
It is possible that the more gracile masticatory apparatus of H. habilis could have resulted from tool use in
food-processing activities and relaxed selection for robust features.

24. Homo rudolfensis | 155

25. Homo species indeterminate
Homo species indeterminate (2.8 mya)
A possible new species of Early Homo was recently discovered. Villmoare et al. (2015) reported on what
they are calling Homo species indet. (“indeterminate”). The half mandible (LD 350-1) was discovered by Chalachew Seyoum in 2013 at the Ledi-Geraru site in the Afar region of Ethiopia. If indeed the jaw is part of the
Homo lineage, it extends the origin of our genus to 2.8 mya, 400 kya older than the oldest H. habilis specimen, i.e. AL 666-1 from the Hadar site in Ethiopia where Lucy was discovered. Villmoare et al. (2015) believe
that the specimen represents a transitional form between Au. afarensis and Homo habilis. Support for their
supposition includes the combination of australopith and Homo-like characteristics seen in the mandible
and teeth, as well as the fact that it is from the same area as Au. afarensis that is known to have survived
there until 3 mya. They report on a fragmentary mandible from the Koobi Fora site in Kenya (KNM-ER 5431)
that exhibits a similar combination of australopith and Homo morphology (see Villmoare et al. 2015 for references).
The anterior of the mandible exhibits the most primitive characteristics, along with some Homo-like characteristics. Homo characteristics include narrower molars with more derived dimensions and cusp morphology, and the canine/first premolar configuration is less ape- or australopith-like, as evidenced by wear
patterns. They conclude that deviation in the teeth and jaws, from the australopith condition, occurred
early in the Homo lineage.
DiMaggio et al. (2015) reported on the paleoenvironment of the site. The area was a mosaic environment
consisting of open grass- and scrubland, gallery forest, and lakes and/or rivers. They see a faunal turnover
2.8–2.6 mya in the strata, in accordance with the area becoming more open and likely arid with an increase
in grazers. They cite evidence for climatic and vegetation shifts resulting from “rifting processes and extensive volcanism [that] altered the architecture of sedimentary basins” (see DiMaggio et al., p. 1, for references). Their work fills an important gap in the paleoenvironmental history of the region.
The fact that Au. garhi is younger and their teeth are more robust leads the researchers to conclude parsimoniously that Au. garhi is not part of our ancestry, as earlier and later forms of Homo had more gracile
teeth and jaws. The same would also hold true for Au. sediba due to their much later appearance in the
fossil record at ~2 mya. However, Hawks et al. (2015) argue that the osteometrics (bone measurements) and
anatomical features do not support firm taxonomic placement in genus: Homo. They believe that they have
ample evidence showing that Au. sediba is closely related to early species of Homo (see Chapter 21).

156

26. Homo naledi
Homo naledi (date unknown)
(“human” / “star” in Sotho language)

Figure 26.1 Skull and mandible of type specimen DH-1 by Lee Roger Berger research team is licensed under CC-BY-SA 4.0.

SITE
Rising Star cave system, South Africa

157

PEOPLE
Cavers Steven Tucker and Rick Hunter and investigated by Paul Dirks and Lee Berger and their
associates

Figure 26.2 Comparison among H. naledi, H. habilis, “African H. erectus”, and H. floresiensis. By Chris Stringer, Natural
History Museum, United Kingdom – Stringer, Chris (10september 2015). “The many mysteries of Homo naledi.” eLife 4:
e10627. DOI:10.7554/eLife.10627. PMC: 4559885. ISSN 2050-084X. Licensed under CC-BY 4.0.

INTRODUCTION
This newest member of our genus has once again confounded the evolutionary history of the Homo lineage.
The most exciting aspect is the nature of the remains suggests that they were intentionally deposited in the
deep cavern where they were discovered. H. heidelbergensis was heretofore the earliest species thought to
have practiced intentional body disposal. Attempts at dating the remains have not been successful. However, Thackeray (2015) has estimated that the species may date to 2.0 ± 0.5 mya, based on comparisons of
date and anatomical characteristics among H. naledi, H. habilis, H. rudolfensis, and H. erectus (see Figure
26.2 and Chapter 27 for the erectus grade).

PHYLOGENY
It appears that the majority of researchers agree that the remains reflect a new hominin (see references this
section, especially Randolph-Quinney 2015). Like most hominins, the phylogeny of the species is unknown
but it likely descended from an australopith ancestry. What makes things even more difficult is that the
species shares characteristics with possible extant or near extant species of Homo (H. habilis, H. rudolfen-

158 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

sis, and H. erectus), more derived forms (e.g. neandertals and humans), as well as various australopiths. The
mosaic of traits is interesting and further supports the bushy nature of the hominin tree.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
The remains of a minimum of 15 individuals, totaling 1550 fossils (see Figure 26.4), were excavated in 2013
and 2014 from the Dinaledi Chamber, located within the Rising Star cave system in the Cradle of Humankind
World Heritage Site, Gauteng Province, South Africa (Berger et al. 2015). The fossils are the largest collection
of a hominin species in Africa (Dirks et al. 2015). The chamber is 30 m below ground and is only accessible
via a 12 m narrow shaft (Randolph-Quinney 2015 and see Figure 26.3 – top right). Based on depositional data,
the bodies were deposited over time (Dirks et al. 2015).

Figure 26.3 Dinaledi Chamber by Paul H. G. M. Dirks, et al. is licensed under CC-BY 4.0.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
The remains are especially valuable as all body regions are represented, and some bones are articulated,
so that anatomical positions and arrangements are preserved, e.g. an almost complete leg of a child and
an adult hand (Dirks et al. 2015). The low cranial capacity, elevated shoulder joints, curved phalanges, and
trunk and hip morphology are australopith-like. Crania, jaw and teeth morphology, and leg bones are, for
the most part, Homo-like. The wrist is most similar to humans and neandertals. The foot is very human-like.
(Berger et al. 2015, Harcourt-Smith et al. 2015, Kivell 2015, Thackeray 2015) Thus, we see an able terrestrial
biped that could climb, forage, and take refuge in trees.

26. Homo naledi | 159

Figure 26.4 Homo naledi collection by Lee Roger Berger research team is licensed under CC-BY 4.0.

Cranial capacity falls within the range for the australopiths, with males averaging 560 cc and females, 465
cc (Berger et al. 2015). The base of skull vault is flexed like members of the erectus grade and subsequent
species of Homo (see Figure 26.2 and 15.8). The vault bones are thin like those of H. habilis. H. naledi exhibits
less postorbital constriction than the earliest australopiths, yet possesses a larger supraorbital torus than
any gracile australopith (Berger et al. 2015). Taken together, it is an odd combination. A more gracile face
would result in less postorbital constriction, yet the supraorbital torus is associated with chewing stress.
Even more surprising, the teeth are smaller than those of H. habilis, H. rudolfensis, and the erectus grade,
except for H. floresiensis (Berger et al. 2015). The skull vault is pentagonal in cross-section like Asian H. erectus (see Figure 26.5), due to the presence of a sagittal keel, i.e. a thickening along the midline of the skull,
from front to back (Berger et al. 2015). Since the trait is poorly understood in H. erectus, its presence in
another species may shed more light on the adaptive significance or ontological processes involved. However, unlike H. erectus, the keel begins in the parietal versus the frontal region (again, see Figure 26.5). While
not well developed, H. naledi exhibits a canine fossa, i.e. a depression above the canine tooth, as seen in H.
antecessor, H. heidelbergensis, and humans.

160 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 26.5 A cast of Peking Man (H. erectus) to
illustrate its sagittal keel – see ridge running across
the top of the skull from front to back. By kevinzim.
Licensed under CC-BY 2.0.

While the hand of H. naledi (see Figure 26.6) shares characteristics with other hominins, the combination of
characteristics is unique. They had long fingers and the two more proximal digit phalanges are curved even
more than those of australopiths, suggestive of arboreal activities. Yet their wrist morphology is most similar to neandertals and modern humans and, along with their long, robust thumb, they were thus capable of
strong manipulatory activities (Berger et al. 2015, Kivell et al. 2015).

Figure 26.6 Hand of H. naledi by Lee Roger Berger research team is licensed under CC-BY 4.0.

The thorax and pelvis were flared like australopiths, but the vertebrae resemble those of the erectus grade
and subsequent species of Homo.
While the combination of characteristics seen in the leg bones are distinctive, they are Homo-like, except
that the femoral neck is long like that of australopiths. The foot (see Figure 26.7) is very human-like, with

26. Homo naledi | 161

the primary differences being the curvature of their digits and less of a medial longitudinal arch (HarcourtSmith 2015).

Figure 26.7 Foot of H. naledi by Lee Roger Berger research team is licensed under CC-BY 4.0.

The seemingly advanced bipedal morphology of the two most recent hominin discoveries, i.e. Au. sediba and
H. naledi suggest that strong selective forces favored the ability to move through the landscape, in search
of food and other resources.
Berger et al. (2015) have calculated the weight of the sexes as follows: males at 55.8 kg and females at 39.7 kg.
The only bone that they could use for calculating height was a tibia that yielded an estimate of 144.5 – 147.8
mm. They state that the species falls within the height range of modern small-statured human populations,
as well as estimates for the H. georgicus hypodigm from Dmanisi (Lordkipanidze et al. 2007, cited in Berger
et al. 2015).

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
The environment of the region, at around 2 mya, has already been described in the “ENVIRONMENT AND
WAY OF LIFE” sections of Au. sediba and P. robustus. Interestingly, the Dinaledi site is 800 m southwest of
the P. robustus site of Swartkrans. It was a hominin neighborhood!
The evidence is compelling that the remains could not have been deposited via natural forces, but rather
were carried at least part of the way, through a dark and narrow passage. We thus need to reassess our
image of the cognitive capabilities and awareness of earlier members of our genus.

162 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

27. The "erectus Grade"
The species that are collectively known as the erectus grade are believed to be descendants of the African
“erectus” form, Homo ergaster, which in turn is thought to be descended from one of the two species of early
Homo, H. habilis or H. rudolfensis. They lived in one form or another from 1.8 mya to as recently as 25–17 kya.
H. erectus was first discovered by Eugène Dubois in 1891 (see Figure 27.1), at the Trinil site on the Solo River
in Java. He had gone to Asia to find evidence of human ancestors, since the popular notion at the time was
that we originated there.

Figure 27.1 Title page from Dubois’s monograph. “Eugene Dubois, book” is in
the public domain.

The first genus and species combination he assigned to the material was Anthropopithecus erectus (“upright
man-ape”). He then changed it to Pithecanthropus erectus (“upright ape-man”). It was only later, after much
more material had been unearthed, that Franz Weidenreich persuaded researchers that the species did
not differ enough from our own to warrant different genus status. In more recent years, researchers have
argued that the material from different continents should be assigned to different species. While we cannot
know if the different continental assemblages represent true biological species, i.e. incapable of interbreed163

ing, they are now minimally classified as geographic species. Since the holotype or “type specimen” came
from Asia (Java), the species designation “erectus” was retained for Asian material. The African material has
come to be known as H. ergaster, contemporary material from Dmanisi (in the Republic of Georgia) is known
as H. georgicus, material from Spain as H. antecessor. The strangely tiny and small-brained species from the
island of Flores, Homo floresiensis, is thought to be a derived form of H. erectus. Some researchers place all
of this material into the taxon H. erectus. Depending on which model people embrace for explaining the origin of our own species, one or more of those species would have evolved into archaic or premodern humans
and, subsequently, anatomically modern humans (AMH), i.e. Homo sapiens sapiens. The Regional Continuity or Multiregional Model supposes that whatever erectus forms were present in the various locations
evolved through a premodern form, often termed Archaic Homo sapiens whether neandertal-like or otherwise, and then into AMH via gene flow between the populations. However with the more widely accepted
“Recent African Origin” (RAO) theory, which holds that our ancestors arose in Africa ~200 kya and then
moved out to populate the rest of the world, those “erectus” species that did not contribute to our lineage
went extinct. The problem remains as to which of the later “erectus” forms gave rise to our premodern form,
Homo heidelbergensis. At this point in time, the most plausible choices for the origin of H. heidelbergensis,
the ancestor of both Homo neanderthalensis and AMH, are Homo ergaster or Homo antecessor.

164 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

28. Homo ergaster
Homo ergaster (1.8 mya)
(“human” / “working man”)

Figure 28.1 Reconstruction of Homo erectus. “Homo erectus new” by Lillyundfreya
is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

SITES
Algeria: Tighenif
Morocco: Thomas Quarries and Sidi Abderrahman

165

Ethiopia: Konso Gardula and Omo
Kenya: Olorgesaillie and Nariokotome
Tanzania: Olduvai Gorge
South Africa: possibly Swartkrans

PEOPLE
Richard Leakey, Kimoya Kimeu, Bernard Ngeneo

INTRODUCTION
As mentioned, the African form of the “erectus grade” is termed Homo ergaster.

PHYLOGENY
H. ergaster is thought to have evolved from either H. habilis or H. rudolfensis in East Africa. However, it
is possible that H. habilis may have been the first to leave Africa, after which it may have evolved into a
pre-ergaster/erectus form that then moved into Africa and Asia. If H. habilis was in our ancestry, the latter scenario might explain how the more modernly proportioned H. ergaster appeared in the fossil record
contemporary with H. habilis in East Africa. Of course, the hit and miss nature of the fossil record and fossil
and species discoveries could also explain that phenomenon, i.e. the seeming lack of transitional forms in
Africa.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
The earliest H. ergaster material is from the East Lake Turkana site of Koobi Fora in Kenya. Richard Leakey
is credited with this 1.8 mya discovery. Other sites outside of Africa are contemporary with African sites,
e.g. the 1.8 mya Dmanisi site in the Republic of Georgia and the 1.8–1.6 mya site of Modjokerto in Java. (Note:
There are problems with the Javanese dates because the fossil-containing layers are not conducive to more
reliable dating methods.) The almost complete Nariokotome or Turkana Boy (see Figure 28.2) from the West
Lake Turkana region of Kenya was discovered in 1984 by Kamoya Kimeu and dated to 1.6 mya. The skeleton has been extremely important for reconstructing body morphology and limb proportions. The boy is
thought to have been eight years old based upon tooth development patterns. He was formerly thought to
be as old as 15, based on his height, stage of bone development, and hypothesized growth trajectories. However, dental calculations can accurately determine age due to the daily pattern of enamel deposition during
tooth development. Scientists can count the microscopic, bead-like deposits that are laid down daily during the course of a tooth’s development. Once it was determined that he was only eight years old yet 5´3˝
tall, it was apparent that H. ergaster developed at a much faster rate, more like a chimp than a human. Had
Turkana Boy lived to adulthood, he would have been over 6´ tall. His morphology was adapted to the hot,
dry conditions in equatorial East Africa, i.e. tall and long-limbed, similar to modern peoples of the region.
Other African sites include the North African sites of Tighenif (formerly Ternifine and sometimes assigned
to Homo mauritanicus) in Algeria and Thomas Quarries and Sidi Abderrahman in Morocco; the East African
166 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

sites of Konso Gardula and Omo in Ethiopia, Olorgesaillie in Kenya, and Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania; and
possibly the South African site of Swartkrans, although it is not universally accepted that H. ergaster was
there.

Figure 28.2 “Turkana Boy” by Mike Peel is licensed under CC
BY-SA 4.0.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
H. ergaster exhibited robust craniofacial characteristics relative to modern humans, but overall we see the
continued reduction in dentition and masticatory apparatus. Their brains were large, with a maximum cranial capacity of 1200 cc and a range of 800–1200 cc, based on the material from the three continents. However, the relative brain size of early specimens may not have been much greater than that seen in early
Homo. They had fairly robust supraorbital and nuchal regions. The skull vault was long and low, termed
platycephalic, with a low maximum width. Our vaults are much higher, and we have high maximum width,
due to subsequent cerebral expansion. The shape of the vault in cross-section has been described as that of
a turtle shell. H. ergaster, like all hominins before and especially the robust australopiths, exhibits postorbital constriction between the orbits and the cranial vault. Their temporal lines were more pronounced than
ours (see Figure 28.4), indicating that they had more powerful jaw muscles and chewing capabilities. They
did not have much of a forehead due to several of the aforementioned craniofacial characteristics. Their
nasal bones suggest a human-like, projecting nose. This would have been adaptive in arid as well as cold
conditions. In addition to warming and humidifying inhaled air, the moisture in warm exhaled air condenses
on the cooler nasal membranes, resulting in water conservation. The jaws were somewhat prognathic in the
alveolar region, i.e. the bone that houses the teeth, and the mandibles were robust. They lacked a chin, a
characteristic seen only in anatomically modern humans.
Relative to H. habilis, long thought to be the species from which H. ergaster was derived, H. ergaster possessed a longer skull vault, a larger brain (however, see previous paragraph), a smaller temporal fossa (the
opening formed by the zygomatic arch where jaw muscles pass through and/or attach), a shorter face, a
larger nose, reduced dentition and jaw robusticity, and a heavier nuchal region.

28. Homo ergaster | 167

Figure 28.3 Homo ergaster by Keenan Taylor.

Relative to Asian H. erectus, H. ergaster possessed a higher cranial vault, and the bones of the vault were
thinner. They also did not exhibit the sagittal keel (see Homo erectus, Chapter 29) typical of the Asian form.
However, the Koobi Fora specimen exhibits slight keeling (see Figure 28.4).
Postcranially, H. ergaster was very human-like. While the thorax may still have been somewhat conical, they
had more of a waist, demonstrating an uncoupling of the lower limb from the torso. The small birth canal
relative to adult brain size suggests a long period of postnatal brain growth, as seen in subsequent hominins,
especially our own species. They were tall, achieving heights of over 6´. They were also more robust than
premodern humans that, in turn, were more robust than modern humans. Males were 20–30% larger than
females. While the lifespan tended to be short, some individuals lived to be 50 to 60 years of age. There was
high infant mortality, with 40% of fossil remains estimated to be less than 14 years of age.

168 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 28.4 Koobi Fora Homo ergaster.
Postorbital constriction. Slight keeling
Temporal line. “Homo ergaster skull replica,
World Museum Liverpool” by Reptonix is
licensed under CC BY 3.0.

Review of Primitive Characteristics
Retain:
• Initially brain possibly no larger than early Homo.
• Some robusticity in cranium and face.
• Supraorbital and nuchal tori.
• Postorbital constriction.
• Low forehead.
• Conical thorax.
Relative to later hominins:
• Platycephalic skull vault with low maximum breadth.
• Pronounced temporal lines.
• Alveolar prognathism.
• Large teeth but smaller than previous species.
• No chin.

28. Homo ergaster | 169

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Protruding nose.
• Postcranially robust.
• Tall with long legs.
• Development of waist (decoupling between torso and lower limb).

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
The environment of East Africa during the Pleistocene was hot and arid. Savannas had expanded and forests
had become increasingly fragmented. There was increased volcanic activity in the Great Rift zone, and that
is one hypothesis as to why at least a portion of the population moved out of the area. It is of great interest as to how and why H. ergaster (or a predecessor) first left East Africa. The “how” is not as difficult as
the “why.” While they may have crossed the Red Sea, they could also have come up through the Nile Valley
and exited Africa across the Arabian land bridge that was exposed at the time. As to why they left, there
are a variety of ideas that are not mutually exclusive. They may have ventured farther and farther due to (1)
competition for resources with their own or other species of hominins or non-hominins; (2) local resource
depletion; (3) similar environment (there is speculation that they were a grassland species that followed
African grasslands into West Asian steppes, through the Indian subcontinent, and southeast to Indonesia);
(4) following herd animals north and out of Africa; and/or (5) the aforementioned volcanic activity.
While there is debate as to whether the various “erectus” species hunted large game, it is not likely, since
they lacked weaponry. It is generally accepted that they were mobile scavengers and foragers that hunted
opportunistically. They certainly would have been capable of taking small prey and older and/or injured
animals. Faunal remains at the Zhoukoudian, China, site consisted of deer, elephant, rhino, and beaver
remains, but the bulk of the animal matter in their diet is thought to have come from smaller animals, such
as rodents, hedgehogs, hares, and frogs, as well as ostrich eggs. However, Bunn and Gurtov (2014) have analyzed faunal remains at the Zinj FLK site in Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania (1.8 mya) and concluded that the high
percentage (72%) of prime-aged large prey (especially bovids with weights of 250–750 lb) conforms solely
to hominin hunting patterns, versus accidental deaths or carnivore kills. Thus at least some H. ergaster are
thought to have been practicing ambush hunting and were therefore big-game hunters.
While nomadic, they are thought to have stayed in an area for at least short periods of time, relative to past
species. Early H. ergaster is associated with the Oldowan technology, and that is the technology that they
took with them out of Africa. H. ergaster subsequently invented a tool tradition, termed Acheulian, that first
appears in the archaeological record at 1.4 mya (newer data suggests possibly as early as 1.7 mya) and lasted
to as late as 115 kya in some areas. The latter industry spread throughout Africa and as far east as the Indian
subcontinent and west to Western Europe. It involved the use of better stone resources and tools that were
more refined and standardized than in the Oldowan tradition. The most representative tool was a bifacially
worked (shaped on both sides) hand axe in the shape of a teardrop (see Figure 28.5). The tool manifests
what is called a “target design,” in that the manufacturer knew what he or she was making and followed
standardized steps in shaping the core into the resulting tool form. Once the core was prepared with the
use of a stone hammer, the next step involved a “soft hammer” technique (see Figure 28.6). This required
the use of a bone or antler hammer that could more carefully control the size and shape of the flakes to be
removed on either side of the axe as it was shaped. Sharper and straighter edges resulted from the technique. The hominins had different tools for different purposes. The categories of tools included hand axes,

170 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 28.5 Acheulian hand axe. “Bifaz en mano” by
José-Manuel Benito Álvarez is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.5.

smaller flake tools, choppers, picks, cleavers, and some bone tools. They would likely have been used to kill;
butcher; scrape and cut hides; shape wood, bone, antler, and stone; and harvest and process plant foods.

Figure 28.6 Soft hammer percussion. “Soft Hammer” by ZenTrowel is in the public
domain.

28. Homo ergaster | 171

It would have been necessary for H. erectus to have had some sort of body covering prior to moving north
into colder regions of Eurasia. There is some evidence to support H. erectus’s use of fire, but it is scant.
However, even in later species wherein we know they had fire, such as H. heidelbergensis and H. neanderthalensis, there are fewer hearths apparent at archaeological sites than would be expected.
It was previously believed that the erectus grade lacked the technology to cross open water and therefore
were limited to land travel. However, the discovery of a site dated to >8 kya on the island of Flores suggests
that early H. erectus were capable of crossing fairly sizeable stretches of open sea. It is thus possible that
H. ergaster may have rafted across the Red Sea to the Arabian Peninsula or across the Mediterranean to
Gibraltar or Italy (via Sicily) during periods of lower sea levels when much of the earth’s water was tied up
in ice.
While it is likely that H. ergaster and related species had some complex form of communication, due to their
advanced cultural achievements, it is not known whether they had speech or language similar to our own.
They possessed the arched palate, flexed cranial base, and cerebral centers that are necessary for speech
production and comprehension. However, Turkana Boy had small intervertebral foramina (the openings in
between the vertebrae where the spinal nerves exit the spinal cord) in the thoracic region. It is thus thought
that they may not have had the necessary motor function for controlled breathing and speech. However as
mentioned in the section on Homo habilis (Chapter 23), I believe the standardized nature of the Acheulian
tool industry demonstrates active teaching and thus theory of mind that in turn assumes some sort of language.

172 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

29. Homo erectus
Homo erectus (1.8 mya)
(“human” / “upright”)

Figure 29.1 Drawing of Trinil material. “Pithecanthropus-erectus” by 120
is in the public domain.

SITES
Java: Trinil, Modjokerto, Sangiran, Ngandong
China: Zhoukoudian, Taiwan, and sites in Yunxian, Hexian, and Lantian counties
India: Narmada
Turkey: Kocabas

173

PEOPLE
While there are many people associated with Homo erectus, I have listed a few of the historic
names.
Java: Eugène Dubois
China: J. Gunnar Andersson, Davidson Black, Franz Weidenreich

INTRODUCTION
Homo erectus is the genus and species combination that was retained for all mainland Asian, Taiwanese, and
Javanese fossil material.

PHYLOGENY
The most popularly held notion is that Homo erectus is derived from H. ergaster or a pre-ergaster form that
“quickly” moved out of Africa into Eastern Europe and Southeast Asia. However, H. georgicus is another possibility for the ancestor of H. erectus.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
Eugène Dubois discovered the first H. erectus material at the Trinil site (see Figure 29.1) on the Solo River in
Java in 1891. While there are problems with the dates, the oldest material from the Javanese site of Modjokerto may be “contemporary” with African and Georgian material at 1.8 mya. Other famous Javanese sites are
Sangiran, Ngandong, and Trinil. Java is part of the Sunda shelf, and when initially colonized by H. erectus, it
was connected to mainland Asia (see Figure 29.2). After reaching Java and possibly other areas of Southeast
Asia, later groups of H. erectus moved north into China. The earliest Chinese fossils are dated to 1 mya. First
assigned to the genus Sinanthropus (“Chinese man”), the material was later included in our own genus after
Franz Weidenreich pointed to the similarities between the various assemblages of erectus-like fossils and
other extinct and modern humans. The first fossils were discovered at the now famous site of Zhoukoudian
(formerly Choukoudian), near Beijing (formerly Peking and hence the term, “Peking Man”). The local people
called them “dragon bones” and were using them for medicinal purposes. Material from Zhoukoudian spans
a time period of over 200,000 years, from 460 to 230 kya, with three distinct cultural periods thought to be
in evidence.
One of the great mysteries of paleoanthropology surrounds the Zhoukoudian material. Weidenreich and his
predecessors, Davidson Black and J. Gunnar Andersson, had amassed an unprecedented amount of fossil
material from the site. Due to the imminent Japanese invasion, Weidenreich packed up the fossil material
in 1941 with the intent of having it shipped to the United States. However, the material disappeared, and all
that remains are Weidenreich’s notes, drawings, and some casts of the original fossils.
Other Chinese sites are found in the counties of Lantian, Yunxian, and Hexian. A new discovery on the
island of Taiwan has been linked to H. erectus, with the closest resemblance to the Hexian remains (Chang

174 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

et al. 2015). Finally, the Narmada site in India has been a topic of debate for a long time but it has now been
decided, at least by a portion of the paleoanthropological community, as being Homo erectus.

Figure 29.2 Sundaland (northwest of the Wallace Line). “Map of Sunda and Sahul” by Maximilian Dörrbecker is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
While many of the physical characteristics of H. erectus are similar to H. ergaster, the Asian species is unique
in a number of ways. Asian forms exhibit a thickening along the sagittal suture, termed a sagittal keel. The
keel gives the skull a pentagonal shape in cross-section. It is unknown whether the keel served a function.
Their incisors were shoveled, an adaptation that increases the stress resistance of teeth, especially when
using them as tools. The molar enamel was characterized by a unique wrinkling pattern. Both of those
dental characteristics are found in modern people of Asia and Asian ancestry and are interpreted by some
scholars as evidence of regional continuity; in other words, there was a gradual evolution from erectus-like
forms through archaic human populations and into modern populations in multiple areas via gene flow.

29. Homo erectus | 175

Figure 29.3 Homo erectus by Keenan Taylor.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Sagittal keel.
• Shoveled incisors.
• Wrinkled molar enamel.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
Javanese sites in the early Pleistocene would have been conducive to tropical-adapted animals like Homo
erectus. The area was part of the land bridge that was exposed beginning ~2.5 mya, making it accessible by
land. Pleistocene Java was a mix of environments consisting of a variety of forest types, freshwater lakes
and rivers, brackish marshes, and grasslands (Blain 2012).
At the time of H. erectus occupation, the site of Zhoukoudian, China, was in a transitional zone between
temperate steppe and boreal forest. It would thus have been seasonally cold and would likely only have been
habitable during the warmer months.

176 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 29.4 Homo erectus: Peking Man by Keenan Taylor.

Culturally and technologically, Asian H. erectus are thought to have been somewhat similar to African H.
ergaster. One of the key differences is the fact that the Acheulian industry never made it to Asia. The earliest
inhabitants of Asia carried with them the Oldowan tool tradition, but the inventors of the Acheulian tradition apparently never followed. On maps, the Movius Line (see Figure 29.5) demarcates the border between
the two tool traditions during the Pleistocene. It has been suggested that bamboo would have been a suitable material for making tools, which could explain the paucity of stone tools found.
Populations of H. erectus survived in Asia for much of the Pleistocene Epoch. Recent redating of the
Javanese site of Ngandong has yielded dates as recent as 53–27 kya. Even more surprising is the recent discovery of dwarfed hominins on the island of Flores, termed H. floresiensis, that have been dated to 18 kya.
H. floresiensis is thought to be descended from a population of H. erectus that adapted to limited island
resources by becoming dwarfed in size.

29. Homo erectus | 177

Figure 29.5 Movius Line: color change delineation extending from Eastern Europe to northeast India. “Biface Extension” by
José-Manuel Benito Álvarez is in the public domain.

178 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

30. Homo georgicus
Homo georgicus (1.8 mya)
(“human” / “Georgia”)

Figure 30.1 Reconstruction of Homo georgicus. “Homo
georgicus” by 120 is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

SITES
Dmanisi, Georgia

PEOPLE
Leo Gabunia, Yekva Abesalom, David Lordkipanidze

INTRODUCTION
Located in the southern Caucasus region of the Republic of Georgia (see Figure 30.2), Dmanisi is the only
known site for the geographic species Homo georgicus, of the erectus grade. Some treat it as a subspecies of
Homo erectus, H. erectus georgicus, while others attribute it to H. erectus.

179

PHYLOGENY
H. georgicus is dated to the same time as the earliest African material at 1.8 mya. It is thus thought to be
(1) closely related to or possibly a descendent species of Homo ergaster or (2) possibly the ancestor of H.
ergaster and Asian Homo erectus.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
Leo Gabunia and Vekua Abesalom discovered the site and first reported on the hominin fossil material.
Beginning in 1991 and continuing to the present, David Lordkipanidze and his team have recovered teeth,
multiple skulls, and numerous postcranial remains. A partial skeleton that was discovered in 2001 was
thought to be more primitive than other erectus-grade material, and there was speculation that H. habilis
may have preceded H. ergaster out of Africa, where it then evolved into an intermediate form. Since that
time, researchers have come to believe it to be a more a primitive form of the erectus grade versus H. habilis.
The site has an interesting history (see Figure 30.4). The area has been settled since the Bronze Age. In
the 6th century, an orthodox Christian cathedral was built on the site. By the 9th century, the region was
under Arab rule. Because of its location on two important trade routes, by medieval times it had become an
important commercial center. It was conquered by the Seljuk Turks in the 11th century and later liberated
by Georgian kings. The area was then attacked by the Turkomans in both the 14th and 15th centuries, from
which it never fully recovered, in terms of its regional importance and economic development (Wikipedia
contributors 2015b).

Figure 30.2 Dmanisi site. “GeorgieKaart met Dmanisi” by Rasbak is in the public domain.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
H. georgicus exhibited a mix of primitive and erectus-like characteristics. They had small, robust skulls and
habiline-like, prognathic faces (see Figure 30.3). Their upper limbs were australopith-like, while their spines
and lower limbs were more modern. The cranial vault for one of the four adult skulls measured only 546 cc.
Their molars were large, and tooth microwear suggests that they ate tough, fibrous plant foods and thus
had a low-quality diet. Their canines were surprisingly long.

180 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 30.3 Cast of Homo georgicus. “Homo
Georgicus IMG 2921” by Rama is in the public
domain.

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• Robust skull.
• Small brain.
• Prognathic face.
• Large molars and long canines.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Human-like spine and lower limb.

30. Homo georgicus | 181

Figure 30.4 Dmanisi castle ruins with archeological site in background (under the
white roof). “Ruins of Dmanisi Castle” by Larry V. Dumlao is licensed under CC
BY-SA 4.0.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
The environment at the time when H. georgicus lived in the area is thought to have been a mosaic of forest
and steppes. A great many Oldowan tools and debitage (i.e. small chips of stone that are byproducts of tool
manufacture) were found at the site, along with faunal remains. Due to their australopith-like upper limb
morphology and the dangerous predators at the site, there is speculation that they may have slept and foraged in trees (de Lumley et al. 2005).
Of great interest is an older edentulous male. The tooth loss was antemortem because the alveolar bone had
been resorbed, showing that he lived for quite a while after he began losing his teeth (de Lumley and Lordkipanidze 2006). He would likely have needed care during the intervening years, and his family or groupmates must have helped and supported him. This would be the earliest known evidence for kin selection
and/or reciprocal altruism, respectively. Kin selection involves incurring a cost to oneself in order to benefit relatives, thus increasing their survival and propagating your genes because they share a portion of your
genes in common. Reciprocal altruism is basically tit for tat. It explains why we will help nonrelatives. During our long hominin history prior to agriculture and sedentism, our ancestors lived in small bands. They
were related to the members of their groups by blood or marriage. If Individual A incurred a cost to help a
nonrelative, Individual B, there is a good chance that Individual B may have been around at a future point
in time when Individual A needed help. Genes involved with those cooperative behaviors could thus have
spread via natural selection. We are, and past hominins were, cooperative.

182 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 30.5 Homo georgicus by Keenan Taylor.

30. Homo georgicus | 183

31. Homo antecessor
Homo antecessor (1.2 mya)
(“human” / “predecessor” or “pioneer”)

Figure 31.1 Incomplete Homo antecessor skull from Gran
Dolina, Spain. “Homo antecessor” by José-Manuel Benito is
in the public domain.

SITES
Gran Dolina and Sima del Elefante, Spain

PEOPLE
Eudald Carbonell, Juan Luis Arsuaga, and J. M. Bermúdez de Castro

184

INTRODUCTION
Until the recent discovery of hominin fossils dating to over 1.2 mya in the Atapuerca Mountains of Spain, the
earliest known fossil material from the area was no more than 800 kya. The 800 kya material was assigned
the taxonomic designation of Homo antecessor, or “Pioneer Man,” as the first hominins to have ranged into
Western Europe.

PHYLOGENY
Since its discovery, researchers have speculated that Homo antecessor was descended from a more derived
form of H. ergaster that may have crossed the Mediterranean Sea from North Africa during a period of lowered sea levels. Now that the geological clock has been pushed back 300 kya, it is thought that they may
have traveled through the Levant (i.e. the Eastern Mediterranean region). What is not known is whether the
evolutionary event took place in Europe or North Africa. As far as descendant species, Homo antecessor is
one contender for the ancestor of Homo heidelbergensis that in turn is thought to have given rise to neandertals and modern humans.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
The species was discovered by Eudald Carbonell, Juan Luis Arsuaga, and J. M. Bermúdez de Castro. The first
site to yield fossil material was the Gran Dolina site (see Figure 31.4) in the Atapuerca mountain range in
Spain. Dated to 900 kya, the site has yielded both H. antecessor and H. heidelbergensis material. Eighty fossils from six individuals were recovered. It is of interest that much of the fossil material is immature and
exhibits cut marks that may indicate that they were victims of cannibalism.
The earliest H. antecessor site is Sima del Elefante (“Pit of the Elephant”). Dated to 1.2 mya, only a handful of
fossils have been recovered from the site.
In addition to other sites in Spain, tools and footprints have been found in Happisburgh, England and
Ceprano, Italy (also known as Homo cepranensis, some consider it more closely related to H. heidelbergensis).

Figure 31.4 Gran Dolina site. “Gran Dolina 2012 (Sierra de Atapuerca)” by Mario Modesto Mata is licensed under CC BY-SA
2.0.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
The 800 kya H. antecessor material was more derived than earlier erectus forms, possessing a larger brain
(1,000–1,150 cc) and a more modern skull and face. They had low foreheads and possessed an occipital bun

31. Homo antecessor | 185

Figure 31.2 Homo antecessor by Keenan Taylor.

(a bun or chignon is the hairstyle wherein one winds long hair into a doughnut shape on the top or back of
the head), as did neandertals (see neandertal features in Figure 31.5). It has been suggested that the purpose
of that posterior protrusion is to balance the weight of the anterior portion of the skull and face. Based upon
cranial anatomy, they are thought to have been capable of detecting the same range of sounds as modern
humans and were possibly right-handed. They were almost as tall as modern humans at 5.5–6′ (1.6–1.8 m),
with males weighing ~200 lb (90 kg).

186 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 31.3 “Homo antecessor moves to Spain” by Keenan Taylor.

Figure 31.5 Neandertal cranial characteristics. “Neanderthal cranial anatomy” by Jason Potter is licensed under CC BY-SA
2.5.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Increased encephalization.
• Occipital bun.

31. Homo antecessor | 187

• Tall like Turkana Boy.

188 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

32. Homo floresiensis
Homo floresiensis (74–12 kya)
(“human” / Flores)

Figure 32.1 By Momotarou2012
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Homo_floresiensis_Restoration_model.jpg

189

SITES
Liang Bua cave, Flores, Indonesia

PEOPLE
Mike Morwood

Figure 32.2 Liang Bua Cave. “Homo floresiensis cave” by Rosino is licensed under
CC BY-SA 2.0.

INTRODUCTION
The material assigned to the species Homo floresiensis comes only from the cave site of Liang Bua (see Figure 32.2) on the island of Flores in Indonesia (see Figure 32.3). Because of its diminutive size, the new species
took the world by storm when it was discovered in 2003 by Mike Morwood and his team. While tools attributed to the species have been dated to almost 100 kya, skeletal remains are dated to as young as 18 kya and
as old as 95–74 kya (Brown et al. 2004).
Morwood et al. (1998) had previously discovered a much older site (840 kya) that they attributed to H. erectus, but no associated skeletal material was found. Thus the ancestor of H. floresiensis may have arrived
much earlier.

190 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

PHYLOGENY
While there is controversy (see PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS below) surrounding this strange species,
H. floresiensis is thought to have descended from a group of H. erectus that traveled across the sea from
mainland Asia. Once there, they adapted to the island via a process known as insular or island dwarfism.
Large mammalian species that become isolated on islands tend to decrease in size over time (as opposed
to reptiles and small mammals that may increase in size), as smaller individuals require less food and thus
have a better chance of survival and reproduction, when faced with limited space and resources and low
risk of predation. (However, komodo dragons were present.) A dwarf stegodon (a relative of the Asian elephant) also inhabited the island and served as a prey species, as evidenced by juvenile bones with signs of
butchering. In addition, modern “pygmy” human groups inhabit tropical rainforests where small body size
is thought to possibly be adaptive for traveling through the tangled interior. Though short, they have low
mass relative to surface area and relatively long limbs and extremities just like tall peoples of East Africa
(e.g. the Maasai), to reduce metabolic heat and maximize cooling via sweating. The hominins may have survived until 12 kya when a volcanic eruption may have caused their extinction, as well as that of the dwarf
stegodon. Since Flores was not inhabited when discovered by Portuguese traders in the 15th century, they
may never have coexisted with modern humans (Wikipedia contributors 2015c, 2015d).

Figure 32.3 Flores Island in red. “ID – Flores” by M. Minderhoud is in the
public domain.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
As mentioned, there is only one site on Flores where H. floresiensis material has been found, Liang Bua cave.
Mike Morwood and his colleagues are credited with the discovery of this species that is so recent in time,
the skeletal elements are not even fossilized (Brown et al. 2004)! Material from nine individuals has been
recovered. The only complete skull, LB1, is from a 30-year-old adult female for which they have postcranial material as well. Nicknamed “The little lady of Flores” or “Flo,” she serves as the type specimen for the
species (Brown et al. 2004)

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
At only ~3.5′ (1.06 m) tall and 35–79 lb (16–36 kg), LB1 is very small relative to H. erectus, falling at the low end
of H. habilis. Even more incredible is her brain size of 380 cc. Yet her encephalization quotient is estimated
at 2.5–4.6. When compared with the brains of H. erectus and H. ergaster at 3.6–4.3 and H. habilis at 3.6–4.3,
her brain is not as small as it first appears. Other aspects of H. floresiensis’s morphology are primitive relative to Homo species, such as its australopith-like hip and limb characteristics, especially in the shoulder

32. Homo floresiensis | 191

Figure 32.4 Homo floresiensis. “Homo floresiensis” by
Ryan Somma is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0.

and wrist. Craniofaciodental characteristics (see Figure 32.4) are consistent with Homo status, most closely
aligning with H. erectus, including multiple mental foramina (i.e. small holes in the mandible through which
multiple branches of the trigeminal nerve exit the bone to innervate the face), whereas we have only one
(Brown et al. 2004; Morwood et al. 2005). Postcranially, the limb bones were robust and the feet were flat
and relatively large (Jungers et al. 2008).
While body size is expected to decrease via insular dwarfism, brain size does not usually keep pace and thus
can be used to support a case for dwarfism. Some researchers have argued that LB1 is a modern human
with microcephaly, an ontogenetic disorder that results in an exceptionally small brain and cranium and
greatly limited cognitive capabilities. However, primitive skeletal characteristics, the complexity of the cultural remains, and the size of an important association area of the prefrontal cortex (Falk et al. 2005) do not
support the microcephaly argument.

Review of Primitive Characteristics
• Australopith-like hip and upper limb morphology, especially shoulder and wrist components.

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Dwarfism.
• Brain reduction without apparent loss of cognition.

192 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
Flores was primarily tropical forest during the time that H. floresiensis occupied the island. Tropical forests,
while rich in biodiversity, are poor human habitats due to a low density of food species. In other words, on
average you will find many different species of plants and animals per unit area but not very many of each.
Compounded by the small area of the island, dwarfism and complex culture likely explain the survival of the
species. They made and used tools, as evidenced by the presence of sharpened tools, prepared cores for the
production of tools, debitage from their manufacture, anvils, etc., along with faunal remains from a variety
of species, such as stegodon, komodo dragons, rats, and bats (Morwood et al. 2005). Their tools were small,
compatible with their small body size. Burnt bones, fire-cracked rock, and a possible hearth consisting of a
circle of fired rocks show that they made use of fire.
Large predators and scavengers like komodo dragons are known to “clean up” anything that dies, often
without a trace. It is thus lucky that we have some remains of H. floresiensis.

Figure 32.5 Homo floresiensis: Megalania encounter by Keenan Taylor.

32. Homo floresiensis | 193

33. Homo heidelbergensis
Homo heidelbergensis (<600 kya)
(“human” / Heidelberg, Germany)

Figure 33.1 Model of Homo heidelbergensis head
and shoulders. “Homo heidelbergensis adult
male – head model – Smithsonian Museum of
Natural History – 2012-05-17” by Tim Evanson
is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0<.

SITES
Europe:
Spain: Sima de los Huesos
France: Arago
Germany: Mauer, Steinheim, Ehringsdorf, Schöningen, Bilzingsleben
England: Boxgrove, Swanscombe
Italy: Ciampate del Diavolo (footprints)
Hungary: Vértesszöllös
Greece: Petralona, Apidima

194

Africa:
Morocco: Jebel Irhoud
Ethiopia: Bodo, Omo (Kibish Beds)
Zambia: Kabwe
Tanzania: Lake Eyasi, Laetoli (Ngaloba Beds)
South Africa: Florisbad, Elandsfontein
Asia:
China: Dali, Maba, Jinniushan

PEOPLE
Otto Schoetensack and many more

INTRODUCTION
For many years, fossil material from ~500–200 kya from Africa, Asia, and Europe that was more humanor sapiens-like was included in our own genus and species but was distinguished as “Early Archaic” Homo
sapiens (EAHS). There was much debate as to when to draw the line between more erectus-like forms and
more sapiens-like forms. The prevailing view was that material on all three continents was descended from
H. erectus. (The various geographic species distinctions for H. erectus had not yet come into use.) Again, this
is referred to as the Regional Continuity Model (RCM) for the origin of modern humans. In this scenario,
erectus-like forms on each of the continents slowly evolved into modern humans via gene flow between
populations. This is in contrast to the Recent African Origin (RAO) model whereby modern humans evolved
in Africa and moved out to eventually replace archaic forms elsewhere, e.g. H. erectus in Asia.
The RAO model has gained in popularity due to a combination of the reevaluation of fossil material and
especially DNA methods aimed at evaluating genetic distance between species, in terms of number of years
since divergence from a common ancestor. The material from Asia that had previously been assigned to
EAHS has been relegated to H. erectus, with very little evidence for an intermediate form bridging the gap
between H. erectus and AMH.
Fossil material from Europe and Africa that was formerly assigned to EAHS is now termed Homo heidelbergensis, with some researchers using Homo rhodesiensis for some of the African material. It is now well
accepted that H. heidelbergensis was ancestral to both humans and neandertals (see Figure 33.2—note that
in this scenario, H. antecessor is not considered to be ancestral to H. heidelbergensis).

33. Homo heidelbergensis | 195

Figure 33.2 Human phylogeny. “Homo-Stammbaum, Version Stringer” by Chris Stringer is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 DE.

PHYLOGENY
H. heidelbergensis is thought to have evolved from a more derived form of H. ergaster. Some researchers
believe that the material from Tighenif (formerly Ternifine), Algeria, known by some as Homo mauritanicus,
is a possible transitional form between the two species. Mandibles from Tighenif are very similar to the
type specimen, the Mauer mandible (see Figure 33.3) from the Heidelberg area of Germany, from which the
species name is derived. In addition to the material from North Africa, the oldest material is from the Bodo
site in Ethiopia, dated to 600 kya. Thus while an African origin is favored, some believe that H. heidelbergensis is descended from H. antecessor in Europe. Whether H. heidelbergensis evolved in Europe or Africa, they
had to have migrated from one continent to the other. Thus if H. heidelbergensis evolved in Europe from H.
antecessor, a portion of the population migrated to Africa and evolved toward AMH, leaving some regional
population of the remaining European stock to evolve into H. neanderthalensis. The other more popular
scenario has H. heidelbergensis evolving in Africa from some descendant form of Homo ergaster. A portion
of the population then emigrated to Europe and evolved into neandertals while a portion of the remaining
African stock evolved toward AMH.
In addition, a new species of hominin is also thought to be descended from H. heidelbergensis. The Denisovans (see this chapter), as they have come to be known due to their discovery in the Denisova Cave in the
Altai Mountains of Russia, are thought to have branched off from the H. heidelbergensis lineage that led to
neandertals. DNA analyses show that Denisovans interbred with neandertals, as well as the first wave of
AMH that left Africa, possibly around 125 kya and subsequently settled Melanesia and Australia.

196 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 33.3 Type specimen: Mauer mandible. “Unterkiefer von
Mauer (Replika)” by Gerbil is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Contrary new DNA evidence suggests that H. heidelbergensis branched off from some common ancestors prior to 800 kya and is thus not part of our recent lineage. H. heidelbergensis then divided into the
neandertals and the Denisovan lineages, but interbreeding continued between them in areas of geographic
overlap.
There is good evidence that H. heidelbergensis gave rise to neandertals. There are skulls from the sites of
Erhingsdorf, Germany; Fontechavade, France; and Sima de los Huesos, Spain, that appear to be transitional
in that they exhibit characteristics seen in neandertals, such as similar brow ridge morphology, enlarged
facial sinuses, occipital bun, etc. It is rare in paleoanthropology to have such good support for continuity
in physical characteristics between ancestor and descendent species. However, the fact that those species
lived more recently in time and in developed and populated areas certainly helps, in terms of facilitating
discoveries.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
The earliest discoveries of H. heidelbergensis are from Germany. The type specimen was discovered in 1907
in Mauer, Germany. The oldest site is Bodo, Ethiopia (600 kya). There are numerous H. heidelbergensis sites
in Europe (e.g. Steinheim, see Figure 33.4) that date from as early as 500 kya and range from Spain through
Eastern Europe. The greatest number of individuals came from the Sima de los Huesos (“Pit of Bones”) (see
Figure 33.5) site in the Atapuerca Mountains of Spain. Both H. antecessor and H. heidelbergensis sites in that
area were discovered when a railway was built. The H. heidelbergensis remains were found in a deep chamber inside of a cave, hence the name, “Pit of Bones.” More than 32 individuals have been recovered, and
most of them are juveniles. While there has been much speculation, the significance of this find in terms
of cultural complexity (see ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE below) remains elusive. There are a couple
of sites in Asia that some researchers believe are also representative of H. heidelbergensis, including Dali,
China. Sites in Africa (also referred to as H. rhodesiensis) include Jebel Irhoud in North Africa; Omo, Bodo,
Ndutu, Eyasi, and Ngaloba in East Africa; Kabwe in Zambia; and Florisbad and Elandsfontein in South Africa.

33. Homo heidelbergensis | 197

Figure 33.4 Homo heidelbergensis from Steinheim,
Germany. “Homo steinheimensis, holotype” by Dr.
Günter Bechly is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Figure 33.5 Homo heidelbergensis from Sima de los Huesos,
Spain. “Homo heidelbergensis-Cranium -5” by José-Manuel
Benito Álvarez is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.5.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
In general, H. heidelbergensis was less robust, both cranially and postcranially, than the erectus grade and
more robust than AMH. There is intraspecific variability in craniofacial morphology, with some specimens
being more robust and others more gracile. While this is not surprising, considering the temporal and geographic range for the species, it has led to disagreement as to how to define it.
H. heidelbergensis is primarily distinguished from erectus-like forms by its increased cranial capacity
(1100–1400 cc—93% that of AMH) and more modern skull vault. Cerebral expansion, especially of the parietal
lobes, led to increased cranial breadth in the superior aspect of the skull vault and thus a more vertically
198 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 33.6 Homo heidelbergensis by Keenan Taylor.

oriented skull. The occipital region is less angular due to reduced robusticity in the nuchal musculature.
Some specimens have very pronounced brow ridges (see Figure 33.7) and some have speculated that those
individuals represent males of the species. They share the presence of a canine fossa with AMH. The canine
fossa is a depression above the canine on either side of the maxilla. The robusticity of their jaw morphology
and tooth wear suggests that they were using their mouths and teeth as tools, for example, pulling meat
off bones and working hides. Surprisingly, the middle ear bones were discovered for one specimen, and it
could thus be determined that their hearing was comparable with our own (Martínez et al. 2004).
Some H. heidelbergensis are considered to be transitional and exhibited characteristics seen in the subsequent neandertals. Their midfacial region was (1) prognathic with a corresponding large nose and (2) puffy
due to large frontal and maxillary sinuses. Their zygomatics have a “swept back” appearance, and the posterior skull vault exhibited an occipital bun. The outer layer of their long bones (the cortical bone) was thick,
and the interior medullary (marrow) cavity was narrow. The species was taller than neandertals, with males
and females averaging 5′ 9″ (175 cm) and 5′ 2″ (157 cm), respectively. Average weights for males and females
were 136 lb (62 kg) and 112 lb (51 kg), respectively (Smithsonian Institution 2015).

33. Homo heidelbergensis | 199

Review of Derived Characteristics
• Increase in brain size & complexity of skull architecture, and corresponding vault changes.
• Loss of angulation in occipital region.
• Canine fossa.

Review of Characteristics Inherited by Neandertals
• Midfacial prognathism and large nose.
• Puffy appearance to face due to large frontal and maxillary sinuses.
• “Swept back” zygomatics.
• Occipital bun.
• Thick cortical bone and narrow medullary cavity.

Figure 33.7 “Broken Hill Man” from Kabwe, Zambia
( formerly “Rhodesian Man”). “Broken Hill Skull
(Replica01)” by Gerbil is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
The Bodo site was of course, close to the equator and hence warm. H. heidelbergensis moved into Europe
during the Holstein interglacial period (400–300 kya) (Wikipedia contributors 2015e).

200 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 33.8 Homo heidelbergensis hunting by Keenan Taylor.

Like those species that preceded them, H. heidelbergensis were mobile foragers. They left evidence for both
seasonal and differential use camps. In addition to using rock shelters and caves for shelter, they are the
first species for which we have evidence of building free-standing structures. At the site of Terra Amata in
the south of France, the living floors of free-standing structures have been excavated. It is thought that a
group returned to the site annually for fishing and other subsistence activities and reconstructed their huts
33. Homo heidelbergensis | 201

(up to 11 times) on the exact same site (see Figure 33.9). They are credited as having been the first to make
the tools necessary for efficient fishing. Like past species, their big-game hunting capabilities are questionable. However, there is evidence that they may have ambushed large animals by forcing them off cliffs or
cornering them in dead-end canyons. Support for ambush comes from faunal assemblages on the Channel Islands off the coast of France. The remains are from animals in prime condition, and the frequency of
the various bones shows that the hominins were differentially removing the limbs and bringing them back
to butcher at a home base. Javelin-type spears and thousands of faunal remains have been recovered at
Schöningen, Germany. The spears were fire-hardened for strength and expertly weighted for flight, like
modern javelins.

Figure 33.9 Hut design at Terra Amata. “Terra-Amata-Hut” by
Locutus Borg is in the public domain.

While some tools from H. heidelbergensis are Oldowan-like, most are of the Acheulian tradition. The species
is credited with inventing a more conservative method, termed the Levallois technique, for controlling
flake shape and maximizing their yield from a core. Flakes could then be worked into a variety of tools. They
could also shape the core in such a way that a point could be struck off that was sharp on all sides (see
Figure 33.10). H. heidelbergensis were the first to make compound tools, i.e. tools with more than one component, such as hammers and stone-tipped spears. There is a great website demonstrating and describing
tool production at http://donsmaps.com/makingflinttools.html, as well as an animated visual for the Levallois technique at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levallois_technique.
H. heidelbergensis is the first species for which there is ample evidence of the controlled use of fire, in that
hearths have been found at several sites. In addition to the aforementioned inventions, a couple of novel
cultural practices have been suggested for the species. They may have made and used furniture, such as
seaweed beds and stone blocks, and there is some evidence of art or written communication in the form of
arcs and angles and the use of ocher (mineral pigments). A fine pink quartz hand axe, nicknamed “Excalibur,”
was found among the bodies in the “Pit of Bones.” Some researchers believe it is the earliest evidence of ritual associated with burial, in that the artifact was seemingly unused and manufactured from exotic stone.
The seclusion of the bodies may also represent an attempt at keeping them from being ravaged by scavengers. All of these advancements and innovations are unequivocal support for the increase in cognition
that resulted from the degree of encephalization and changes in brain architecture that are evident in the
skull size and shape of H. heidelbergensis. Finally, if the new DNA evidence is correct and H. heidelbergensis
branched off from our ancestry versus being our ancestor, the behavioral and cultural complexity apparent at H. heidelbergensis sites indicates that our common ancestor was cognitively advanced more than 800
kya!

202 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 33.10 Levallois point. “Levallois point” by
José-Manuel Benito Álvarez is licensed under CC BY-SA
2.5.

Figure 33.11 Hand axe from Boxgrove,
England. “Boxgrove handaxe” by
Midnightblueowl is licensed under CC BY-SA
3.0.

33. Homo heidelbergensis | 203

34. The Denisovans
THE DENISOVANS
A New Species of Hominin

SITE
Denisova and Okladnikov Caves in the Altai Mountains of Russia

PEOPLE
Michael Shunkov and Anatoly Derevianko

Figure 34.1 Denisova Cave (approximate location indicated by
arrow). “Russia edcp relief location map” by Uwe Dedering is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0.

INTRODUCTION
In 2008, Russian scientists Michael Shunkov (paleontologist) and Anatoly Derevianko (archaeologist) discovered a terminal finger phalanx from a young girl, dubbed “X-woman,” in the Denisova Cave in the Altai
Mountains of Russia (see Figures 34.1 and 34.2). The Denisovans, as they have come to be called, inhabited
the cave by 50 kya.

204

PHYLOGENY
The phalanx was sequenced by Svante Pääbo’s lab at the Max Planck Institute, where it was determined
to be from a new form of extinct hominin. Its ancestor is thought to have split from our own lineage by
>800 kya, subsequently splitting into the Denisovan and neandertal lineages ~640 mya (Callaway 2013). The
two resulting lineages remained as genomically alike as two geographically distant modern human populations. Pääbo (2014) uses the example of Finns and the San people of South Africa. It is estimated that gene
flow from neandertals to Denisovans was fairly low (≥0.5%) and seemingly occurred only locally in the Altai
region (Prüfer et al. 2013). What is even more interesting from our perspective is that Denisovans seem to
have interbred with the first wave of AMH as they passed through southern Asia after leaving Africa. These
humans already carried neandertal genes from having interbred with them. Thus modern human populations that have descended from those early humans (i.e. indigenous Melanesians, Polynesians, Australians,
and some Filipinos) carry 4.8% Denisovan genes, along with the mean of 2.5% neandertal genes that all
Eurasians possess, meaning that a total of ~7% of their genes are derived from extinct hominins! Genes for
dark skin, hair, and eyes were present in the Denisovan genome and are present in modern Melanesians
(Marshall 2013). This is fascinating from two perspectives. First, it is interesting that those ancestral characteristics survived in a modern population. Second, we now know something about what the Denisovans
likely looked like. Wow!
The Denisovan-like genes that the rest of Eurasians possess may have been inherited from neandertals, due
to their close genetic relationship with the Denisovans. It is of great interest that the genetic variability in
one of our important immunological systems, the human leucocyte antigen (HLA) system, is probably due to
interbreeding with neandertals. Half of the HLA variant genes, termed alleles, seen in Eurasian populations
are derived from those two extinct species (Abi-Rached et al. 2011). What is fascinating is that those alleles
likely conferred a selective advantage on some of our ancestors, and they thus survived in their descendants. It is likely that neandertals and Denisovans inherited the allele(s) from H. heidelbergensis, lending further support for the latter species having diverged from our lineage prior to the mutation(s) that led to the
forms present in the former two species.
Finally, a variant of the EPAS1 gene in Tibetans has also been traced to the Denisovans. The allele is an adaptation to the hypoxic (i.e. low oxygen) conditions of high altitude. The allele affords those individuals with
better oxygen metabolism capabilities (Huerta-Sanchez et al. 2014).
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from a 400 kya femur from the Sima de los Huesos site in Spain has been found
to most closely resemble Denisovans (Callaway 2013). The site contains Homo heidelbergensis material, and
if the leg bone is from an individual of that species, it will further muddy the phylogenetic waters. However,
it must be remembered that mtDNA gives only maternal lineage information, and it is thus possible that the
individual was not more closely related to Denisovans but that the mtDNA alleles were conserved in his or
her lineage.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
In addition to Denisova Cave, Shunkov and Derevianko also found bone fragments in the nearby Okladnikov
Cave. They have since recovered two teeth and a toe bone.
The caves were also occupied by neandertals and humans at various times over the millennia. Prior to the
discovery of neandertals in the area, it was thought that they ranged no farther east than Uzbekistan. This
new discovery extends their geographic range by 2,000 km. The Denisovans also must have had a large geographic range, since they are thought to have bred with AMH as they passed through southern Asia (see
Figure 34.3). It is amazing that for over 100 years, the only extinct hominins that we knew of in the northern
hemisphere were the erectus-forms and neandertals and now, in just the last couple of years, we have two
more, the Denisovans and the Red Deer Cave hominins. (Pääbo 2014, unless otherwise indicated.)

34. The Denisovans | 205

Figure 34.2 Denisova Cave. “Turist den-peschera” by ЧуваевНиколай at ru.wikipedia is
licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Figure 34.3 Possible routes taken by Late Pleistocene hominins. “Spread and evolution of Denisovans” by John D. Croft at
English Wikipedia is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
While there is not much to go on, the finger bone was broad and robust relative to modern humans and the
molars were large with widely diverging roots, unlike the little or no space between neandertal molar roots.
The robusticity of the phalanges suggests that the Denisovans may have been morphologically similar to
neandertals (Reich et al. 2010).

206 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
The environment of the area must have been at least seasonally cold. Mountains surrounding the area were
covered with glacial ice during the Late Pleistocene (Lehmkuhl et al. 2011). However, it is possible that game
may have been available year-round in the lower elevations. If large game migrated seasonally, then the
hominins would have followed and thus would have only resided in the area when animals were on their
northern grazing and birthing grounds.
Since H. heidelbergensis was cognitively and culturally advanced, the Denisovans were descended from
them, and Denisovans interbred with neandertals in the Altai region at some point(s) in time, it is likely that
they all had similar behavior and culture. While complex tools and an ivory bracelet were found, it is not
known whether they are attributable to the Denisovans. They are more likely AMH artifacts, as they are
usually only found at AMH sites.

34. The Denisovans | 207

35. Homo neanderthalensis
Homo neanderthalensis (>300 kya)
(“human” / Neander Valley, Germany)

Figure 35.1 Reconstruction of Neandertal at
Neanderthal Museum. “Neandertaler reconst”
by Stefan Scheer is licensed under CC BY-SA
3.0.

SITES
See “Neandertal sites” map, Figure 35.2

PEOPLE
Too many to mention (see text for some prominent researchers)

208

INTRODUCTION
One of the best known and most enigmatic of the archaic hominins were the neandertals, Homo neanderthalensis. Although Homo neanderthalensis was originally included in our own genus and species but distinguished by subspecies status, i.e. Homo sapiens neanderthalensis, increasing evidence from DNA analysis
suggests that the two lineages split sometime prior to 300 kya and, if new DNA evidence is correct, possibly
prior to 800 kya. However, DNA evidence shows that they interbred, possibly as AMH migrated out of Africa
one or more times or cohabited with neandertals in the Middle East. Eurasians and Australasians carry, on
average, 2.5% neandertal genes. Thus while the RAO model for the origin of AMH is still favored and neandertals are considered a separate species, at least some populations were capable of interbreeding and thus
were not true biological species at that point in time and geographic space.
The material that became the holotype for the species was discovered in the Neander Valley near Dusseldorf, Germany. The German word for valley is “thal,” and the “h” is silent. The “h” has been dropped for the
common name in some sources. I can only imagine that someone got tired of people pronouncing the “th”
and decided to head up a campaign to put a stop to it!

PHYLOGENY
There are two possible scenarios for the origin of neandertals and AMH. The first is based on fossil evidence
and the second on DNA. The interpretation of the fossil record suggests that both species are derived from
H. heidelbergensis, which in turn likely evolved from a derived form of H. ergaster (possibly H. mauritanicus)
in Africa. At some point prior to 500 kya, H. heidelbergensis split into the AMH and neandertal lineages.
The latest genetic evidence supports a split between the AMH and neandertal lineages prior to 800 kya
in Africa. The branch leading to neandertals and Denisovans is then considered H. heidelbergensis. The
Denisovans and neandertals then split ~640 kya. However, localized groups continued to interbreed.
It is refreshing to learn that populations of hominins have been interbreeding and maintaining or forming
genetic relationships since the beginning of “our” time. We modern humans are much more closely related
to one another than were those ancient hominin “species” and yet some of us do not see ourselves in others
due to physical differences that mean no more than that we went different ways at different times and
adapted to different environments.
Regardless of the neandertal/human/Denisovan phylogeny, a group of H. heidelbergensis moved into Western Europe, where a localized group then evolved into the neandertal lineage <300 kya. Transitional forms
can be seen in several locales in Western Europe, especially Spain, France, and Germany.
As Pleistocene Europe became colder, neandertals adapted to the harsher conditions. The neandertals from
Western Europe, with their stunted and cold-adapted bodies, are known as the “Classic” neandertals, as
distinct from those to the east and southeast that retained a more gracile morphology. Dates for the Classic
neandertals range from 75 to <30 kya. Figure 35.2 shows neandertal sites in Eurasia.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC RANGE
The earliest recognized discoveries were in Belgium and Gibraltar. The next discovery was the Neander
Valley remains, which lent the name to the species. Fossil sites are ubiquitous in Western Europe, with the
majority located in well-watered river valleys of France. More than 200 sites fall within a 20-mile radius of
Les Ezies, France. There are also sites in Germany, Belgium, Spain, Portugal, and Italy. Some of the more
famous sites are La Chapelle-aux-Saints, La Ferrassie, and St. Cesaire in France; the aforementioned Neander Valley in Germany; and Zafarraya Cave in Spain. The Chapelle-aux-Saints site has played a key role in
the development of the myth of the neandertals as hulking, barbaric cavemen. The remains of an approximately 40-year-old male (see Figure 35.3) were excavated in 1908 and analyzed by Marcellin Boule, who

35. Homo neanderthalensis | 209

Figure 35.2 Neandertal sites. “Carte Neandertaliens” by 120 is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

characterized the individual as primitive, brutish, and hunched over. Researchers later realized that the
adult was afflicted with arthritis, which accounted for his posture. While we cannot know how neandertals
behaved relative to ourselves, they achieved a theretofore unprecedented level of cultural and technological complexity. The derogatory characterization stuck for many years until researchers realized just how
much those ancient “peoples” had accomplished, such as intentional burial of their dead.
From their supposed Western European origin, they spread east into the Middle East and as far east as
Uzbekistan and northeast to Russia, in the area of the Denisovans. Some researchers do not accept that the
nine-year-old boy at the site of Teshik Tash, Uzbekistan is neandertal, but rather they argue that he is AMH.
Non-classic neandertal sites are found in Croatia, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Syria, the Republic of Georgia, Russia, the Ukraine, Iraq, Uzbekistan, and Israel. Famous sites include Krapina and Vindija in Yugoslavia;
the cave sites of Kebara, Amud, and Tabun in Israel; Shanidar in Iraq; and the aforementioned Teshik Tash
in Uzbekistan.
The Israeli sites have been of interest for decades because they are seemingly contemporary with nearby
AMH sites. There has been much speculation as to the nature of interactions between the two species. One
theory is that when ice sheets blanketed much of Europe, the neandertals moved down into the Middle East
along with other animals. The fact that AMH reached the Middle East by 120 kya but never entered Europe
until after 40 kya suggested to some that the neandertals “held” Europe, preventing the encroachment of
AMH. When moving down into the Middle East, neandertals may have pushed resident AMH out of the area.
During subsequent warmer periods, AMH may have moved back into the area following the retreat of the
neandertals to more northerly destinations. This idea of trading places has now been superseded by the
idea of contemporaneity and interbreeding, at least by some groups at some point(s) in time.
Figure 35.2 illustrates the broad geographic range of the neandertals. It is likely that during glacial advances,
populations moved south so that those in Western Europe were closer to the Mediterranean Sea and eastern neandertals may have pushed down into Israel and other warm areas, along with other animals. The

210 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 35.3 “Old Man” of La
Chapelle-aux-Saints. “Homo sapiens
neanderthalensis” by Luna04 is licensed under
CC BY-SA 3.0.

fossil record indicates that animal herds moved up and down in latitude in accordance with climatic pulses,
so it is very likely that hominin populations did as well. They were smart and may have inherited past cultural knowledge if they had language and theory of mind and, if for no other reason, they needed to eat and
would have followed the game.
By the time that AMH moved into Western Europe ~35 kya, the neandertals had begun to die out. They
likely succumbed to the increasingly harsh climate. They also went through an evolutionary bottleneck at
some point and lost some of their genetic diversity, possibly leaving them more vulnerable to disease. As
in the Middle East, there has been much speculation about what went on when AMH arrived in Western
Europe. While they likely carried neandertal genes (unless those western AMH left no modern descendants), they themselves may not have mated with neandertals, and certainly western populations would
have appeared somewhat different than Middle Eastern neandertals. However, most eastern neandertals
were gone by the time AMH passed through their former eastern geographic range, en route to Western Europe. It has been suggested that AMH outcompeted them either directly, which is known as contest competition, or indirectly, which is known as scramble competition, or possibly even killed them as
they encountered them. Contest competition involves one group preventing another group from accessing
resources, whereas scramble competition involves one group being better at gaining access to resources
than the other. I always think of a bully defending a buffet table from others versus kids scrambling at an
Easter egg hunt where some are better than others at getting to and/or finding eggs. It has also been widely
accepted that the neandertals were marginalized as AMH encroached on their territory. Except for a more
recent date from the Croatian site of Vindija (28 kya), the most recent dates are from the Iberian Peninsula,
where it is thought they retreated and died out. Regardless of what transpired between the two species,
since it appears that neandertals were on their way out, it is likely a moot point. It is rather fitting that after
all of the years of thinking that humans played a role in the demise of the neandertals, it appears they made
love not war (at least as far as we know)!

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
See Figure 35.4 for a full skeletal view of a neandertal. As mentioned, western and eastern neandertals
diverged morphologically over time. That clinal variation, i.e. a graded change in physical characteristics

35. Homo neanderthalensis | 211

Figure 35.4 Neandertal skeleton. “Neanderthalensis” by Claire
Houck is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0.

over geographic space, is thought to have been the result of time, varying adaptation and exposure to
chronically cold Ice Age conditions, and possibly gene flow with AMH in the Middle East. Populations in
Western Europe lived at higher latitudes, and the Classic neandertals exhibited cold adaptations that conform to Bergmann’s and Allen’s Rules. Bergmann’s Rule states that as you move away from the equator,
mass increases relative to surface area in order to conserve heat, as heat loss is a function of surface area.
Allen’s Rule pertains to limb or extremity length, so that organisms in colder environments exhibit shorter
appendages. Thus in equatorial Africa, where people have adapted over the long term to hot and dry conditions, body morphology is long and gracile versus the short, stocky morphology of Arctic peoples. In
addition to their stocky bodies, short appendages, and barrel chests, neandertals had facial adaptations to
the cold. Like H. heidelbergensis, neandertals exhibited midfacial prognathism, large noses, and puffy faces
due to enlarged sinuses. Due to their forward-oriented maxilla, the mandible also moved forward, leav-

212 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

ing a space behind the third molar, termed a retromolar space. The internal nasal projections were large,
thus increasing the internal surface area even further for warming and humidifying inspired air. In addition,
unique projections extended from their internal nasal region, up into their orbits. Additional skull characteristics seen in both cold-adapted and eastern neandertals were large, smoothly rolled brow ridges above
large, round, widely spaced orbits; “swept back” zygomatics; some unique inner ear characteristics; and, in
the occipital region, an occipital bun and suprainiac fossae (two small depressions located above inion, or
the external occipital protuberance; see Figure 35.5 for general area). While their skulls were longer and
lower than those of AMH (see Figure 35.6), their absolute cranial capacity exceeded even that of modern
humans. In accordance with Bergmann’s Rule, a larger brain, while energetically costly in terms of calories, is more conservative from a heat generation and retention perspective. While the neandertal brain was
larger, the frontal and parietal lobes (involved with higher thought processes) of AMH were expanded relative to those of neandertals. This may have given AMH an advantage in Ice Age Europe.

Figure 35.5 Neandertal cranial anatomy. “Neanderthal cranial anatomy” by Jason Potter is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.5.

Postcranially, neandertals have been described as a cross between a marathon runner (in terms of their
endurance) and a wrestler. They were built for chasing down and killing prey. Their upper body was heavily
muscled.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
The neandertals have traditionally been portrayed as having endured harsh climatic conditions. However,
there is debate as to how much of a tolerance they had for conditions in Ice Age Europe. Tattersall (2009)
presents an overview of research that suggests that during the coldest periods neandertals lived in more
southerly regions and only moved into higher latitudes when temperatures were warmer. While their morphology reflects chronic exposure to cold, like traditional arctic peoples, they did not have the modern
technology of those modern humans, such as better shelter, tailored clothes, weapons, and millennia of
advanced cultural traditions. They thus had to biologically adapt to the cold. However, when conditions
deteriorated as the last glacial maximum approached, they went extinct along with other ill-suited species
in the northern latitudes.
It has been known for many years that there were two different types of neandertal settlements, and discussions were often biased as though some inhabited prime real estate and others eked out a living on the
open plains. Cave sites in southern France were often described as well-watered river valleys with plentiful
caves for shelter, game, water, stone resources for tools, and so forth, and they were thought to have been
inhabited for millennia. Open-air sites were apparently inhabited by more nomadic groups that lived out
35. Homo neanderthalensis | 213

Figure 35.6 Homo sapiens and neandertal skulls compared. “Sapiens Neanderthal comparison” by hairymuseummatt is
licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0.

in the open in free-standing structures and followed herd animals. Cave sites and open-air sites are now
thought to represent the seasonal shift in subsistence strategies practiced by the same peoples.
Thus while neandertal populations may have been able to live year-round in more temperate regions, the
rest were likely semi-nomadic like their ancestors. During the cold of winter in Western Europe, they likely
sheltered in southern caves and, in summer, ventured north in pursuit of migrating herds. In addition to
caves, they used rock shelters, whereby they built outward from a rock wall or overhang. They did the same
inside of caves, building a shelter within a shelter. Post molds form when a wooden post inserted in the
ground decays, so that a darker circle of humus is apparent. The pattern of post molds can be used to
reconstruct the shape and size of houses and walls in the archaeological record. Based on post molds, neandertals are known to have covered cave entrances, probably during colder periods. Remains of constructed
structures show that they used bones, posts, and rocks and likely covered them with skins and insulated
with grass. At the Moldova site in the Ukraine, a 26 x 16´ oval ring of mammoth bones was excavated. The
bones were likely covered with hides, forming a hut that contained numerous hearths.
During the Pleistocene, European winters are described as having been long and cold and summers were
short and cool. Because of the seasonality, plant foods would primarily have been available during warmer
months. European neandertals ate a high proportion of meat, with reindeer and mammoth making up the
majority of the diet, based upon faunal assemblages and isotopic analyses, respectively. However, dietary
composition varied by region. Horses, bovids, and goats inhabited plains whereas at higher elevations,
mountain sheep and ibex dominated. At the site of Shanidar, Iraq, faunal remains included goat, sheep,
bovid, pig, tortoise, bear, deer, fox, marten, and gerbil bones. At the same site, there is evidence of plant
consumption and cooking. Henry (2011) found phytoliths and starch grains in calcium deposits (calculus) on
neandertal teeth. Some of the starch from grasses showed damage that is characteristic of cooking. While
we know that neandertals used fire, as evidenced by hearths at their sites, and likely ate plants when they
were available, it is valuable to finally have supporting evidence. Since Shanidar is south of most of Europe
and thus more temperate, it is likely that the neandertals had greater access to such resources.
While debate has raged for some time over whether neandertals practiced cannibalism, fossil material,
especially from the French site of Moula-Guercy, provides convincing evidence that at least some groups

214 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 35.7 Homo neanderthalensis by Keenan Taylor.

Figure 35.8 Restoration of Le Moustier Neanderthals by Charles R.
Knight. “Le Moustier” by 1920 is in the public domain.

did eat their own. Neandertal bones at the site exhibit the same signs of processing as animal bones. Bones
were disarticulated and hammered open for marrow, and exhibit cut marks from muscle removal.
It is interesting how abhorrent cannibalism is to us. We identify with the neandertals and may feel disappointed that they practiced cannibalism. While it is difficult to say why they ate one another, there is evi-

35. Homo neanderthalensis | 215

Figure 35.9 Discoid hand axe from Lyndford Quarry
(near Mundford, Norfolk, UK), 60 kya. “Lyndford
Hand axe-Discoid” by José-Manuel Benito Álvarez is
licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

dence of dietary stress in the form of enamel hypoplasia at some sites, such as Krapina, Croatia. Thus some
groups suffered periodic food shortages that resulted in faulty enamel deposition in developing children.
If people are starving and there is a dead body available, historic accounts show that they will eat it. Thus
it should not be surprising if neandertals consumed the dead, versus killing for consumption. There is no
evidence that they practiced cannibalism in all times and places, and thus it could have been in response to
extreme conditions.
Prior to the evidence from Moula Guercy, there was great reluctance anytime someone proposed cannibalism to explain damage to remains at particular sites. I think that the stimulus for many of us to feel an
affinity for the neandertals is that they intentionally buried their dead. They seem so human. Now that we
know that some of our ancestors interbred with them, we may feel an even greater connection to them and
will have to accept the good along with possible acts of survival.
Neandertal culture falls within the period termed the Middle Paleolithic, i.e. the middle portion of the Old
Stone Age. The neandertal tool tradition is termed the Mousterian Industry (see Figures 35.9 and 35.10 for
examples of Mousterian tools), after the Le Moustier site in France (see Figure 35.8). While there are no
known neandertal remains from North Africa, it is of interest that their tools have been found there (see
Figure 35.11). The Mousterian method was an improvement on the Levallois technique that provided greater
control over resulting flakes. Flakes were then modified into a variety of tools, such as scrapers and points,
for various functions. Some of the tools were denticulate, meaning that they were saw-toothed. Like H. heidelbergensis, they made compound tools by hafting stone implements onto handles and shafts.
A later tool tradition (35 kya) from the St. Cesaire site in France is categorized as an Upper Paleolithic industry, as the tools exhibit characteristics of AMH industries. Termed the Chatelperronian tradition (see Figure 35.12), it may be evidence of direct or indirect contact between neandertals and AMH, meaning they
obtained the technology via contact with AMH or found one or more tools and used their own methods
to replicate them. Some scholars claim the latter versus learning AMH modes of production. Several items
from the neandertal site of Arcy-sur-Cure, France, have been interpreted as jewelry, another cultural
achievement attributed solely to AMH.

216 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 35.10 Mousterian flint artifacts. “Pointe levellois
Beuzeville MHNT PRE.2009.0.203.2” by Didier Descouens is
licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

Figure 35.11 Distribution of Mousterian lithic sites. “Distribution géographique des sites du Moustérien” by Manon
Delamaison is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

35. Homo neanderthalensis | 217

Figure 35.12 Chatelperronian tools. From Manuel
d’archéologie préhistorique, celtique et gallo-romaine by
Joseph Déchelette (1862–1914). “Pointes de chatelperron” by 120
is in the public domain.

While H. naledi and H. heidelbergensis deposited their dead in deep caves, the neandertals were the first
species known to bury their dead in individual graves. Bodies are often found in a flexed position. There
is very little evidence of ritual associated with neandertal burials. It appears that they dug a hole, folded
the body into the hole, hence the flexed position, and possibly threw some other things in with it. Items
are often interpreted as having some significance, but they are usually limited to animal bones and broken tools. However, at the site of Teshik Tash, Uzbekistan, a nine-year-old boy was buried with five sets of
wild goat horns that may have adorned his body. While some have suggested that he was an AMH, if he was
neandertal it appears to have been a ritualized burial.
The Shanidar site (see Figure 35.13) has always been the most romantic from my perspective. It is a cave site
that experienced periodic cave-ins and has yielded the remains of several interesting individuals, some of
which were intentionally buried. Shanidar 1 was an adult male. While ultimately the victim of a cave-in, he
survived one or more earlier traumatic events in his life. He is thought to have been partially blind due to a
head injury that involved one of his eyes. He was missing the end of one of his forearms and thus the hand
as well. He suffered a leg injury that resulted in a permanent limp, and some of his teeth were completely
worn down. The interesting question is, how did he survive? The oft-cited response is that his group mates
helped him in life. He is thus heralded as another case of pre-human altruism or at least kin selection, if the
care was provided by his relatives.
Shanidar 3 may be the earliest evidence for murder. Another adult male, he was possibly stabbed, as evidenced by a cut wound to one of his ribs. While the bone showed signs of healing, it is not known whether
he died from the wound and was intentionally buried or died in a cave-in. Another interesting burial is
Shanidar 4. He was also an adult male that was intentionally buried, and pollen from eight wildflower
species was found in the grave. While highly controversial and possibly attributable to a seed-caching
rodent species, many would like to think that neandertals not only buried their dead but also placed flowers
on their remains.
As I was writing the previous section, it occurred to me that males may have been differentially buried relative to females. While I do not know the answer to that question, it is interesting and food for thought.
The debate as to whether the neandertals could speak has raged for decades. For many years, experts
thought that their larynx was situated too high in their throats to have allowed for speech. Our larynx drops
during the course of development. Early on it is positioned high in the throat to allow simultaneous drinking and breathing. Babies cannot talk until the larynx drops and they then begin to babble. Thus while they

218 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 35.13 Shanidar Cave, Iraq (see the two men in the cave entrance for scale). “Erbil
governorate shanidar cave” by JosephV at the English language Wikipedia is licensed under
CC BY-SA 3.0.

are not mechanically able to speak early on, they are cognitively capable of learning language. Of interest is
that some parents now teach their infants sign language so that they can communicate earlier.
While some researchers still doubt the neandertals’ ability to speak, many have accepted that they likely
had spoken language but would have been unable to produce the full range of sounds that characterize our
own speech. The discovery of a neandertal hyoid bone at the Kebara site in Israel led many to accept their
ability to talk, since its morphology was similar to our own. The hyoid is an important attachment site for
the ligaments and cartilages of the larynx and for some extrinsic muscles of the tongue (i.e., geniohyoid,
hyoglossus). The most telling evidence in support of neandertal speech, in addition to all of my previous
arguments, is the presence of the FOX P2 gene in their genome. We also possess the gene, and it plays an
important role in the acquisition of language.

35. Homo neanderthalensis | 219

Figure 35.14 Muscles involved with speech. Plate 386 from Gray’s
Anatomy. “Gray1019” by Henry Vandyke Carter is in the public domain.

220 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

36. Homo sapiens
Early Anatomically Modern Humans
Homo sapiens (>200 kya)
(“human” / “capable of discerning”)

Figure 36.1 “Scene from the Upper Quaternary
Paleolithic Period.” Painting by José María Velasco
(1840–1912) (Mexican).“José Maria Velasco – Scene
from the Quaternary upper Paleolithic Period –
Google Art Project” by Google Cultural Institute is
in the public domain.

SITES
Africa:
Tanzania: Ngaloba

221

Kenya: Guomde
Ethiopia: Omo Kibish and Herto
Democratic Republic of Congo: Katanda
South Africa: Border Cave and Klasies River Mouth
Asia (the following are earliest regional sites):
Israel: Skhul and Jebel Qafzeh
Mongolia: Ordos
Europe (the following are famous sites):
France: Cro Magnon (the most famous site in France)
Germany, Italy, Spain
Australia (the following are earliest regional sites):
Mungo Lake and Kow Swamp
New World (the earliest regional site):
Chile: Mesa Verde

PEOPLE
Too numerous to mention, as one or more individuals work at each site and sites are numerous,
especially in Eurasia

INTRODUCTION
My discussion of early AMH will cover their existence and culture prior to the Mesolithic period (~12 kya)
only and will focus primarily on European sites due to the paucity of information from earlier and nonEuropean sites.

PHYLOGENY
The origin of our species is thought to have occurred in Africa sometime prior to 200 kya, based on fossil
and genetic evidence. We may be descended from an African population of Homo heidelbergensis (sometimes referred to as Homo rhodesiensis) or an earlier common ancestor of heidelbergensis, based on recent
genetic evidence. Fossils characteristic of a transitional form, termed Homo helmei, are found at the South
African site of Florisbad and dated to 260 kya. Material from the Herto site in Ethiopia (Middle Awash area
of the Afar Depression) is dated to 160 kya and sometimes referred to as Homo idaltu or Homo sapiens idaltu.
Homo idaltu may be descended from the earlier South African form(s) and the most recent ancestor of AMH.
Groups of AMH made one or more exoduses out of Africa during the Late Pleistocene. The ancestors of
some Southeast Asians and the earliest Australians (as well as inhabitants of surrounding islands and those

222 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

that were used as “stepping stones”) may have left Africa ~125 kya. There are sites dating to ~120 kya in the
Middle East. A later group left prior to 50 kya and populated Eurasia and the New World, and made their
way to the South Pacific as well, where they must have come into contact and interbred with the previously
existing humans there.
The AMH ancestors of Eurasians interbred with neandertals, so that living descendants have inherited an
average of 2.5% of neandertal genes. Some Southeast Australasians inherited both neandertal and Denisovan genes, due to interbreeding, and they carry ~7% of genes from those two species.

DISCOVERY AND GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION
Most of the oldest AMH material has been discovered in more recent times, relative to early discoveries
of Asian Homo erectus and neandertal remains. The earliest AMH material is dated to 200–150 kya in East
Africa (e.g. Omo Kibish and Herto in Ethiopia, Guomde in Kenya, and Ngaloba in Tanzania), 180 kya in central
Africa (Katanda in the Democratic Republic of Congo), and 160 kya in South Africa (e.g. Klasies River Mouth).
Later sites dated to 115 kya are found in Israel (Skhul and Jebel Qafzeh caves) and South Africa (Border Cave).
Due to increasing aridification during the Late Pleistocene of sub-Saharan Africa, researchers speculate
that there were few areas that would have been habitable for early AMH. South Africa and other coastal
areas likely served as refugia during those times.
By 125 kya, it would have been possible for AMH to have left Africa during a short interglacial period (see
Figure 36.2 for routes and dates of arrival throughout the world). Middle Eastern sites dated to <120 kya
preserve evidence of AMH. The Arabian land bridge likely served as a corridor to Southeast Asia, just as it
had for the ancestor of Homo erectus. By ~50 kya, that early wave of humans made it all the way to Australia.
Archaeological sites dated to over 50 kya are found in Japan and Australia (with cave art possibly as old as 75
kya), and fossil material from Australia is dated to 40 kya. Some researchers see similarities between early
Australians and early Africans, supporting the idea of at least two African exoduses and multiple human
migrations into the South Pacific. The first wave left Africa first and arrived by 50 kya. Ancestors of AMH
that left Africa during the “second” exodus followed at a later point in time. It is not known when they
arrived in the various areas of Southeast Asia or whether they made it to the same destinations as the original colonizing group, prior to modern times.
The earliest date for AMH in Eurasia is from the Ordos site in Mongolia at 50 kya. AMH reached Western
Europe by 35 kya. Sites are found in Germany, France, Italy, and Spain, with the best-known site being the
Cro-Magnon site in Les Ezies, France. The Cro-Magnon site gave the name to the earliest people of Western Europe and is the location where the “Old Man of Cro-Magnon” (see Figure 36.3) was found in 1868 by
Louis Lartet.
By 15 kya, humans had spread throughout the world. They reached the New World, either by rafting along
the shoreline from Asia during extremely low sea levels that characterized the last glacial maximum (~17
kya) or by crossing the Bering Land Bridge at a later point in time. Dates in South America (~14 kya) are older
than those in North America and represent the former mode of travel. Sea levels dropped by as much as 120
m during that time. Crossing Beringea involved traveling between two ice shields and was likely a difficult
undertaking.

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
AMH are distinguished from Homo heidelbergensis and rhodesiensis by a suite of cranial characteristics and
continued loss of robusticity, both cranially and postcranially. AMH skulls were more vertically oriented
with thinner bones. While the cranial capacity (mean = 1450 cc) was lower relative to neandertals, the brain
was architecturally different, and corresponding behavior was more complex and indicative of greater lateralization. The parietal and frontal lobes were expanded, resulting in high maximum width and breadth

36. Homo sapiens | 223

Figure 36.2 Human arrival dates: 1 = Homo sapiens, 2 = neandertals, 3 = early hominins. “Spreading homo sapiens” by
Magasjukur2 is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.5.

Figure 36.3 “The Old Man of
Cro–Magnon.” “Cro-Magnon” by 120 is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0.

and a more pronounced forehead. Those areas of the cerebrum are involved with higher thought-processing skills related to association, speech, and all of the other cognitive capabilities that make us unique relative to other species, past and present. The face was shorter, the orbits were more rectangular, and the
brow ridges were less pronounced. The brows are termed bipartite in that they are characterized by a slight
bulge on either side of the nose, with a break in between. While the nose may have been pronounced, the
nasal opening was narrower, and the midfacial prognathism seen in earlier forms was absent. Jaw and den-

224 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 36.4 Sternocleidomastoid muscle. Plate 1194 from Gray’s Anatomy. “Gray1194” by Henry Vandyke Carter is
in the public domain.

tal robusticity became further reduced. AMH are characterized by a chin, or mental eminence (an autapomorphic, or unique, trait in AMH). While the mandible was less robust, the morphology (described as an
inverted T-shape) was strong and stress resistant.

Because they had more gracile and hence lighter faces, they needed stronger anterior neck muscles to flex
the head from an extended position, i.e. from a back-tilted to a forward-tilted position. The sternocleidomastoid muscle (see Figure 36.4) accomplishes that action, along with some rotation. The muscle originates
on the sternum and clavicle and inserts on the mastoid process (bony projections posterior to ears; see
Figure 36.5). The mastoid process became more pronounced to handle the additional power that was necessary (Campbell 1998).
Postcranially, AMH exhibited narrow hips, long legs, and thinner long bones than H. heidelbergensis or neanderthalensis. While they were seemingly not as cold-adapted as neandertals, they moved into northern latitudes and survived through the last glacial maximum. It is strange that the seemingly more heat-adapted
humans survived and the robust neandertals did not. However, their long legs and more gracile morphology
were less energetically costly and afforded them greater endurance and a longer stride and hence greater
speed. In addition, cultural adaptations to the climate must have occurred or they could not have survived.
They are thought to have made better clothes, shelter, and weaponry and were skilled hunters.

36. Homo sapiens | 225

Figure 36.5 Mastoid process. From Gray’s
Anatomy. “Processusmastoideusossistemporalis” by
Engusz is in the public domain.

ENVIRONMENT AND WAY OF LIFE
Early AMH arose and lived during the latter part of the Pleistocene Epoch, which was characterized by
intermittent glacial and interglacial periods. They ventured into northern latitudes by ~50 kya and stayed
and survived in extreme conditions during the period prior to, during, and after the last glacial maximum.
Populations that stayed in Africa and other warm regions would certainly have continued with life as usual
in the absence of climatic upheaval.

Figure 36.6 “Glyptodon old drawing” by Haplochromis is in
the public domain. Paleoindians hunting a glyptodon in South
America. Being large and slow-moving, they were hunted to
extinction within two millennia. Painting by Heinrich Harder
(1858–1935).

Until the advent of agriculture and the beginning of the modern geological epoch (i.e., the Holocene)
approximately 10 kya, humans were mobile to semi-sedentary foragers. They exploited whatever flora and
fauna were native and available in the various regions they inhabited and colonized, from mastodons in the
far north to wallabies in the far south of the Old World. We really do not need to discuss much about how
AMH made a living because we have living and historic examples in the ethnographic record to show us how
people lived and adapted, even to environmental extremes, from the cold of the Arctic to the deserts of the
world. We have a record of Stone Age populations whose way of life disappeared within my lifetime, such as
Australian Aborigines and Amazonian Indians. Like modern foragers, population density would have been
low, and life ranged from easy to hard, depending on the availability of resources, seasons, and climatic patterns and disasters. One estimate of mortality rates has 50% of people dying before 20 years of age, few
females living beyond 30, and only 12% living beyond the age of 40.

226 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Any discussion of early AMH culture is seemingly Eurocentric, because the majority of the known archaeological record falls between 30 and 20 kya in Western Europe. We know that ~30 kya, a warming trend
occurred that lasted several thousand years. As glacial ice retreated, prime grazing land opened and spread
from Spain to Siberia. As large game expanded their geographical range, so did humans and other predators. Human population numbers increased as groups spread throughout the habitable landmass. However,
as the last glacial maximum approached, ice reclaimed the land and humans were once again restricted in
their range and movements.

Figure 36.7 Vegetation map for last glacial maximum (zoom in for a better look). “Last glacial vegetation map” by Jrockley is
in the public domain.

The vegetation map in Figure 36.7 shows what the world was like beginning about 20 kya, during the last
glacial maximum. By that time, AMH were living in Africa, Eurasia, island chains southeast of Asia, and Australia and the surrounding islands. A short time later, they ventured into the New World.
We certainly know that early humans had spoken language, and it would have facilitated their survival via
group memory and tradition as well as problem-solving. They were qualitatively different than the neandertals, and their modes of communication were likely more advanced. Modern languages can be traced,
showing their spread and evolution over time and geographic space. Some of the symbols that have survived from Paleolithic times, such as dots, dashes, and hand-prints, may have conveyed information. The
same may be said for depictions of animals, humans, and hunting on cave walls.
Early AMH culture falls within the period termed the Upper Paleolithic (40–12 kya). Relative to prior Middle
Paleolithic sites, AMH cultural achievements are much more impressive. Over time, they made great technological advances, inventing a great variety of new and useful objects and modes of production. People left
Africa armed with language, religion, and cultural identity, as they are cultural universals and there is some
evidence in the archaeological record that suggests religious practices and initiation rituals (see below).
Greater individual expression is apparent in the wonderful representational art that has survived in cave
paintings and sculptures, and body adornment in the form of clothing, jewelry, and pigmentation. Complex
aspects of culture, such as rules regarding kinship and marriage, also may have preceded the African diaspora(s). They too are cultural universals, and while they likely changed over time in response to need and
ecology, they certainly did not evolve independently in all places.

36. Homo sapiens | 227

Figure 36.8 “Ice age fauna of northern Spain” by Mauricio Antón. “Ice age fauna of northern Spain – Mauricio Antón” by
FunkMonk is licensed under CC BY 2.5.

According to Stringer and Andrews (2005), cultural achievements in the various regions of the Old World
were as follows:
• Europe ~40 kya:
◦ All aspects of Upper Paleolithic culture.
◦ Only early representational art.
• South Africa ~75 kya:
◦ Blombos Cave.
▪ Carved and decorated ocher crayons (see Figure 36.9).
• Australia ~30 kya:
◦
◦
◦
◦
◦

Rafts.
Cremation.
Art.
Body adornment.
Bone artifacts.

Figure 36.9 Blombos Cave, South Africa: engraved ocher. “Blombos Cave engrave ochre” by Chris S. Henshilwood is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0.

228 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 36.10 Reconstruction of tent from Magdalenian times at Pincevent, France. “Pincevent tent” by
José-Manual Benito is in the public domain.

AMH settlements were larger and more permanent than those of neandertals and were often located on the
tops of hills. Researchers have speculated that the view of the surrounding areas may have been beneficial
for monitoring herd movements. They built better shelters, some of which had sunken and stone foundations. Materials that were utilized consisted of wooden posts and branches, stone, and hides, and where
no wood was available, bones, tusks, and antlers. They also made tents (see Figure 36.10). The remains of
a house in Russia show that it was approximately 50 by 120′ with multiple hearths along its length. That is
four times the size of my house and architecturally impressive, considering their tool kit relative to ours.
Cooking was done in stone-lined hearths and ovens. They dug storage pits to preserve and protect food
stores from animals. Stone lamps consisted of a flat stone with a depression into which was placed animal
fat that would have provided light for a couple of hours.
At the Sungir site near Moscow, clothes from 22 kya survived in permafrost. We thus know that Paleolithic
peoples made tailored clothing like our own. Earlier hominins are thought to have worn ponchos and lashed
skins onto their bodies. AMH tools of the trade that survive in the archaeological record are bone needles,
pins, and awls for punching holes in the skins. In addition to animal hides, they used bark cloth and woven
grass for insulation.
Upper Paleolithic tool industries were advanced relative to past traditions, with greater diversification and
refinement. Tools consisted of knives, scrapers, chisels, borers, awls, needles, and a greater number of
blade and compound tools. Stone, bone, ivory, and antler were used. Some of the more famous Upper Paleolithic industries are the Aurignacian (possibly <40 kya), Gravettian (~28–22 kya), Solutrean (~22–17 kya),
and Magdalenian (~18–10 kya).

36. Homo sapiens | 229

Figure 36.11 Map showing Aurignancian culture, 47–41 kya. “Aurignacian culture map-en” by Hughcharlesparker is licensed
under CC BY-SA 3.0.

The Aurignacian industry (see Figure 36.11) may have originated in Asia, but it can be found throughout
Europe (Stringer and Andrews 2005). The Cro-Magnon people that produced the tools, art, and other cultural achievements from that time are thus known as the Aurignacian or Cro-Magnon culture. Aurignacian and subsequent tool industries were predominantly blade-based. Like the Levallois technique and the
Mousterian industry, AMH could produce a variety of tools from a single core, but they used a new mode of
production known as the punch technique. It involved using a hammerstone, a hammer and chisel, or a long
wooden spear (using upper body weight and strength) to “punch” blades from the core. For illustrations on
this technique see Dennis O’Neil’s Early Modern Human Culture at http://anthro.palomar.edu/homo2/.
The Gravettian industry had a more limited distribution in Eastern Europe and Western Asia (Stringer and
Andrews 2005). Stereotypical tools of the industry were flat-end blades and burins (see Figure 36.12) that
were used to work wood.

230 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 36.12 Brassempouy burins from the Gravettian
culture. “Burin Brassempouy 213.3 Profil (3)” by Didier
Descouens is licensed under CC BY 3.0.

The Solutrean industry (see Figure 36.13) is most famous for its beautiful and refined laurel leaf blades (see
Figure 36.14). A method known as pressure flaking was used to finely and bifacially shape the blade. Pressure flaking involves the use of a pointed tool, such as antler or bone, to force tiny flakes from the surface
and edges of the tool (see Figure 36.15).

Figure 36.13 Solutrean sites.“Homo Sapiens in Europe – solutrean distribution map-fr” by Sémhur is licensed under CC
BY-SA 4.0.

36. Homo sapiens | 231

Figure 36.14 Solutrean
leaf blade. “Biface
feuille de laurier” by
Calame is in the
public domain.

Figure 36.15 Flaking stone. From The origins of invention: a
study of industry among primitive peoples by Otis Tufton
Mason (1895). “19th century knowledge stone tools flaking
stone by outward pressure” by Jonp154 is in the public
domain.

Finally, the Magdalenian industry (see Figures 36.16, 36.17, and 36.18) is characterized by great advances in
weaponry, such as the bow and arrow and the atlatl or spear thrower (see Figures 36.19 and 36.20), both of
which allowed hunters to put distance between themselves and their prey.

232 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 36.16 Magdalenian blades and
burins. “Burins and blades – Bernifal –
Meyrals – MNP” by Sémhur is licensed
under CC BY-SA 4.0.

Figure 36.19 Atlatl being used to throw a spear. From Manuel d’archéologie préhistorique, celtique et gallo-romaine by
Joseph Déchelette (1862–1914).“Propulseur-2” by 120 is in the public domain.

Figure 36.20 Atlatl. “Atlatl” by Maxim Razin is in the public
domain.

Other weapons from the Upper Paleolithic are stone missiles or bolas (see Figure 36.21), boomerangs,
spears, javelins, and clubs. AMH had refined fishing techniques, rafts, and canoes. Harpoons appear very
early in the archaeological record, e.g. the Katanda site in the Democratic Republic of Congo is dated to
180–75 kya. They also constructed traps, rope, and baskets.

36. Homo sapiens | 233

Figure 36.17 Examples of antler weapons. From The Outline of History by H. G. Wells (1920). “Wells Reindeer Age articles” by
SEWilco is in the public domain.

234 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 36.18 Geographic range of Magdalenian culture (in pink). “Homo Sapiens in Europe – magdalenian distribution
map-fr” by Sémhur is licensed under CC BY-SA 4.0.

Figure 36.21 Bola from the site of Sidi
Abderrahman,
Morocco. “Bolo-Sidi-Abderrahman” by
120 is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

Beginning ~25 kya, a cultural and symbolic explosion is evident in the archaeological record of Western
Europe, possibly in response to the increasingly cold temperatures, such as if they spent more time inside
caves or were performing rituals aimed at increasing their survival. The Cro-Magnon/Aurignacian people
are known for their cave art and sculptures (see Figures 36.23 and 36.24). Figure 36.22 illustrates the incredible number of sites where early AMH art has been found. There are 150 sites in southwest France alone.

36. Homo sapiens | 235

Figure 36.22 Paleolithic art sites. Aqua lines indicate “limits of the main glaciations.” “Upper Paleolithic Art in Europe”
by Sugaar is in the public domain.

Common cave art themes are fauna; hunting; hands; dots and lines; some humans; and the occasional
human costumed as an animal and sometimes dancing, such as “The Sorcerer” (see Figures 36.23 and 36.24).
Men appear alone or in groups, but women are never pictured alone. Drawings of male and female genitalia
are reported from multiple sites.

Figure 36.23 Half-bull/half-human etching. Cave site in
Dordogne, France. “Gabillou Sorcier” by José-Manuel Benito is
in the public domain.

236 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 36.24 Drawing by Breuil of the
“Sorcerer” Cave painting. Trois-Frères, Ariège,
France (15 kya). “Pintura Trois Freres” by
Dcasawang1 is in the public domain.

Artists used charcoal and mineral pigments, such as ocher (see Figure 36.9 for a photo of an ocher crayon
from Blombos Cave), and may have applied some of the shading by chewing the pigments and spitting them
onto the walls, resulting in an air-brushed effect. There is a great demonstration of that practice in the third
segment of the public television series In Search of Human Origins (NOVA 1994).
The art may have served a variety of purposes. First, it is difficult not to imagine their aesthetic and emotional value, e.g. accompanying stories and myths. They may have been used for more utilitarian purposes,
such as hunting strategies or keeping records. Some might have served a social function, such as communication within and between groups or education. Finally, of course, there is their proposed use in magic and
ritual. Some art is found deep within caves in association with primitive stone lamps and children’s footprints. Some of the caves were discovered by divers, and thus the archaeological record was not disturbed,
i.e. they were not modern footprints. It is easy to see why this has been interpreted as possible evidence of
initiation rituals.
While they drew and painted on outer walls as well as inside caves, the cave paintings survived better. The
French site of Lascaux Cave (18 kya) (see Figures 36.25 and 36.26) is renowned for the color and beauty of
its animal depictions, especially those seen in the “Great Hall of Bulls.” At the cave site of Grotte Chauvet,
France (~30 kya) (see Figure 36.27), more than 300 animals are depicted, many of which are not seen elsewhere, such as panthers and lions. Figures 36.29 and 36.30 show maps of the Spanish cave of La Pasiega
(<20 kya), giving you some idea of the labyrinthine nature of some of the cave systems and richness of the
galleries. Figures and forms in the cave number over 700 and consist of the following:
97 deer (69 females and 28 males), 80 horses, 32 ibex, 31 cattle (17 bison and 14 aurochs), two reindeer, a carnivorous animal, a chamois, a megaloceros, a bird and a fish; also there may be a mammoth and about 40 quadrupeds not clearly identified; also the ideomorphs, such as roof-shaped and
other surprisingly varied symbols (more than 130), and very often including various anthropomorphs
and hundreds of marks and partly erased traces. (Wikipedia contributors 2015a)

36. Homo sapiens | 237

Another famous Spanish cave site is Altamira (15 kya) (see Figure 36.28). The cave is about one kilometer
long (Chivers, 2004) and contains polychromatic renderings of large mammals, especially bison, and human
hand prints.

Figure 36.25 Great Hall of Bulls, Lascaux Cave, France.
“Lascaux painting” by Prof saxx is licensed under CC BY SA
3.0.

Figure 36.26 Great Hall of Bulls, Lascaux Cave, France.
“Entrance to Lascaux Cave, France” by Thoreno is licensed
under CC BY-NC-ND 3.0.

Figure 36.27 Grotte Chauvet cave, France. “Lions
painting, Chauvet Cave (museum replica)” by HTO is in
the public domain.

238 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 36.28 Altamira cave, Spain. “AltamiraBison” by
Rameessos is in the public domain.

Figure 36.29 Map of Gallery Zones within La Pasiega Cave, Spain. “La Pasiega-Plano (Cantabria)” by Locutus Borg is
licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

36. Homo sapiens | 239

Figure 36.30 Map of art of Gallery A, La Pasiega Cave, Spain (also
see map above). “La Pasiega-Galería A-1er Santuario” by Locutus
Borg is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

It is of interest that some of the most magnificent animal art is located in the most acoustically resonant
areas within caves. It conjures images of our ancestors having special ceremonies or gatherings. Some
musical instruments have survived in the form of bone flutes, percussion instruments, and a possible
lithiphone (a stone xylophone). Their music would have been amplified, and with the addition of flickering
flames, the wall images would have seemingly come alive!
AMH invented pottery, with the earliest evidence being fired-clay animals from the Czech Republic. The
most famous sculptures are the Venus figurines (i.e. fertility goddesses) that have been found from Western
Europe to Siberia. They are usually clay or stone depictions (also wood, bone, and ivory) of obese women
with pronounced breasts and buttocks. They were originally thought to have been produced by men for fertility purposes. A more recent interpretation is that they were self-sculptures by women. That may explain
why they were usually faceless and why body parts closest to the eyes were large and disproportionate
240 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

compared with their tiny feet. Another idea suggests their use as obstetrical aids. Other sculptures were
created via bas-relief on walls and rocks, which involves carving some dimensionality into the façade (see
the Venus of Laussel, Figure 36.31), and there were also engraved tools, jewelry, and so forth.
The idea of fecund women as fertility goddesses is an example of sympathetic magic, i.e. depicting what one
would like to happen. Obese women would have been better able to carry and nurse their babies so that
they had better chances of survival. The same could be said for hunting scenes and game animals. Men may
have been hoping for safe and successful hunting or an increase in the local game.
Other interesting sculptures came from the following sites or areas:
• Le Tuc d’Audoubert, France:
◦ Footprints (see Figure 36.32).
◦ Two 1 m clay bisons found propped up in the middle of a small chamber inside the cave.
• Grotte de Montespan, France:
◦ Children’s footprints.
◦ Clay figures of a bear, a lion, and other animals propped up against the cave’s walls.
• Czech Republic:
◦ Fired animal figurines (27 kya).
◦ “Oldest human portrait” (26 kya) carved from mammoth ivory and possibly attached to a staff or
baton, showing great detail in the eyes, hair, mouth, and expression.
• El Juyo, Spain (14 kya):
◦ Stone figure on which one side of the face is a smiling man and the other is a feline predator, discovered in a possible ceremonial sanctuary.

Figure 36.31 Venus sculptures from EuropeLeft: Venus of
Laussel. “Venus-de-Laussel-vue-generale-noir” by 120 is licensed under CC BY
3.0. Top right: Venus of Willendorf. “A female Paleolithic figurine, Venus of
Willendorf Wellcome M0000440” by Wellcome Images is licensed under CC BY
4.0. Bottom right: Venus of Brassempouy. “Venus of Brassempouy” by Jean-Gilles
Berizzi is in the public domain.

36. Homo sapiens | 241

Figure 36.32 Footprints in the Cave of Tuc d’Audoubert, France. “Upper Paleolithic period, view of gallery with heel prints,
Wellcome M0015047” by Wellcome Images is licensed under CC BY 4.0.

In addition to murals and sculptures, early humans also decorated their tools and bodies. Ocher is found in
burials and was likely used to color the body, just as seen in many modern indigenous groups. Depending
on the mineral composition, ocher is found in a variety of colors: yellow, orange, rust, brown, etc. They also
made and wore jewelry and decorated their clothes with beads. At the Sungir site near Moscow (see more in
section on burial practices), two children and an old man were buried in garments that were covered with
thousands of ivory beads, thought to have taken an hour each to produce.

242 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Figure 36.33 “Lion Man” Aurignacian
artifact. Oldest known
zoo-/anthropo-morphic figurine (40 kya)
from Hohlenstein-Stadel cave, Germany.
“Lion man photo” by JDuckeck is in the
public domain.

The earliest intentional burials that have been discovered for AMH are from the Middle East and dated to
120–80 kya. As mentioned, they not only buried their dead but also included grave goods and decorated the
bodies in ritual fashion. Some Paleolithic cultures cremated remains. Mass burials have been found at some
sites. Burial practices included placing the body in a flexed position, as the neandertals did, or supine and, in
a few instances, covered with a slab of rock. Two interesting burials were found at Italian and Russian sites.
At the site of Grotte des Enfants, Italy, two youngsters were decorated with hundreds of shells and pierced
animal teeth. At the famous site of Sungir (see Figures 36.34 and 36.35) near Moscow, three interesting
burials were found. In one grave, a nine-year-old and a twelve- or thirteen-year-old were buried together.
They were flanked by two mammoth bone spears. The tusks would have had to have been boiled in a pit
of water, using hot rocks, in order to straighten them. Ten thousand beads were sewn to their clothes, and
the bodies were decorated with hundreds of perforated fox canines (remember that each fox has only four
large canines!), carved ivory animals, pins, and pendants. They were placed on a bed of ocher. A 40-year-old
man was also honored in death. His clothes were also decorated with thousands of beads, and he wore ivory
bracelets. He too was placed on a bed of ocher.

36. Homo sapiens | 243

Figure 36.34 Paleolithic burial at Sunghir site, Russia. “Sunghir-tumba paleolítica” by José-Manuel Benito Álvarez is in the
public domain.

Figure 36.35 Map of Sungir site, Russia. “SungirMap” by ASekirin is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.

In conclusion, I found this great timeline of the Upper Paleolithic (Wikipedia contributors 2015j):

244 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

Timeline of the Upper Paleolithic
45,000–43,000
• Earliest evidence of modern humans found in Europe, in Southern Italy.
43,000–41,000
• At Ksar Akil in Lebanon, ornaments and skeletal remains of modern humans are dated to this
period.
• Denisova hominin live in the Altai Mountains, Russia.
40,000–35,000 BC
• Early cultural center in the Swabian Alps.
• Earliest figurative art (Venus of Schelklingen, Germany).
• Beginning of the Aurignacian.
• The first flutes appear in Germany.
• Lion-Human created from Hohlenstein-Stadel.
39,000 BC
• Most of the giant vertebrates and megafauna in Australia became extinct, around the time of
the arrival of humans.
38,000 BC
• Examples of cave art in Spain are dated to around 38,000 BC, making them the oldest examples of art yet discovered in Europe.
38,000 BC–29,000 BC
• Wall painting with horses, rhinoceroses, and aurochs, Chauvet Cave, Vallon-Pont-d’Arc,
Ardéche gorge, France, is made.
35,000 BC
• Zar, Yataghyeri, Damjili and Taghlar caves in Azerbaijan
• First evidence of people inhabiting Japan.
32,000 BC
• Europeans understand how to harden clay figures by firing them in an oven at high temperatures.
30,000 BC
• First ground stone tools appear in Japan.
• Invention of the bow and arrow.

36. Homo sapiens | 245

29,000–25,000 BC
• Venus of Dolní Věstonice, Czech Republic. It is the oldest known ceramic in the world.
• The “Red Lady of Paviland” lived around 29,000–26,000 years ago. Recent evidence has come
to light that he was a tribal chief. (Note: it was a male skeleton dyed with red ocher.)
23,000 BC
• Venus of Petřkovice (Petřkovická venuše in Czech) from Petřkovice in Ostrava, Czech Republic, was made.
22,000 BC
• Last Glacial Maximum.
• Venus of Brassempouy, Grotte du Pape, Brassempouy, Landes, France, was made.
• Venus of Willendorf, Austria, was made.
20,000 BC
• Last Glacial Maximum. Mean sea levels are believed to be 110 to 120 meters (361 to 394 ft)
lower than present, with the direct implication that many coastal and lower riverine valley
archaeological sites of interest are today under water.
18,000 BC
• Spotted Horses, Pech Merle cave, Dordogne, France are painted.
18,000 BC–11,000 BC
• Ibex-headed spear thrower, from Le Mas d’Azil, Ariège, France.
18,000 BC–12,000 BC
• Mammoth-bone village in Mezhirich, Ukraine, is inhabited.
17,000 BC
• Spotted human hands, Pech Merle cave, Dordogne, France are painted.
17,000 BC–15,000 BC
• Hall of Bulls, Lascaux caves, France is painted.
• Bird-Headed man with bison and Rhinoceros, Lascaux caves, is painted.
• Lamp with ibex design, from La Mouthe cave, Dordogne, France, is made.
16,500 BC
• Paintings in Cosquer cave, where the cave mouth is now under water at Cap Margiou, France
were made.
15,000 BC

246 | The History of Our Tribe: Hominini

• Bison, Le Tuc d’Audoubert, Ariège, France.
15,000 BC–12,000 BC
• Paleo-Indians move across North America, then southward through Central America.
• “Pregnant woman” from Laugerie-Basse, France was made.
14,000 BC
• Paleo-Indians searched for big game near what is now the Hovenweep National Monument
in Colorado and Utah.
• Bison, on the ceiling of a cave at Altamira, Spain, is painted.
• Domestication of reindeer.
13,000 BC
• Beginning of the Holocene extinction.
• Earliest evidence of warfare (found in the Americas).
11,500 BC–10,000 BC
• Wooden buildings in South America (Chile), first pottery vessels (Japan).
11,000 BC
• First evidence of human settlement in Argentina.
• The “Arlington Springs Man” dies on the island of Santa Rosa, off the coast of California.
• Human remains deposited in caves which are now located off the coast of Yucatán.
10,500 BC
• Stone Age Creswellian culture settlement on Hengistbury Head, England, dates from around
this year.

….And the rest, as they say, is “history”!

36. Homo sapiens | 247

Postscript
It can certainly be said that we humans are special relative to past and present species. We have changed
the world in both wonderful and terrible ways. Let us hope that (1) we can understand and appreciate our
common origin as well as our cultural and physical differences so that we can live together as a global community; (2) we continue to advance technologically in order to correct the problems, afflictions, and mistakes of the past, present, and future; and (3) our time on earth will continue so that we do not become just
another extinct hominin in the fossil record

249

Bibliography
Abi-Rached L, Jobin MJ, Kulkarni S, McWhinnie A, Dalva K, Gragert L, Babrzadeh F, Gharizadeh B, Luo M, Plummer FA, et
al. 2011. The shaping of modern human immune systems by multiregional admixture with archaic humans. Science
334(6052):89–94.
Behrensmeyer AK. 2008. Paleoenvironmental context of the Pliocene A.L. 333 “first family” hominin locality, Hadar formation, Ethiopia. GSA Spec Pap. [accessed 2015 Sept 10];446:203–214. http://specialpapers.gsapubs.org/content/
446/203.abstract.
Berger LR. 2012. Australopithecus sediba and the earliest origins of the genus Homo. J Anthropol Sci. 90:117–131.
Berger LR, de Ruiter DJ, Schmid SE, Carlson KJ, Dirks PHGM, Kibii JM. 2010. Australopithecus sediba: A new species of
Homo-like Australopith from South Africa. Science 328(5975):195–204.
Berger LR, Hawks J, de Ruiter DJ, Churchill SE, Schmid P, Delezene LK, Kivell TL, Garvin HM, Williams SA, DeSilva JM.
(2015) Homo naledi, a new species of Homo from the Dinaledi Chamber, South Africa. eLife doi:10.7554/eLife.09560
Blain H. 2012. An environmental tale from Pleistocene Java [MA thesis]. [Leiden, Netherlands]: Leiden University.
Boaz N. 1998. Eco homo: how the human being emerged from the cataclysmic history of the earth. New York (NY): Basic
Books.
Bramble DM, Lieberman DE. 2004. Endurance running and the evolution of Homo. Nature 432:345–352.
Bromage TG, McMahon JM, Thackery JF, Kullmar O, Hogg R, Rosenberger AL, Schrenk F, Enlow DH. 2008. Craniofacial
architectural constraints and their importance for reconstructing the early Homo skull KNM-ER 1470. J Clinical
Pediatr Dent. 33(1):43–54.
Brown P, Sutikna T, Morwood MJ, Soejono RP, Jatmiko, Saptomo EW, Due RA. 2004. A new small-bodied hominin from
the Late Paleistocene of Flores, Indonesia. Nature 431:1055–1061.
Bunn HT, Gurtov AN. 2014. Prey mortality profiles indicate that Early Pleistocene Homo at Olduvai was an ambush
predator. Quatern Int. 322–323:44–53.
Callaway E. 2013. Hominin DNA baffles experts. Nature 504:16–17.
Campbell BG. 1998. Human evolution: an introduction to man’s adaptations. 4th ed. New York (NY): Aldine de Gruyter.
Carlson KJ, Stout D, Jashashvili T, de Ruiter DJ, Tafforeau P, Carlson K, Berger LR. 2011. The endocast of MH1, Australopithecus sediba. Science 333(6048):1402–1407.
Cartmill M, Smith FH. 2009. The Human Lineage. New York: Wiley-Blackwell.
Chang CH, Kaifu Y, Takai M, Kono RT, Grün R, Matsu’ura S, Kinsley L, Lin LK. 2015. The first archaic Homo from Taiwan.
Nat Commun. 6:6037. doi:10.1038/ncomms7037.
Clement A, Hillson S. 2013 Oct 24. ‘Do larger molars and robust jaws in early hominins represent dietary adaptation?’ a
new study in tooth wear. UCL Archaeol Int.; [accessed 2015 Oct 3]. doi:10.5334/ai.1605.
Copeland SR, Sponheimer M, de Ruiter DJ, Lee-Thorp JA, Codron D, le Roux PJ, Grimes V, Richards MP. 2011. Strontium
isotope evidence for landscape use by early hominins. Nature 474:76–78.
Curnoe D, Ji XP, Herries AIR, Kanning B, Taçon PSC, Zhende B, Fink D, Yunsheng Z, Hellstrom J, Yun L, et al. 2012. Human
remains from the Pleistocene-Holocene transition of Southwest China suggest a complex evolutionary history for
East Asians. PLoS One 7(3):e31918.

250

Davis, OK. 2009. Other dating methods. Tucson (AZ): University of Arizona; [accessed 2015 Sept 16]. http://www.geo.arizona.edu/palynology/geos462/11datingmeth.html.
de Lumley H, Nioradze M, Barsky D, Cauche D, Celiberti V, Nioradze G, Zvania D, Lordkipanidze D. 2005. The preOldowayen lithic industry from the beginning of the Lower Pleistocene at the Dmanisi site in Georgia. Anthropologie 109:1–182.
de Lumley M, Lordkipanidze D. 2006. L’home de dmanissi (Homo georgicus), il y a 18100000 ans. C R Palevol. 5:273–281.
de Ruiter DJ, DeWitt TJ, Carlson KB, Brophy JK, Schroeder L, Ackermann RR, Churchill SE, Berger LR. 2013. Mandibular
remains support taxonomic validity of Australopithecus sediba. Science 340(6129):1232997.
DeSilva JM, Holt KG, Churchill SE, Carlson KJ, Walker CS, Zipfel B, Berger LR. 2013.The lower limb and mechanics of
walking in Australopithecus sediba. Science 340(6129):1232999.
DiMaggio EN, Campisano CJ, Rowan J, Dupont-Nivet G, Deino AL, Bibi F, Lewis ME, Souron A, Werdelin L, Reed KE, et
al. 2015. Late Pliocene fossiliferous sedimentary record and the environmental context of early Homo from Afar,
Ethiopia. Science 347(6228):1355–1359. doi:10.1126/science.aaa1415.
Dirks P HGM, Berger LR, Roberts EM, Kramers JD, Hawks J, Randolph-Quinney PS, Elliott M, Musiba CM, Churchill SE,
de Ruiter DJ, et al. (2015) Geological and taphonomic context for the new hominin species Homo naledi from the
Dinaledi Chamber, South Africa. DOI: doi:10.7554/eLife.09561.
Duke L. 1998 Dec 10. Full Australopithecus fossil found in South Africa. Washington Post. Sect. A:1; [accessed 2015 Sept
10]. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/national/daily/dec98/safrica10.htm.
Fagan BM. 2000. Chronological methods 11 – Paleomagnetic and archaeomagnetic dating. Santa Barbara (CA): Regents
of the University of California; [accessed 2015 Aug 30]. http://archserve.id.ucsb.edu/courses/anth/fagan/anth3/
Courseware/Chronology/11_Paleomag_Archaeomag.html.
Falk D. 2009. Finding our tongues: Mothers, infants and the origins of language. New York, (NY): Basic Books.
Falk D, Hildebolt C, Smith K, Morwood MJ, Sutikna T, Brown P, Jatmiko, Wavhu Saptomo E, Brunsden B, Prior F. 2005.
The brain of LB1, Homo floresiensis. Science 308(5719):242-245.
Gibbons A. 2009. A new kind of ancestor: Ardipithecus unveiled. Science 326:36-40.
Green DJ, Gordon AD, Richmond BG. 2007. Limb-size proportions in Australopithecus afarensis and Australopithecus
africanus. J Hum Evol. 52(2):187–200.
Harcourt-Smith WEH, Throckmorton Z, Congdon KA, Zipfel B, Deane AS, Drapeau MSM, Churchill SE, Berger LR,
DeSilva JM (2015). The foot of Homo naledi. Nature Communications 6:8432. doi:10.1038/ncomms9432.
Harmund S, Lewis JE, Feibel CS, Lepre CJ, Prat S, Lenoble A, Boës X, Quinn RL. 2015. 3.3-million-year-old stone tools
from Lemokwi 3, West Turkana, Kenya. Nature 521:310–315. doi:10.1038/nature14464.
Hawks J, de Ruiter DJ, Berger LR. 2015. Comment on “Early Homo at 2.8 Ma from Ledi-Geraru, Afar, Ethiopia.” Science
348(6241):1326. doi:10.1126/science.aab0591.
Henke W, Tattersall I, editors. 2006. Handbook of paleoanthropology. New York (NY): Springer; [accessed 2015 Aug 15].
http://www.evolbiol.ru/large_files/handbook_paleoanthropology.pdf.
Henry AG. 2011. Microfossils in calculus demonstrate consumption of plants and cooked foods in Neanderthal diets.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108(2):486–491.
Henry AG, Ungar PS, Passey BH, Sponheimer M, Rossou L, Bamford M, Sandberg P, de Ruiter DJ, Berger LR. 2012. The
diet of Australopithecus sediba. Nature 487:90–93.
Huerta-Sánchez E, Jin X, Asan, Bianba Z, Peter BM, Vinckenbosch N, Liang Y, Yi X, He M, Somel M, et al. 2014. Altitude
adaptation in Tibetans caused by introgression of Denisovan-like DNA. Nature 512:194–197.

251

Irish JD, Guatelli-Steinberg D, Legge SS, de Ruiter DJ, Berger LR. 2013. Dental morphology and the phylogenetic “place”
of Australopithecus sediba. Science 340(6129):1233062.
Ji X, Curnoe D, Bao Z, Herries AIR, Fink D, Zhu Y, Hellstrom J, Luo Y, Taçon PSC. 2013. Further ecological excavations at
the Maludong hominin site, Yunnan Province, Southwest China. Chinese Sci Bull. 58(35):4472–4485.
Jungers WL, Larson SG, Harcourt-Smith W, Morwood MJ, Sutikna T, Due AR, Djubiantono T. 2008. Descriptions of the
lower limb skeleton of Homo floresiensis. J Hum Evol. 57(5):538–554.
Kibii JM, Churchill SE, Schmid P, Carlson KJ, Reed MD, de Ruiter DJ, Berger LR. 2011. A partial pelvis of Australopithecus
sediba. Science 333(6048):1407–1411.
Kivell TL, Deane AS, Tocheri MW, Orr CM, Schmid P, Hawks J, Berger LR, Churchill SE. (2015) The hand of Homo naledi.
Nature Communications 6:8431. doi:10.1038/ncomms9431.
Kivell TL, Kibii JM, Churchill SE, Schmid P, Berger LR. 2011. Australopithecus sediba hand demonstrates mosaic evolution
of locomotor and manipulative abilities. Science 333(6048):1411–1417.
Lehmkuhl F, Klinge M, Stauch G. 2011. The extent and timing of late Pleistocene glaciations in the Altai and neighboring
mountain systems. Dev Quatern Sci. 15:967–979.
Le Gros Clark WE. 1959. The antecedents of man. New York (NY): Harper and Row.
Lovejoy CO. 1981. The origins of man. Science 211:341-348.
Lovejoy CO. 1988. Evolution of human walking. Scientific American, November 1988: 118-125.
Lovejoy CO, Latimer B, Suwa G, Asfaw B, White TD. 2009. Combining prehension and propulsion: the foot of Ardipithecus ramidus. Science 326(5949):72e1–72e8.
Marshall M. 2013 Nov 19. Mystery human species emerges from Denisovan genome. New Sci. [accessed 2015 Sept
29].
http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn24603-mystery-human-species-emerges-from-denisovan-genome.html.
Martínez I, Rosa M, Arsuaga JL, Jarabo P, Quam R, Lorenzo C, Gracia A, Carretero JM, Bermúdez de Castro JM. 2004.
Auditory capacities in Middle Pleistocene humans from the Sierra de Atapuerca in Spain. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
101:9976–9981.
McHenry, H. 2015. Australopithecus. Encyclopædia Britannica Online; [accessed 2015 Sept 18]. http://www.britannica.com/topic/Australopithecus.
McHenry HM, Berger LR. 1998. Body proportions of Australopithecus afarensis and A. africanus and the origin of the
genus Homo. J Hum Evol. 35(1):1–22.
Morwood MJ, Brown P, Jatmiko, Sutikna T, Saptomo EW, Westaway KE, Due RA, Roberts RG, Maeda T, Wasisto S,
et al. 2005. Further evidence for small-bodied hominins from the Late Pleistocene of Flores, Indonesia. Nature
437:1012–1017.
Morwood MJ, O’Sullivan P, Aziz F, Raza A. 1998. Fission track age of stone tools and fossils on the east Indonesian island
of Flores. Nature 392:173–176.
Napier JR, Napier PH. 1967. A handbook of the living primates. London: Academic Press.
Pääbo S. 2014. Neanderthal man: in search of lost genomes. New York (NY): Basic Books.
Pickering R, Dirks PHGM, Jinnah Z, de Ruiter DJ, Churchill SE, Herries AIR, Woodhead JD, Hellstrom JC, Berger LR. 2011.
Australopithecus sediba at 1.977 Ma and implications for the origins of the genus Homo. Science 333(6048):1421–1423.
Prüfer K, Racimo F, Patterson N, Jay F, Sankararaman S, Sawyer S, Heinze A, Renaud G, Sudmant PH, De Filippo C, et al.
2013. The complete genome sequence of a Neanderthal from the Altai Mountains. Nature 505:43–49.

252

Randolph-Quinney PS. A new star rising: Biology and mortuary behavior of Homo naledi. South African Journal of Science 1111 (9/10): 2-5.
Reich D, Green RE, Kircher M, Krause J, Patterson N, Durand EY, Viola B, Briggs AW, Stenzel U. 2010. Genetic history of
an archaic hominin group from Denisova Cave in Siberia. Nature 468:1053–1060.
Schmid P, Churchill SE, Nalla S, Weissen E, Carlson KJ, de Ruiter DJ, Berger LR. 2013. Mosaic morphology in the thorax
of Australopithecus sediba. Science 340(6129):1234598.
Smithsonian Institution. 2015. Homo heidelbergensis. What does it mean to be human?; [accessed 2015 Sept 22].
http://humanorigins.si.edu/evidence/human-fossils/species/homo-heidelbergensis.
Smithsonian Institution. 2015. Ardipithecus ramidus. What does it mean to be human?; [accessed 2016 June 14].
http://humanorigins.si.edu/evidence/human-fossils/species/ardipithecus-ramidus.
Stringer C, Andrews P. 2005. The complete world of human evolution. London (England): Thames and Hudson.
Tattersall I. 2009. The fossil trail: How we know what we think we know about human evolution, 2nd ed. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Thacheray JF (2015) Estimating the age of Homo naledi. South African Journal of Science 111(11/12):3–4. doi:10.17159/
sajs.2015/a0124.
Villmoare B, Kimbel WH, Seyoum C, Campisano CJ, DiMaggio A, Rowan J, Braun DR, Arrowsmith JR, Reed KE. 2015. Early
Homo at 2.8 Ma from Ledi-Geraru, Afar, Ethiopia. Science 347(6228):1352–1355. doi:10.1126/science.aaa1343.
Wagner GA. 2006. Chronometric methods in paleoanthropology. In: Henke W, Tattersall I, editors. Handbook of paleoanthropology. New York (NY): Springer. p. 311–337.
Wayman E. 2012. Sahelanthropus tchadensis: Ten years after the discovery. Smithsonian.com; [accessed 2015 Sept 7].
http://www.smithsonianmag.com/science-nature/sahelanthropus-tchadensis-ten-years-after-the-disocvery-2449553/.
Wikipedia contributors. 2015a. Cueva de La Pasiega. Wikipedia; [accessed 2015 Sept 29]. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Cueva_de_La_Pasiega.
Wikipedia contributors. 2015b. Dmanisi. Wikipedia; [accessed 2015 Sept 20]. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dmanisi.
Wikipedia contributors. 2015c. Flores. Wikipedia; [accessed 2015 Sept 22]. https://href=”https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Flores.
Wikipedia contributors. 2015d. Homo floresiensis. Wikipedia; [accessed 2015 Sept 22]. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Homo_floresiensis.
Wikipedia contributors. 2015e. Hoxnian stage. Wikipedia; [accessed 2015 Sept 22]. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hoxnian_Stage.
Wikipedia contributors. 2015f. Malapa fossil site, cradle of humankind. Wikipedia; [accessed 2015 Sept 11].
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malapa_Fossil_Site,_Cradle_of_Humankind.
Wikipedia contributors. 2015g. Paranthropus boisei. Wikipedia; [accessed 2015 Sept 11]. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Paranthropus_boisei.
Wikipedia contributors. 2015h. Robert Broom. Wikipedia; [accessed 2015 Sept 10]. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Robert_Broom.
Wikipedia contributors. 2015i. Surface exposure dating. Wikipedia; [accessed 2015 Aug 12]. http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Surface_exposure_dating

253

Wikipedia contributors. 2015j. Upper Paleolithic. Wikipedia; [accessed 2015 Sept 29]. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Upper_Paleolithic.
Williams SA, Ostrofsky KR, Frater N, Churchill SE, Schmid P, Berger LR. 2013. The vertebral column of Australopithecus
sediba. Science 340(6129):1232996.
Zipfel B, DeSilva JM, Kidd RS, Carlson KJ, Churchill SE, Berger LR. 2011. The foot and ankle of Australopithecus sediba.
Science 333(6048):1417–1420.

254

About the Author
Barbara Welker is Associate Professor of Anthropology at SUNY Geneseo. She received her Ph.D. in 2004
from SUNY Buffalo. She is a biological anthropologist, anatomist, primatologist, and behavioral ecologist.
She teaches courses in biological anthropology, e.g. “Human Evolution”, “Human Ecology”, and “Primates”,
and anatomy, e.g. “Human Osteology”. Her research involves feeding ecology and color vision genetics in
mantled howler monkeys in Costa Rica.

255

About Open SUNY Textbooks
Open SUNY Textbooks is an open access textbook publishing initiative established by State University of
New York libraries and supported by SUNY Innovative Instruction Technology Grants. This pilot initiative
publishes high-quality, cost-effective course resources by engaging faculty as authors and peer-reviewers,
and libraries as publishing service and infrastructure.
The pilot launched in 2012, providing an editorial framework and service to authors, students and faculty,
and establishing a community of practice among libraries.
Participating libraries in the 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 pilots include SUNY Geneseo, College at Brockport,
College of Environmental Science and Forestry, SUNY Fredonia, Upstate Medical University, and University
at Buffalo, with support from other SUNY libraries and SUNY Press.

256

