E D IT E D B Y
S T EP H E N Mc GL IN C H EY, R OSIE WA LTE R S
& C H R IS T IA N SC H E IN P FLU G

﻿

i

International
Relations Theory

﻿

This e-book is provided without charge via free download by E-International
Relations (www.E-IR.info). It is not permitted to be sold in electronic format
under any circumstances.

If you enjoy our free e-books, please consider leaving a small donation to
allow us to continue investing in open access publications:
http://www.e-ir.info/about/donate/

i

“In the plethora of textbooks on IR almost none depart from ‘playing it safe’,
giving forms of instruction in the rudiments of established theories. The great
breakout of this volume is its entire second half of proposing quite radical new
ways of looking at the world. The book is both ‘safe’ and ‘unsafe’ and in both
it is sometimes witty in a way that students will savour – learning what IR is,
and what it could be. A lovely book in which even the doyens of ‘old’ IR are
sometimes bold.”
– Stephen Chan OBE, Professor of World Politics, School of Oriental &
African Studies, University of London.

“This rich volume offers a highly accessible and exceptionally broad-ranging
introduction to the field of International Relations theory. In 20 short chapters
the book provides a highly readable and comprehensive overview of core
theoretical frameworks ranging from ‘mainstream’ realism and liberalism all
the way to queer theory and critical geography. By placing each theory in
context, and by providing a wealth of easily graspable examples, the book
provides ‘one-stop shopping’ for the full range of theoretical frameworks and
concepts – along with welcome attention to non-western perspectives. An
excellent place to start.”
– Mette Eilstrup-Sangiovanni, Senior University Lecturer in International
Relations at Cambridge University.

“This is a superb book. It offers a comprehensive listing that is imaginatively
presented and enormously accessible. Helpfully, too, it takes the form of a
global conversation. IR theory at its sparkling best.”
– Peter Vale, Professor of Humanities, University of Johannesburg; Professor
of Public Policy and Global Affairs, Nanyang Technological University and
Nelson Mandela Professor of Politics Emeritus, Rhodes University.

﻿

ii

International
Relations Theory
ED IT ED BY
S T E PH EN M C GL IN C H EY, R OS IE WA LTE R S
& C H R IS T IAN SC H E INP FLU G

iii

E-International Relations
www.E-IR.info
Bristol, England
2017
ISBN 978-1-910814-19-2 (paperback)
ISBN 978-1-910814-20-8 (e-book)
This book is published under a Creative Commons CC BY-NC 4.0 license. You
are free to:
•
•

Share – copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
Adapt – remix, transform, and build upon the material

Under the following terms:
•

•

Attribution – You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the
license, and indicate if changes were made. You may do so in any
reasonable manner, but not in any way that suggests the licensor
endorses you or your use.
Non-Commercial – You may not use the material for commercial
purposes.

Any of the above conditions can be waived if you get permission. Please
contact info@e-ir.info for any such enquiries, including for licensing and
translation requests.
Other than the terms noted above, there are no restrictions placed on the use
and dissemination of this book for student learning materials/scholarly use.
Production: Michael Tang
Copy-editing: Gill Gairdner
Cover Image: feedough via Depositphotos
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

﻿

iv

E-IR Foundations
Series Editor: Stephen McGlinchey
Editorial Assistants: Michael Bolt, Eloise Cox, Gary Leigh and Farah Saleem.
E-IR Foundations is a series of beginner’s textbooks from E-International
Relations (E-IR) that are designed to introduce complicated issues in a
practical and accessible way. Each book will cover a different area connected
to International Relations. This is the second book in the series, with more to
follow.
You can find the books, and many other learning materials, on E-IR’s Student
Portal: http://www.e-ir.info/students
E-IR is developing our Foundations series as part of our mission to provide
the best source of freely available scholarly materials for students of
International Relations. Each book is available to buy in bookstores in
paperback and, uniquely for textbooks, also freely accessible in web and PDF
formats. So, readers can have each book at their fingertips and on all their
devices without any restrictions or hassle.
Typically, textbook publishing is designed to appeal to professors/lecturers
and, consequently, even the introductory books are intended less as an aid to
the student and more to assist the instructor in the classroom. Our books are
designed to meet the needs of the student, with the focus on moving readers
from no prior knowledge to competency. They are intended to accompany,
rather than replace, other texts, while offering the student a fresh perspective.
About E-International Relations
E-International Relations is the world’s leading open access website for
students and scholars of international politics, reaching over three million
readers per year. E-IR’s daily publications feature expert articles, blogs,
reviews and interviews – as well as student learning resources. The website
is run by a non-profit organisation based in Bristol, UK and staffed by an allvolunteer team of students and scholars.
http://www.e-ir.info

v

Acknowledgements
This book would not have been possible without the assistance of E-IR’s
Student Review Panel. Members of the panel gave up their spare time to read
drafts of each chapter and offer their thoughts on how they could be
improved. The panel comprised Laura Southgate, Matthew Koo, Constance
Dijkstra, Loveleena Sharma, Daniel Golebiewski, Ljupcho Stojkovski, Max
Nurnus, Jess Dam, Caroline Cottet, Jan Tattenberg, Matthew Ribar, Laura
Cartner, Cameran Clayton, Phoebe Gardner, Ana Carolina Sarmento, Naomi
McMillen, Kanica Rakhra, Dean Cooper-Cunningham, Jonathan Webb, Daniel
Rowney, Janja R. Avgustin and Scott Edwards.
The editors would also like to thank all members of the E-International
Relations team, past and present, for their many acts of kindness in feeding
back on ideas and providing a supportive climate for the book’s development.
Finally, and most importantly, the editors would like to thank the authors of
each of the chapters for working so hard on this project and helping us deliver
such an excellent book.

﻿

vi

vii

International Relations Theory

Contents
GETTING STARTED WITH INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS THEORY
Stephen McGlinchey, Rosie Walters & Dana Gold

1

PART ONE – ESTABLISHED THEORIES
1.

REALISM
Sandrina Antunes & Isabel Camisão

15

LIBERALISM
Jeffrey W. Meiser

22

THE ENGLISH SCHOOL
Yannis A. Stivachtis

28

CONSTRUCTIVISM
Sarina Theys

36

MARXISM
Maïa Pal

42

CRITICAL THEORY
Marcos Farias Ferreira

49

POSTSTRUCTURALISM
Aishling Mc Morrow

56

FEMINISM
Sarah Smith

62

POSTCOLONIALISM
Sheila Nair

69

10. TOWARDS A GLOBAL IR?
Amitav Acharya

76

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Contents

viii

PART TWO – EXPANSION PACK
11. GREEN THEORY
Hugh C. Dyer

84

12. GLOBAL JUSTICE
Alix Dietzel

91

13. QUEER THEORY
Markus Thiel

97

14. SECURITISATION THEORY
Clara Eroukhmanoff

104

15. CRITICAL GEOGRAPHY
Irena Leisbet Ceridwen Connon & Archie W. Simpson

110

16. ASIAN PERSPECTIVES
Pichamon Yeophantong

117

17. GLOBAL SOUTH PERSPECTIVES
Lina Benabdallah, Victor Adetula & Carlos Murillo-Zamora

125

18. INDIGENOUS PERSPECTIVES
Jeff Corntassel & Marc Woons

131

19. A CONTEMPORARY PERSPECTIVE ON REALISM
Felix Rösch & Richard Ned Lebow

138

20. THE ‘ISMS’ ARE EVIL. ALL HAIL THE ‘ISMS’!
Alex Prichard

145

REFERENCES

153

NOTE ON INDEXING

166

ix

International Relations Theory

Contributors
Victor Adetula is Head of Research at the Nordic Africa Institute, Uppsala,
Sweden and Professor of International Relations and Development Studies at
the University of Jos, Nigeria.
Amitav Acharya is Distinguished Professor of International Relations and the
UNESCO Chair in Transnational Challenges and Governance at American
University, USA.
Sandrina Antunes is an Assistant Professor at the Department of International
Relations and Public Administration at the Universidade do Minho, Portugal
and a Scientific Fellow at the Center for the Study of Politics, Université Libre
de Bruxelles, Belgium.
Lina Benabdallah is an Assistant Professor of Political Science at Wake
Forest University, USA.
Isabel Camisão is an Assistant Professor of International Relations at the
University of Évora, Portugal.
Irena Leisbet Ceridwen Connon is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in Human
Geography at the University of Dundee, UK.
Jeff Corntassel is an Associate Professor and Director of Indigenous
Governance at the University of Victoria, Canada. He is a citizen of the
Cherokee Nation.
Alix Dietzel is a Lecturer in Global Ethics at the University of Bristol, UK.
Hugh C. Dyer is an Associate Professor of World Politics at the University of
Leeds, UK.
Clara Eroukhmanoff is a Lecturer in International Relations at London South
Bank University, UK.

Contributors

x

Marcos Farias Ferreira is a Lecturer in International Relations at the
University of Lisbon and Instituto Universitário de Lisboa (ISCTE-IUL), Centro
de Estudos Internacionais, Portugal.
Dana Gold is a PhD candidate at the University of Western Ontario in
London, Canada.
Richard Ned Lebow is a Professor of International Political Theory at King’s
College London, UK, Bye-Fellow of Pembroke College, University of
Cambridge, UK and the James O. Freedman Presidential Professor
(Emeritus) of Government at Dartmouth College, USA.
Stephen McGlinchey is Senior Lecturer in International Relations at the
University of the West of England, Bristol and Editor-in-Chief of
E-International Relations.
Aishling Mc Morrow is a Lecturer in International Relations at Queen’s
University Belfast, UK.
Jeffrey W. Meiser is an Assistant Professor in Political Science at the
University of Portland, USA.
Carlos Murillo-Zamora is a Professor at the University of Costa Rica and the
National University of Costa Rica.
Sheila Nair is Professor of Politics and International Affairs at Northern
Arizona University, USA.
Maïa Pal is a Senior Lecturer in International Relations at Oxford Brookes
University, UK.
Alex Prichard is a Senior Lecturer in International Relations at the University
of Exeter, UK.
Felix Rösch is a Senior Lecturer in International Relations at Coventry
University, UK.
Christian Scheinpflug is Lead Editor of E-International Relations and a
columnist at the Santiago Times.

xi

International Relations Theory

Archie W. Simpson is a Teaching Fellow in Politics and International Relations
at the University of Bath, UK.
Sarah Smith is visiting Assistant Professor in Gender Studies at Central
European University, Budapest. She has also held lecturing posts at Monash
University, Swinburne University of Technology and Australian Catholic
University, Melbourne.
Yannis A. Stivachtis is an Associate Professor of Political Science and
Director of the International Studies Program at Virginia Tech, USA.
Sarina Theys is a Contributing Lecturer in the Politics Department of
Newcastle University, UK.
Markus Thiel is an Associate Professor of Politics & International Relations
and Director of the EU/Jean Monnet Center of Excellence at Florida
International University, USA.
Rosie Walters is a PhD candidate at the University of Bristol, UK and an
Editor-at-Large of E-International Relations.
Marc Woons is a Doctoral Fellow with the Fonds Wetenschappelijk
Onderzoek – Vlaanderen (Research Foundation – Flanders) and the
Research in Political Philosophy Leuven (RIPPLE) Institute at the University
of Leuven in Belgium.
Pichamon Yeophantong is a Lecturer in International Relations and
Development at the University of New South Wales (UNSW Sydney),
Australia.

1

International Relations Theory

Getting Started with
International Relations Theory
S T E P HE N M C GL IN C H E Y, R OSIE WALTE R S & D A N A GOLD

Before we go forward you should know that this book is available in e-book,
PDF, web and paperback versions. While we know that many will use the
digital versions of the book, we encourage you to buy a paperback copy as
well if you are able. A growing body of research offers strong evidence that it
is more effective to study from paper sources than from digital. Regardless of
how you engage with the book, we hope it is an enjoyable read.
You can order the paperback version of this book in all good bookstores –
from Amazon right down to your local bookstore – and digital versions are
always freely available on the E-International Relations Students Portal:
http://www.e-ir.info/students/
The Students Portal also includes a range of online resources that
complement and expand upon the material in this book: http://www.e-ir.info/
online-resources/
Hello
This book is designed as a foundational entry point to International Relations
(IR) theory. As a beginner’s guide, it has been structured to condense the
most important information into the smallest space and present that
information in the most accessible manner in order to introduce this area of
study in a fresh way. It is recommended that you first consult this book’s
companion text International Relations (McGlinchey 2017) so that you have a
fuller understanding of the discipline of International Relations before you
delve into IR theory, which is one of its more difficult elements.
Theories of IR allow us to understand and try to make sense of the world
around us through various lenses, each of which represents a different
theoretical perspective. They are ways to simplify a complicated world. In a

Getting Started with International Relations Theory

2

familiar analogy, theories are like maps. Each map is made for a certain
purpose and what is included in the map is based on what is necessary to
direct the map’s user. All other details are left out to avoid confusion and
present a clear picture. Since a picture paints a thousand words, go to
Google and type in ‘Singapore MRT’ and then click on images. There you will
see a map of Singapore’s Mass Rapid Transit network. Enlarge it and stare at
it for a moment. What you see there are lines, stations and some basic
access information. You will not see public toilets, roads, banks, shops (and
the like) charted as these are not essential to travelling on the system.
Theories do a similar thing. Each different theory of IR puts different things on
its map, based on what its theorists believe to be important. Variables to plot
on an IR map would be such things as states, organisations, people,
economics, history, ideas, class, gender and so on. Theorists then use their
chosen variables to construct a simplified view of the world that can be used
to analyse events – and in some cases to have a degree of predictive ability.
In a practical sense, IR theories can be best seen as an analytical toolkit as
they provide multiple methods for students to use to answer questions.
Some students love studying IR theories because they open up interesting
questions about the world we live in, our understanding of human nature and
even what it is possible to know. Some students, however, are eager to get
straight to the real-life (often described as ‘empirical’) case studies of world
events that made them want to study IR in the first place. For these students,
studying IR theory might even seem like a distraction. Yet it is crucial to point
out that embarking on the study of International Relations without an
understanding of theory is like setting off on a journey without a map. You
might arrive at your destination, or somewhere else very interesting, but you
will have no idea where you are or how you got there. And you will have no
response to someone who insists that their route would have been much
better or more direct. Theories give us clarity and direction; they help us to
both defend our own arguments and better understand the arguments of
others.
This book presents a wide range of IR theories, split into two sections. The
first section covers the established theories that are most commonly taught in
undergraduate IR programmes. The second section expands to present
emerging approaches and offer wider perspectives on IR theory. By giving
equal space to the two sections we encourage readers to appreciate the
diversity of IR theory. Each chapter of the book has a simple set of aims in
mind. First, to compress and simplify the basics of each theory. Although
theories are complex, our aim with this book is to provide an accessible
foundation for further study rather than try to survey an entire field of
scholarship. To return to the map analogy from above, our aim with each
chapter is to give you a starting point on your journey – you will have to read

3

International Relations Theory

deeper and wider to fully appreciate each theory’s complexity. Like a good
map, the chapters signpost you to where you can find this literature. Second,
and to help you continue your journey in IR theory, each chapter also
presents a case study of a real-world event or issue. This allows you to see
each theory in action as a tool of analysis and understand the insights that IR
theory can bring. The final chapter of each of the two sections (chapters 10
and 20) breaks this format and instead offers an innovative perspective on IR
theory as a whole – allowing you to take a fresh view of things and reflect
back on the discipline as you reach the mid and end points of the book.
Unlike most other textbooks, there are no boxes, charts, pictures or exercises
included. The philosophy underpinning this book is that these things can be a
distraction. This book, like others in the E-IR Foundations series, is designed
to capture attention with an engaging narrative.
Before we get started, one very important note. You may notice that some of
the theories you are introduced to here are referred to by names that also
occur in other disciplines. They may be related to those theories, or not
related at all. This can sometimes be confusing – for example, realism in IR is
not the same as realism in art. Similarly, you may hear the word ‘liberal’ being
used to describe someone’s personal views, but in IR liberalism means
something quite distinct. To avoid any confusion, this note will serve as a
caveat that in this book we refer to the theories concerned only as they have
been developed within the discipline of International Relations. Where minor
exceptions to this rule are necessary, this will be stated clearly to avoid
reader confusion.
A brief introduction to IR theory
As international relations has grown in complexity, the family of theories that
IR offers has grown in number, which presents a challenge for newcomers to
IR theory. However, this introduction should give you the confidence to get
started. To kick off, this section will briefly introduce IR theory via a three-part
spectrum of traditional theories, middle ground theories and critical theories.
As you read further into the book, you should expect this simple three-part
picture to dissolve somewhat – though it is a useful device to come back to
should you get confused.
Theories are constantly emerging and competing with one another. This can
be disorientating. As soon as you think you have found your feet with one
theoretical approach, others appear. This section will therefore serve as both
a primer and a warning that complexity is to be expected ahead! Even though
this book presents IR theory in a particularly simple and basic way, complexity

Getting Started with International Relations Theory

4

remains. IR theory requires your full attention and you should buckle down
and expect turbulence on your journey.
Thomas Kuhn’s The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) set the stage
for understanding how and why certain theories are legitimised and widely
accepted. He also identified the process that takes place when theories are
no longer relevant and new theories emerge. For example, human beings
were once convinced that the earth was flat. With the advancement of
science and technology, there was a significant discovery and humans
discarded this belief. When such a discovery takes place, a ‘paradigm shift’
results and the former way of thinking is replaced by a new one. Although
changes in IR theory are not as dramatic as the example above, there have
been significant evolutions in the discipline. This is important to keep in mind
when we consider how theories of IR play a role in explaining the world and
how, based upon different time periods and our personal contexts, one
approach may speak to us more than another.
All of the theories previewed in this section (and many more besides) are
covered in their own chapters in the book.
Traditionally there have been two central theories of IR: liberalism and
realism. Although they have come under great challenge from other theories,
they remain central to the discipline. At its height, liberalism was referred to
as a ‘utopian’ theory and to some degree is still recognised as such today. Its
proponents view human beings as innately good and believe peace and
harmony between nations is not only achievable, but desirable. In the late
eighteenth century, Immanuel Kant developed the idea that states that shared
liberal values should have no reason for going to war against one another. In
Kant’s eyes, the more liberal states there were in the world, the more
peaceful it would become, since liberal states are ruled by their citizens and
citizens are rarely disposed to go to war. This is in contrast to the rule of kings
and other non-elected rulers who frequently have selfish desires out of step
with citizens. His ideas have resonated and continue to be developed by
modern liberals, most notably in the democratic peace theory, which posits
that democracies do not go to war with each other.
Further, liberals have faith in the idea that the permanent cessation of war is
an attainable goal. Putting liberal ideas into practice, US President Woodrow
Wilson addressed his ‘Fourteen Points’ to the US Congress in January 1918
during the final year of the First World War. The last of his ‘points’ – ideas for
a rebuilt world beyond the war – was the setting up of a general association
of nations: this became the League of Nations. Dating back to 1920, the
League of Nations was created largely for the purpose of overseeing affairs

5

International Relations Theory

between states and implementing, as well as maintaining, international
peace. However, when the League collapsed due to the outbreak of the
Second World War in 1939, its failure was difficult for liberals to comprehend,
as events seemed to contradict their theories. Therefore, despite the efforts of
figures such as Kant and Wilson, liberalism failed to retain a strong hold and
a new theory emerged to explain the continuing presence of war. That theory
became known as realism.
Realism gained momentum during the Second World War, when it appeared
to offer a convincing account for how and why the most widespread and
deadly war in known history followed a period of supposed peace and
optimism. Although it originated in named form in the twentieth century, many
realists look back much further. Indeed, realists have looked as far back as
the ancient world, where they detected similar patterns of human behaviour
as those evident in our modern world. As its name suggests, advocates of
realism purport that it reflects the ‘reality’ of the world and more effectively
accounts for change in international politics. Thomas Hobbes is often
mentioned in discussions of realism due to his description of the brutality of
life during the English Civil War of 1642–1651. Hobbes described human
beings as living in an orderless ‘state of nature’ that he perceived as a war of
all against all. To remedy this, he proposed a ‘social contract’ between the
ruler and the people of a state to maintain relative order. Today, we take such
ideas for granted as it is usually clear who rules our states. Each leader, or
‘sovereign’ (a monarch or a parliament, for example), sets the rules and
establishes a system of punishments for those who break them. We accept
this in our respective states so that our lives can function with a sense of
security and order. It may not be ideal, but it is better than a state of nature.
As no such contract exists internationally and there is no sovereign in charge
of the world, disorder and fear rules international relations. For realists, we
live in a system of ‘international anarchy’. That is why war seems more
common than peace to realists; indeed, they see it as inevitable.
It is important to understand that, despite what the layout of the chapters in
this book may suggest, there is no single variant of each theory. Scholars
rarely fully agree with each other, even those who share the same theoretical
approach. Each scholar has a particular interpretation of the world, which
includes ideas of peace, war and the role of the state in relation to individuals.
Nevertheless, these perspectives can still be grouped into theory families (or
traditions) and this is how we have organised the material in this book. In your
studies you will need to unpack the various differences but, for now,
understanding the core assumptions of each approach is the best way to get
your bearings. For example, if we think of the simple contrast of optimism and
pessimism we can see a familial relationship in all branches of realism and
liberalism. Liberals share an optimistic view of IR, believing that world order

Getting Started with International Relations Theory

6

can be improved, with peace and progress gradually replacing war. They may
not agree on the details, but this optimistic view generally unites them.
Conversely, realists tend to dismiss optimism as a form of misplaced idealism
and instead they arrive at a more pessimistic view. This is due to their focus
on the centrality of the state and its need for security and survival in an
anarchical system where it can only truly rely on itself. As a result, realists
reach an array of accounts that describe IR as a system where war and
conflict is common and periods of peace are merely times when states are
preparing for future conflict.
The thinking of the English school is often viewed as a middle ground
between liberal and realist theories. Its theory involves the idea of a society of
states existing at the international level. Hedley Bull, one of the core figures of
the English school, agreed with traditional theories that the international
system was anarchic. However, he insisted this does not mean the absence
of norms (expected behaviours), thus claiming a societal aspect to
international politics. In this sense, states form an ‘Anarchical Society’ (Bull
1977) where a type of order does exist, based on shared norms and
behaviours.
Constructivism is another theory commonly viewed as a middle ground, but
this time between mainstream theories and the critical theories that we will
explore later. It also has some familial links with the English school. Unlike
scholars from other perspectives, constructivists highlight the importance of
values and of shared interests between individuals who interact on the global
stage. Alexander Wendt, a prominent constructivist, described the relationship
between agents (individuals) and structures (such as the state) as one in
which structures not only constrain agents but also construct their identities
and interests. His phrase ‘anarchy is what states make of it’ (Wendt 1992)
sums this up well. Another way to explain this, and to explain the core of
constructivism, is that the essence of international relations exists in the
interactions between people. After all, states do not interact; it is agents of
those states, such as politicians and diplomats, who interact. Since those
interacting on the world stage have accepted international anarchy as its
defining principle, it has become part of our reality. However, if anarchy is
what we make of it, then different states can perceive anarchy differently and
the qualities of anarchy can even change over time. International anarchy
could even be replaced by a different system if an influential group of other
individuals (and by proxy the states they represent) accepted the idea. To
understand constructivism is to understand that ideas, or ‘norms’ as they are
often called, have power. As such, constructivists seek to study the process
by which norms are challenged and potentially replaced with new norms.

7

International Relations Theory

Critical approaches refer to a wide spectrum of theories that have been
established in response to mainstream approaches in the field, mainly
liberalism and realism. In a nutshell, critical theorists share one particular trait
– they oppose commonly held assumptions in the field of IR that have been
central since its establishment. They call for new approaches that are better
suited to understand, as well as question, the world we find ourselves in.
Critical theories are valuable because they identify positions that have
typically been ignored or overlooked within IR. They also give a voice to
groups of people who have frequently been marginalised, particularly women
and those from the Global South. Much of this book’s expansion pack deals
with theories set within this larger category.
Marxism is a good place to start with critical theories. This approach is based
upon the ideas of Karl Marx, who lived in the nineteenth century at the height
of the industrial revolution. The term ‘Marxist’ refers to people who have
adopted Marx’s views and believe that industrialised society is divided into
two classes – the business class of ‘owners’ (the bourgeoisie) and the
working class (the proletariat). The proletariat are at the mercy of the
bourgeoisie who control their wages and therefore their standard of living.
Marx hoped for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie by the proletariat and an
eventual end to the class society. Critical theorists who take a Marxist angle
often argue that the organisation of international politics around the state has
led to ordinary people around the globe becoming divided and alienated,
instead of recognising what they all have in common – potentially – as a
global proletariat. For this to change, the legitimacy of the state must be
questioned and ultimately dissolved. In that sense, emancipation from the
state in some form is often part of the wider critical agenda.
Postcolonialism differs from Marxism by focusing on the inequality between
nations or regions, as opposed to classes. The effects of colonialism are still
felt in many regions of the world today as local populations continue to deal
with the challenges created and left behind by ex-colonial powers such as the
United Kingdom and France. Postcolonialism’s origins can be traced to the
Cold War period when much activity in international relations centred around
decolonisation and the wish to undo the legacies of European imperialism.
This approach acknowledges that the study of IR has historically centred on
Western perspectives and experiences, excluding the voices of people from
other regions of the world. Crucially, postcolonial scholars have argued that
analyses based on Western theoretical perspectives, or that do not take into
account the perspectives of those in former colonies, may lead international
institutions and world leaders to take actions that unfairly favour the West.
They have created a deeper understanding of the way in which the operations
of the global economy, the decision-making processes of international
institutions and the actions of the great powers might actually constitute new

Getting Started with International Relations Theory

8

forms of colonialism. Edward Said’s (1978) Orientalism described how
societies in the Middle East and Asia were regularly misrepresented in
Western literary and scholarly writing in a way that positioned them as inferior
to the West. Postcolonial scholars are, therefore, important contributors to the
field as they widen the focus of enquiry beyond IR’s traditionally ‘Western’
mindset.
Another theory that exposes the inequality inherent in international relations is
feminism. Feminism entered the field in the 1980s as part of the emerging
critical movement. It focused on explaining why so few women seemed to be
in positions of power and examining the implications of this on how global
politics was structured. You only need look at a visual of any meeting of world
leaders to see how it appears to be a man’s world. Recognising this
introduces a ‘gendered’ reading of IR, where we place an issue such as
gender as the prime object on our map. If it is a man’s world, what does that
mean? How have certain characteristics traditionally viewed as masculine –
such as aggression, emotional detachment and strength – come to be seen
as essential qualities of a world leader? Which qualities and characteristics
does this exclude (it might be empathy and cooperation) and what kind of
actions does this result in? By recognising that gender – the roles that society
constructs for men and women – permeates everything, feminism challenges
those roles in a way that benefits everyone. It is not simply a question of
counting male and female bodies. Rather, feminists ask how gendered power
structures make it difficult for women or men who display supposedly
feminine traits to reach the highest levels of power. Given that those positions
involve making life and death decisions, it matters to all of us whether the
person who gets there is known for their aggression or their compassion. With
all this talk of socially constructed gender roles, you might be beginning to
see some overlaps – with constructivism, for example. We are doing our best
to present each approach separately so that you have a clearer starting point,
but it is wise to caution you that IR theory is a dense and complex web and
not always clearly defined. Keep this in mind as you read on and as your
studies develop.
Perhaps the most controversial of the critical theories is poststructuralism.
This is an approach that questions the very beliefs we have all come to know
and feel as ‘real’. Poststructuralism questions the dominant narratives that
have been widely accepted by mainstream theories. For instance, liberals and
realists both accept the idea of the state and for the most part take it for
granted. Such assumptions are foundational ‘truths’ on which those traditional
theories rest – becoming ‘structures’ that they build their account of reality
around. So, although these two theoretical perspectives may differ in some
respects with regard to their overall worldviews, they share a general
understanding of the world. Neither theory seeks to challenge the existence

9

International Relations Theory

of the state; they simply count it as part of their reality. Poststructuralism
seeks to question these commonly held assumptions of reality, not just the
state but also more widely the nature of power. Michel Foucault’s contribution
to poststructuralism was his identification of the knowledge–power nexus.
What this means is that people in a position of power, including politicians,
journalists, even scholars, have the ability to shape our common understandings of a given issue. In turn, these understandings of the issue can become
so ingrained that they appear to be common sense and it becomes difficult to
think outside of them, leaving room for only certain kinds of action. Power is
knowledge and knowledge is power. By analysing the way in which a certain
understanding of an issue becomes dominant, poststructuralists aim to
expose the hidden assumptions it is based upon. They also aim to open up
other possible ways of being, thinking and doing in international politics.
As this brief introduction to IR theory has shown, each theory of IR possesses
a legitimate, yet different, view of the world. Indeed, beyond the theories
explored above are many other theories and perspectives that you will find in
the expansion pack section of this book. It is also important to note that the
theories covered in this book are not exhaustive and there are more that
could be examined. However, the book’s editors believe that we have
provided a good starting point for achieving an overall understanding of the
field and where the most common, and most novel, approaches and
perspectives are situated. It is not necessary – and probably not wise so early
in your studies – to adopt one theory as your own. It is more important to
understand the various theories as tools of analysis, or analytical lenses, that
you can apply in your studies. Simply, they offer a means by which to attempt
to understand a complex world.
Thinking like a scholar
Since studying IR theory requires real focus, you should start to consider how
to make the space and time to concentrate as you read this book. You will
need to put your devices on silent, close your internet browsers and find a
quiet space to work. Take ten-minute mini-breaks every hour or so to do other
things and make sure to eat a decent meal midway through your study
session to give you a longer break. Finally, try to get a good night’s sleep
before and after you study. Your brain does not absorb or retain information
very well when you are sleep deprived or hungry. There will be times in the
year when panic sets in as deadlines approach, but if you have already
developed a good reading strategy you will find you are in good shape for the
task at hand. So, before we delve further into IR theory, we will try to give you
some tips to help you think like a scholar.

Getting Started with International Relations Theory

10

Reading for scholarly purposes is not the same as reading for pleasure. You
need to adopt a reading strategy. Everyone has their own way of doing this,
but the basic tip is this: take notes as you read. If you find that you don’t have
many notes or your mind goes a little blank, then you might be reading too
quickly or not paying enough attention. This is most likely if you are reading
digitally on a computer or tablet, as it is very easy for eyes to wander or for
you to drift onto a social media site. If this happens, don’t worry: just go back
and start again. Often, reading something a second time is when it clicks.
Best practice is to make rough notes as you read through each chapter.
When you get to the end of a chapter, compile your rough notes into a list of
‘key points’ that you would like to remember. This will be useful when you
come to revise or recap an issue because you won’t necessarily have to read
the entire chapter again. Your notes should trigger your memory and remind
you of the key information. Some textbooks do this for you and provide a list
of key points at the end of each chapter. This book, being a foundational book
for beginners, does not do so: we want readers to develop the important skills
of reading and note-taking for themselves and not take short cuts.
Although there is no substitute for reading, if you find a certain theory is not
clicking, go to the online resources section of the E-IR Student Portal (linked
below) and you will find carefully selected audio and visual resources on each
theory to give yourself a different perspective: http://www.e-ir.info/onlineresources-international-relations-theory/
By making notes on everything you encounter you will form a strategy that will
allow you to retain the most important information and compress it into a
smaller set of notes integral to revision for examinations or preparation for
discussions and assignments. It’s best to use digital means (laptop/tablet) so
you can create backups and not risk losing valuable handwritten paper notes.
If you do use paper notes, take pictures of them on your phone so you have a
backup just in case.
You should also note down the citation information for each set of notes at the
top of the page so that you can identify the source you took the notes from if
you need to reference it later in any written work. As theories are most often
developed in written form it is important to understand how to properly
reference the work of theorists as you encounter them. Referencing sources
is very important in academia. It is the way scholars and students attribute the
work of others, whether they use their exact words or not. For that reason it is
usual to see numerous references in the expert literature you will progress to
after completing this book. It is an important element of scholarly writing, and
one that you should master for your own studies. In this book we have tried to

11

International Relations Theory

summarise issues from an expert perspective so as to give you an
uninterrupted narrative. When we need to point you to more specialist
literature, for example to invite you to read a little deeper, we do so by
inserting in-text citations that look like this: (Hutchings 2001). These point you
to a corresponding entry in the references section towards the back of the
book where you can find the full reference and follow it up if you want to.
Typically, these are books, journal articles or websites. In-text citations
always include the author’s surname and the year of publication. As the
reference list is organised alphabetically by surname, you can quickly locate
the full reference. Sometimes you will also find page numbers inside the
brackets. For example, (Hutchings 2001, 11–13). Page numbers are added
when referring to specific arguments, or a quotation, from a source. This
referencing system is known as the ‘Author-Date’ or ‘Harvard’ system. It is the
most common, but not the only, referencing system used in IR.
When the time comes for you to make your own arguments and write your
own assignments, think of using sources as if you were a lawyer preparing a
court case. Your task there would be to convince a jury that your argument is
defensible, beyond reasonable doubt. You would have to present clear, wellorganised evidence based on facts and expertise. If you presented evidence
that was just someone’s uninformed opinion, the jury would not find it
convincing and you would lose the case. Similarly, in academic writing you
have to make sure that the sources you use are reputable. You can usually
find this out by looking up the author and the publisher. If the author is not an
expert (academic, practitioner, etc.) and/or the publisher is unknown/obscure,
then the source is likely unreliable. It may have interesting information, but it
is not reputable by scholarly standards.
It should be safe to assume that you know what a book is (since you are
reading one!) and that you understand what the internet is. However, one
type of source that you will find cited in this book and may not have
encountered before is the journal article. Journal articles are typically only
accessible from your university library as they are expensive and require a
subscription. They are papers prepared by academics, for academics. As
such, they represent the latest thinking and may contain cutting-edge
insights. But, they are often complex and dense due to their audience being
fellow experts, which makes them hard for a beginner to read. In addition,
journal articles are peer reviewed. This means they have gone through a
process of assessment by other experts before being published. During that
process many changes and improvements may be made – and articles often
fail to make it through peer review and are rejected. So, journal articles are
something of a gold standard in scholarly writing.

Getting Started with International Relations Theory

12

Most journal articles are now available on the internet, which leads to
confusion as students can find it difficult to distinguish a journal article from
an online magazine or newspaper article. Works of journalism or opinion are
not peer reviewed and conform to different professional standards. If you
follow the tip above and ‘search’ the publisher and author, you should be able
to discern which is which. Another helpful tip is length. A journal article will
typically be 10–20 pages long (7,000–11,000 words); articles of journalism or
commentary will usually be shorter.
A final note on the subject of sources: the internet is something of a Wild
West. There is great information there, but also a lot of rubbish. It can often
be hard to tell them apart. But, again, if you follow the golden rule of looking
up the author and looking up the publisher (using the internet), you can
usually find your way. However, even some of the world’s biggest websites
can be unreliable. Wikipedia, for example, is a great resource, but it often has
incorrect information because it is authored, and usually edited, by ordinary
people who are typically enthusiasts rather than experts. In addition, its pages
are always changing (because of user edits), making it hard to rely on as a
source. So the rule of thumb with the internet is to try to corroborate anything
you find on at least two good websites/from at least two reputable authors.
Then you can use the internet with confidence and enjoy its benefits while
avoiding its pitfalls. When preparing assignments, however, you should only
use the internet to supplement the more robust information you will find in
academic journals and books.
Another important part of learning to think like a scholar is to understand the
language that scholars use. Each discipline has its own unique language.
This comprises a range of specific terms that have been developed by
scholars to describe certain things. As a result, a lot of the time you spend
learning a discipline is spent learning its jargon so that you can access and
understand the literature. Instead of packing this book with jargon we have
tried as far as possible to explain things in ordinary language while easing
you into the more peculiar terminology found within IR theory. This approach
should keep you engaged while giving you the confidence to read the more
advanced literature that you will soon encounter.
Understanding key terms even applies to something as basic as how to
express the term ‘International Relations’. The academic convention is to
capitalise it (International Relations, abbreviated as ‘IR’) when referring to the
academic discipline – that is, the subject taught in university campuses all
over the world. IR does not describe events; rather, it is a scholarly discipline
that seeks to understand events – with IR theory being a major tool in that
endeavour. On the other hand, ‘international relations’ – not capitalised – is

13

International Relations Theory

generally used by both scholars and non-scholars to describe relations
between states, organisations and individuals at the global level. This term is
interchangeable with terms such as ‘global politics’, ‘world politics’ or
‘international politics’. They all mean pretty much the same thing. We have
maintained this capitalisation convention in the book.
We should also mention that as this book is published in the UK it is
presented in British English. This means words like ‘globalisation’ and
‘organisation’ are spelt with an ‘s’ rather than a ‘z’.
Bottom line
All theories are imperfect. If one was accurate at accounting for behaviour
and actions in IR, there would be no need for any others. The sheer volume
of different IR theories should be a warning to you that International Relations
still is a young discipline that is undergoing significant formative development.
Within that development is a sometimes fierce set of arguments over the
nature of the state, the individual, international organisations, identity and
even reality itself. The important point to remember is that theories are tools
of analysis. Often they are pertinent and insightful when applied correctly to
understand an event. But just as often they are imperfect and you will find
yourself reaching for a more applicable theoretical tool. This book will equip
you with a foundational starting point for developing your own IR theory
toolkit, so that no matter what your task, you are armed with all that you need
to get started in your analysis and well oriented to access – and understand –
the key texts and more advanced textbooks within the field. Good luck!

14

Part One

ESTABLISHED
THEORIES

15

International Relations Theory

1
Realism
S A ND R IN A AN T U N ES & IS AB EL C A MIS Ã O

In the discipline of International Relations (IR), realism is a school of thought
that emphasises the competitive and conflictual side of international relations.
Realism’s roots are often said to be found in some of humankind’s earliest
historical writings, particularly Thucydides’ history of the Peloponnesian War,
which raged between 431 and 404 BCE. Thucydides, writing over two
thousand years ago, was not a ‘realist’ because IR theory did not exist in
named form until the twentieth century. However, when looking back from a
contemporary vantage point, theorists detected many similarities in the
thought patterns and behaviours of the ancient world and the modern world.
They then drew on his writings, and that of others, to lend weight to the idea
that there was a timeless theory spanning all recorded human history. That
theory was named ‘realism’.
The basics of realism
The first assumption of realism is that the nation-state (usually abbreviated to
‘state’) is the principle actor in international relations. Other bodies exist, such
as individuals and organisations, but their power is limited. Second, the state
is a unitary actor. National interests, especially in times of war, lead the state
to speak and act with one voice. Third, decision-makers are rational actors in
the sense that rational decision-making leads to the pursuit of the national
interest. Here, taking actions that would make your state weak or vulnerable
would not be rational. Realism suggests that all leaders, no matter what their
political persuasion, recognise this as they attempt to manage their state’s
affairs in order to survive in a competitive environment. Finally, states live in a
context of anarchy – that is, in the absence of anyone being in charge
internationally. The often-used analogy of there being ‘no one to call’ in an
international emergency helps to underline this point. Within our own states
we typically have police forces, militaries, courts and so on. In an emergency,
there is an expectation that these institutions will ‘do something’ in response.

Realism

16

Internationally, there is no clear expectation of anyone or anything ‘doing
something’ as there is no established hierarchy. Therefore, states can ultimately only rely on themselves.
As realism frequently draws on examples from the past, there is a great deal
of emphasis on the idea that humans are essentially held hostage to
repetitive patterns of behaviour determined by their nature. Central to that
assumption is the view that human beings are egoistic and desire power.
Realists believe that our selfishness, our appetite for power and our inability
to trust others leads to predictable outcomes. Perhaps this is why war has
been so common throughout recorded history. Since individuals are
organised into states, human nature impacts on state behaviour. In that
respect, Niccolò Machiavelli focused on how the basic human characteristics
influence the security of the state. And in his time, leaders were usually male,
which also influences the realist account of politics. In The Prince (1532),
Machiavelli stressed that a leader’s primary concern is to promote national
security. In order to successfully perform this task, the leader needs to be
alert and cope effectively with internal as well as external threats to his rule;
he needs to be a lion and a fox. Power (the Lion) and deception (the Fox) are
crucial tools for the conduct of foreign policy. In Machiavelli’s view, rulers
obey the ‘ethics of responsibility’ rather than the conventional religious
morality that guides the average citizen – that is, they should be good when
they can, but they must also be willing to use violence when necessary to
guarantee the survival of the state.
In the aftermath of the Second World War, Hans Morgenthau (1948) sought to
develop a comprehensive international theory as he believed that politics, like
society in general, is governed by laws that have roots in human nature. His
concern was to clarify the relationship between interests and morality in
international politics, and his work drew heavily on the insights of historical
figures such as Thucydides and Machiavelli. In contrast to more optimistically
minded idealists who expected international tensions to be resolved through
open negotiations marked by goodwill, Morgenthau set out an approach that
emphasised power over morality. Indeed, morality was portrayed as something that should be avoided in policymaking. In Morgenthau’s account, every
political action is directed towards keeping, increasing or demonstrating
power. The thinking is that policies based on morality or idealism can lead to
weakness – and possibly the destruction or domination of a state by a
competitor. In this sense pursuing the national interest is ‘amoral’ – meaning
that it is not subject to calculations of morality.
In Theory of International Politics (1979), Kenneth Waltz modernised IR
theory by moving realism away from its unprovable (albeit persuasive)

17

International Relations Theory

assumptions about human nature. His theoretical contribution was termed
‘neorealism’ or ‘structural realism’ because he emphasised the notion of
‘structure’ in his explanation. Rather than a state’s decisions and actions
being based on human nature, they are arrived at via a simple formula. First,
all states are constrained by existing in an international anarchic system (this
is the structure). Second, any course of action they pursue is based on their
relative power when measured against other states. So, Waltz offered a
version of realism that recommended that theorists examine the characteristics of the international system for answers rather than delve into flaws in
human nature. In doing so, he sparked a new era in IR theory that attempted
to use social scientific methods rather than political theory (or philosophical)
methods. The difference is that Waltz’s variables (international anarchy, how
much power a state has, etc.) can be empirically/physically measured. Ideas
like human nature are assumptions based on certain philosophical views that
cannot be measured in the same way.
Realists believe that their theory most closely describes the image of world
politics held by practitioners of statecraft. For this reason, realism, perhaps
more than any other IR theory, is often utilised in the world of policymaking –
echoing Machiavelli’s desire to write a manual to guide leaders. However,
realism’s critics argue that realists can help perpetuate the violent and
confrontational world that they describe. By assuming the uncooperative and
egoistic nature of humankind and the absence of hierarchy in the state
system, realists encourage leaders to act in ways based on suspicion, power
and force. Realism can thus be seen as a self-fulfilling prophecy. More
directly, realism is often criticised as excessively pessimistic, since it sees the
confrontational nature of the international system as inevitable. However,
according to realists, leaders are faced with endless constraints and few
opportunities for cooperation. Thus, they can do little to escape the reality of
power politics. For a realist, facing the reality of one’s predicament is not
pessimism – it is prudence. The realist account of international relations
stresses that the possibility of peaceful change, or in fact any type of change,
is limited. For a leader to rely on such an idealistic outcome would be folly.
Perhaps because it is designed to explain repetition and a timeless pattern of
behaviour, realism was not able to predict or explain a major recent
transformation of the international system: the end of the Cold War between
the United States of America (US) and the Soviet Union in 1991. When the
Cold War ended, international politics underwent rapid change that pointed to
a new era of limited competition between states and abundant opportunities
for cooperation. This transformation prompted the emergence of an optimistic
vision of world politics that discarded realism as ‘old thinking’. Realists are
also accused of focusing too much on the state as a solid unit, ultimately
overlooking other actors and forces within the state and also ignoring

Realism

18

international issues not directly connected to the survival of the state. For
example, the Cold War ended because ordinary citizens in Soviet-controlled
nations in Eastern Europe decided to rebel against existing power structures.
This rebellion swept from one country to another within the Soviet Union’s
vast empire, resulting in its gradual collapse between 1989 and 1991.
Realism’s toolbox did not and does not account for such events: the actions
of ordinary citizens (or international organisations, for that matter) have no
major part in its calculations. This is due to the state-centred nature of the
thinking that realism is built upon. It views states as solid pool balls bouncing
around a table – never stopping to look inside each pool ball to see what it
comprises and why it moves the way it does. Realists recognise the
importance of these criticisms, but tend to see events such as the collapse of
the Soviet Union as exceptions to the normal pattern of things.
Many critics of realism focus on one of its central strategies in the
management of world affairs – an idea called ‘the balance of power’. This
describes a situation in which states are continuously making choices to
increase their own capabilities while undermining the capabilities of others.
This generates a ‘balance’ of sorts as (theoretically) no state is permitted to
get too powerful within the international system. If a state attempts to push its
luck and grow too much, like Nazi Germany in the 1930s, it will trigger a war
because other states will form an alliance to try to defeat it – that is, restore a
balance. This balance of power system is one of the reasons why international relations is anarchic. No single state has been able to become a
global power and unite the world under its direct rule. Hence, realism talks
frequently about the importance of flexible alliances as a way of ensuring
survival. These alliances are determined less by political or cultural
similarities among states and more by the need to find fair-weather friends, or
‘enemies of my enemy’. This may help to explain why the US and the Soviet
Union were allied during the Second World War (1939–1945): they both saw
a similar threat from a rising Germany and sought to balance it. Yet within a
couple of years of the war ending, the nations had become bitter enemies and
the balance of power started to shift again as new alliances were formed
during what became known as the Cold War (1947–1991). While realists
describe the balance of power as a prudent strategy to manage an insecure
world, critics see it as a way of legitimising war and aggression.
Despite these criticisms, realism remains central within the field of IR theory,
with most other theories concerned (at least in part) with critiquing it. For that
reason, it would be inappropriate to write a textbook on IR theory without
covering realism in the first chapter. In addition, realism continues to offer
many important insights about the world of policymaking due to its history of
offering tools of statecraft to policymakers.

19

International Relations Theory

Realism and the Islamic State Group
The Islamic State group (also known as IS, Daesh, ISIS or ISIL) is a militant
group that follows a fundamentalist doctrine of Sunni Islam. In June 2014, the
group published a document where it claimed to have traced the lineage of its
leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, back to the prophet Muhammad. The group
then appointed al-Baghdadi its ‘caliph’. As caliph, al-Baghdadi demanded the
allegiance of devout Muslims worldwide and the group and its supporters set
about conducting a range of extreme and barbaric acts. Many of these were
targeted at cities in Western nations such as Melbourne, Manchester and
Paris – which has led to the issue becoming a global one. Ultimately, the
intent is to create an Islamic State (or Caliphate) in geopolitical, cultural and
political terms and to deter (via the use of terrorism and extreme actions)
Western or regional powers from interfering with this process. Of course, this
means that existing states’ territory is under threat. Although the Islamic State
group considers itself a state, due to its actions it has been defined as a
terrorist organisation by virtually all of the world’s states and international
organisations. Islamic religious leaders have also condemned the group’s
ideology and actions.
Despite it not being an officially recognised state, by taking and holding
territory in Iraq and Syria, the Islamic State group clearly possessed aspects
of statehood. The major part of efforts to fight the Islamic State group has
comprised airstrikes against its positions, combined with other military
strategies such as using allied local forces to retake territory (most notably in
Iraq). This suggests that war is considered the most effective method of
counterbalancing the increasing power of terrorism in the Middle East and
neutralising the threat that the Islamic State group poses not only to Western
states but also to states in the region. So, while transnational terrorism, such
as that practised by the Islamic State group, is a relatively new threat in
international relations, states have relied on old strategies consistent with
realism to deal with it.
States ultimately count on self-help for guaranteeing their own security. Within
this context, realists have two main strategies for managing insecurity: the
balance of power and deterrence. The balance of power relies on strategic,
flexible alliances, while deterrence relies on the threat (or the use) of
significant force. Both are in evidence in this case. First, the loose coalition of
states that attacked the Islamic State group – states such as the US, Russia
and France – relied on various fair-weather alliances with regional powers
such as Saudi Arabia, Turkey and Iran. At the same time, they downplayed
the role of international organisations because agreeing action in places such
as the United Nations is difficult due to state rivalry. Second, deterring an

Realism

20

enemy with overwhelming, superior force (or the threat of it) was perceived as
the quickest method to regain control over the territories under Islamic State’s
rule. The obvious disproportionality of Islamic State’s military forces when
compared with the military forces of the US, France or Russia seems to
confirm the rationality of the decision – which again harks back to realism’s
emphasis on the importance of concepts like deterrence, but also on viewing
states as rational actors. However, the rational actor approach presupposes
that the enemy – even if a terrorist group – is also a rational actor who would
choose a course of action in which the benefits outweigh the risks.
Via this point, we can see that while the actions of a terrorist group might
appear irrational, they can be interpreted otherwise. From a realist
perspective, the Islamic State group, by spreading terror, is using the limited
means at its disposal to counterbalance Western influence in Iraq and Syria.
The substantial collateral damage of a full military offensive is evidently not a
concern for the group’s commanders for two main reasons, both of which may
serve to enhance their power. First, it would contribute to fuelling antiWestern sentiment throughout the Middle East as local populations become
the target of foreign aggression. Second, the feeling of injustice prompted by
these attacks creates an opportunity for the spontaneous recruitment of
fighters who would be willing to die to validate the group’s aims – this is
equally true for those within the immediate region and those internationally
who fall prey to Islamic State propaganda on the internet.
It is for reasons such as those unpacked in this case, in regions that are as
complex as the Middle East, that realists recommend extreme caution
regarding when and where a state uses its military power. It is easy when
viewing realism to see it as a warmongering theory. For example, on reading
the first half of the paragraph above you might feel that realism would support
an attack on the Islamic State group. But when you read the second half of
the paragraph you will find that the same theory recommends extreme
caution.
The key point in understanding realism is that it is a theory that argues that
unsavoury actions like war are necessary tools of statecraft in an imperfect
world and leaders must use them when it is in the national interest. This is
wholly rational in a world where the survival of the state is pre-eminent. After
all, if one’s state ceases to exist due to attack or internal collapse, then all
other political objectives cease to have much practical relevance. That being
said, a leader must be extremely cautious when deciding where and when to
use military power. It is worth noting that the US invasion of Iraq in 2003,
undertaken as part of the Global War on Terror, was opposed by most leading
realists as a misuse of power that would not serve US national interests. This

21

International Relations Theory

was due to the possibility that the disproportionate use of US military force
would cause blowback and resentment in the region. Indeed, in this case,
realism yielded strong results as a tool of analysis, as the rise of the Islamic
State group in the years after the Iraq invasion demonstrated.
Conclusion
Realism is a theory that claims to explain the reality of international politics. It
emphasises the constraints on politics that result from humankind’s egoistic
nature and the absence of a central authority above the state. For realists, the
highest goal is the survival of the state, which explains why states’ actions are
judged according to the ethics of responsibility rather than by moral principles. The dominance of realism has generated a significant strand of literature
criticising its main tenets. However, despite the value of the criticisms, which
will be explored in the rest of this book, realism continues to provide valuable
insights and remains an important analytical tool for every student of International Relations.

Liberalism

22

2
Liberalism
J E F F R E Y W. ME ISE R

Liberalism is a defining feature of modern democracy, illustrated by the
prevalence of the term ‘liberal democracy’ as a way to describe countries with
free and fair elections, rule of law and protected civil liberties. However,
liberalism – when discussed within the realm of IR theory – has evolved into a
distinct entity of its own. Liberalism contains a variety of concepts and arguments about how institutions, behaviours and economic connections contain
and mitigate the violent power of states. When compared to realism, it adds
more factors into our field of view – especially a consideration of citizens and
international organisations. Most notably, liberalism has been the traditional
foil of realism in IR theory as it offers a more optimistic world view, grounded
in a different reading of history to that found in realist scholarship.
The basics of liberalism
Liberalism is based on the moral argument that ensuring the right of an
individual person to life, liberty and property is the highest goal of government. Consequently, liberals emphasise the wellbeing of the individual as the
fundamental building block of a just political system. A political system
characterised by unchecked power, such as a monarchy or a dictatorship,
cannot protect the life and liberty of its citizens. Therefore, the main concern
of liberalism is to construct institutions that protect individual freedom by
limiting and checking political power. While these are issues of domestic
politics, the realm of IR is also important to liberals because a state’s
activities abroad can have a strong influence on liberty at home. Liberals are
particularly troubled by militaristic foreign policies. The primary concern is that
war requires states to build up military power. This power can be used for
fighting foreign states, but it can also be used to oppress its own citizens. For
this reason, political systems rooted in liberalism often limit military power by
such means as ensuring civilian control over the military.

23

International Relations Theory

Wars of territorial expansion, or imperialism – when states seek to build
empires by taking territory overseas – are especially disturbing for liberals.
Not only do expansionist wars strengthen the state at the expense of the
people, these wars also require long-term commitments to the military
occupation and political control of foreign territory and peoples. Occupation
and control require large bureaucracies that have an interest in maintaining
or expanding the occupation of foreign territory. For liberals, therefore, the
core problem is how to develop a political system that can allow states to
protect themselves from foreign threats without subverting the individual
liberty of its citizenry. The primary institutional check on power in liberal
states is free and fair elections via which the people can remove their rulers
from power, providing a fundamental check on the behaviour of the
government. A second important limitation on political power is the division of
political power among different branches and levels of government – such as
a parliament/congress, an executive and a legal system. This allows for
checks and balances in the use of power.
Democratic peace theory is perhaps the strongest contribution liberalism
makes to IR theory. It asserts that democratic states are highly unlikely to go
to war with one another. There is a two-part explanation for this phenomenon.
First, democratic states are characterised by internal restraints on power, as
described above. Second, democracies tend to see each other as legitimate
and unthreatening and therefore have a higher capacity for cooperation with
each other than they do with non-democracies. Statistical analysis and
historical case studies provide strong support for democratic peace theory,
but several issues continue to be debated. First, democracy is a relatively
recent development in human history. This means there are few cases of
democracies having the opportunity to fight one another. Second, we cannot
be sure whether it is truly a ‘democratic’ peace or whether some other factors
correlated with democracy are the source of peace – such as power,
alliances, culture, economics and so on. A third point is that while
democracies are unlikely to go to war with one another, some scholarship
suggests that they are likely to be aggressive toward non-democracies –
such as when the United States went to war with Iraq in 2003. Despite the
debate, the possibility of a democratic peace gradually replacing a world of
constant war – as described by realists – is an enduring and important facet
of liberalism.
We currently live in an international system structured by the liberal world
order built after the Second World War (1939–1945). The international
institutions, organisations and norms (expected behaviours) of this world
order are built on the same foundations as domestic liberal institutions and
norms; the desire to restrain the violent power of states. Yet, power is more
diluted and dispersed internationally than it is within states. For example,

Liberalism

24

under international law, wars of aggression are prohibited. There is no
international police force to enforce this law, but an aggressor knows that
when breaking this law it risks considerable international backlash. For
example, states – either individually or as part of a collective body like the
United Nations – can impose economic sanctions or intervene militarily
against the offending state. Furthermore, an aggressive state also risks
missing out on the benefits of peace, such as the gains from international
trade, foreign aid and diplomatic recognition.
The fullest account of the liberal world order is found in the work of Daniel
Deudney and G. John Ikenberry (1999), who describe three interlocking
factors:
First, international law and agreements are accompanied by international
organisations to create an international system that goes significantly beyond
one of just states. The archetypal example of such an organisation is the
United Nations, which pools resources for common goals (such as
ameliorating climate change), provides for near constant diplomacy between
enemies and friends alike and gives all member states a voice in the
international community.
Second, the spread of free trade and capitalism through the efforts of
powerful liberal states and international organisations like the World Trade
Organization, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank creates an
open, market-based, international economic system. This situation is mutually
beneficial as a high level of trade between states decreases conflict and
makes war less likely, since war would disrupt or cancel the benefits (profits)
of trade. States with extensive trade ties are therefore strongly incentivised to
maintain peaceful relations. By this calculation, war is not profitable, but
detrimental to the state.
The third element of the liberal international order is international norms.
Liberal norms favour international cooperation, human rights, democracy and
rule of law. When a state takes actions contrary to these norms, they are
subject to various types of costs. However, international norms are often
contested because of the wide variation in values around the globe.
Nevertheless, there are costs for violating liberal norms. The costs can be
direct and immediate. For example, the European Union placed an arms sale
embargo on China following its violent suppression of pro-democracy
protesters in 1989. The embargo continues to this day. The costs can also be
less direct, but equally as significant. For example, favourable views of the
United States decreased significantly around the world following the 2003
invasion of Iraq because the invasion was undertaken unilaterally (outside

25

International Relations Theory

established United Nations rules) in a move that was widely deemed
illegitimate.
Most liberal scholarship today focuses on how international organisations
foster cooperation by helping states overcome the incentive to escape from
international agreements. This type of scholarship is commonly referred to as
‘neoliberal institutionalism’ – often shortened to just ‘neoliberalism’. This often
causes confusion as neoliberalism is also a term used outside IR theory to
describe a widespread economic ideology of deregulation, privatisation, low
taxes, austerity (public spending cuts) and free trade. The essence of
neoliberalism, when applied within IR, is that states can benefit significantly
from cooperation if they trust one another to live up to their agreements. In
situations where a state can gain from cheating and escape punishment,
defection is likely. However, when a third party (such as an impartial
international organisation) is able to monitor the behaviour of signatories to
an agreement and provide information to both sides, the incentive to defect
decreases and both sides can commit to cooperate. In these cases, all
signatories to the agreement can benefit from absolute gains. Absolute gains
refer to a general increase in welfare for all parties concerned – everyone
benefits to some degree, though not necessarily equally. Liberal theorists
argue that states care more about absolute gains than relative gains. Relative
gains, which relate closely to realist accounts, describe a situation where a
state measures its increase in welfare relative to other states and may shy
away from any agreements that make a competitor stronger. By focusing on
the more optimistic viewpoint of absolute gains and providing evidence of its
existence via international organisations, liberals see a world where states
will likely cooperate in any agreement where any increase in prosperity is
probable.
Liberal theory and American imperialism
One of the more interesting illustrations of liberalism comes from the foreign
policy of the United States during the early twentieth century. During this
period, the United States was liberal, but according to the dominant historical
narrative, also imperialistic (see Meiser 2015). So, there appears to be a
contradiction. If we take a closer look we see that the United States was more
restrained than commonly believed, particularly relative to other great powers
of that era. One simple measure is the level of colonial territory it accrued
compared to other great powers. By 1913, the United States claimed 310,000
square kilometres of colonial territory, compared to 2,360,000 for Belgium,
2,940,000 for Germany and 32,860,000 for the United Kingdom (Bairoch
1993, 83). In fact, the bulk of American colonial holdings was due to the
annexation of the Philippines and Puerto Rico, which it inherited after

Liberalism

26

defeating Spain in the Spanish-American War of 1898. The United States
exhibited such restraint because, as suggested by liberal theory, its political
structure limited expansionism. Examining US–Mexico relations during the
early twentieth century helps illustrate the causes of this American restraint.
In the spring of 1914, the United States invaded the Mexican city of Veracruz
because of a dispute over the detention of several American sailors in
Mexico. However, US–Mexican relations were already troubled because of
President Woodrow Wilson’s liberal belief that it was the duty of the United
States to bring democracy to Mexico, which was a dictatorship. The initial
objectives of the American war plan were to occupy Veracruz and
neighbouring Tampico and then blockade the east coast of Mexico until
American honour was vindicated – or a regime change occurred in Mexico.
After American forces landed in Veracruz, senior military leaders and Wilson’s
top diplomatic advisor in Mexico advocated an escalation of the political
objectives to include occupation of Mexico City – there were also vocal
proponents who advocated the full occupation of Mexico. Wilson did not
actually follow any of the advice he received. Instead, he reduced his war
aims, halted his forces at Veracruz and withdrew US forces within a few
months. Wilson exercised restraint because of American public opposition, his
own personal values, unified Mexican hostility and the military losses incurred
in the fighting. International opinion also appears to have influenced Wilson’s
thinking as anti-Americanism began to sweep through Latin America. As
Arthur Link points out, ‘Altogether, it was an unhappy time for a President and
a people who claimed the moral leadership of the world’ (Link 1956, 405).
By 1919, a pro-interventionist coalition developed in the United States built on
frustration with President Wilson’s prior restraint and new fears over the
Mexican Constitution of 1917, which gave the Mexican people ownership of
all subsoil resources. This potentially endangered foreign ownership of mines
and oilfields in Mexico. Interventionists wanted to turn Mexico into an
American protectorate – or at least seize the Mexican oil fields. This coalition
moved the country toward intervention while Wilson was distracted by peace
negotiations in Europe and then bedridden by a stroke. The path to
intervention was blocked only after Wilson recovered sufficiently to regain
command of the policy agenda and sever the ties between the
interventionists. Wilson had two main reasons for avoiding the more
belligerent policy path. First, he saw the Houses of Congress (with the
support of some members of the executive branch) attempting to determine
the foreign policy of the United States, which Wilson viewed as unconstitutional. In the American system, the president has the authority to conduct
foreign policy. His assertion of authority over foreign policy with Mexico was
therefore a clear attempt to check the power of Congress in policymaking.
Second, Wilson was determined to maintain a policy consistent with the norm

27

International Relations Theory

of anti-imperialism, but also the norm of self-determination – the process by
which a country determines its own statehood and chooses its own form of
government. Both of these norms remain bedrocks of liberal theory today.
US relations with Mexico in this case show how institutional and normative
domestic structures restrained the use of violent power. These institutional
restraints can break down if the political culture of a society does not include
a strong dose of liberal norms. For example, anti-statism (a belief that the
power of the government should be limited) and anti-imperialism (a belief that
conquest of foreign peoples is wrong) are liberal norms. A society infused by
liberal norms has an added level of restraint above and beyond the purely
institutional limitations on state power. A liberal citizenry will naturally oppose
government actions that threaten individual liberty and choose representatives that will act on liberal preferences. The institutional separation of
powers in the United States allowed Wilson to block the interventionist efforts
of Congress and others. The liberal norm of anti-imperialism restrained American expansion through the mechanisms of public opinion and the personal
values of the president of the United States. Institutions and norms worked
symbiotically. International opinion put additional pressure on American
political leaders due to increasing trade opportunities with Latin American
countries throughout the early 1900s. Precisely as liberal theory details, the
absolute gains and opportunities offered by trade, together with preferences
for self-determination and non-interference, acted as a restraint on US
expansionism toward Mexico in this most imperial of periods in world history.
Conclusion
A core argument of liberalism is that concentrations of unaccountable violent
power are the fundamental threat to individual liberty and must be restrained.
The primary means of restraining power are institutions and norms at both
domestic and international level. At the international level institutions and
organisations limit the power of states by fostering cooperation and providing
a means for imposing costs on states that violate international agreements.
Economic institutions are particularly effective at fostering cooperation
because of the substantial benefits that can be derived from economic
interdependence. Finally, liberal norms add a further limitation on the use of
power by shaping our understanding of what types of behaviour are
appropriate. Today, it is clear that liberalism is not a ‘utopian’ theory
describing a dream world of peace and happiness as it was once accused of
being. It provides a consistent rejoinder to realism, firmly rooted in evidence
and a deep theoretical tradition.

The English School

28

3
The English School
YA N N IS A. ST IVAC H TIS

The English school provides the basis for the study of international and world
history in terms of the social structures of international orders. Unlike many
theories that claim a certain sector of the subject of International Relations,
the English school provides a holistic approach to the subject, attempting to
see the world as a whole. English school theory is built around establishing
distinctions between three key concepts: international system, international
society and world society. By doing so it opens up a new space in IR theory
and offers a middle ground between the opposing theories of realism and
liberalism.
The basics of the English school
The English school is built around three key concepts: international system,
international society and world society. Hedley Bull (1977, 9–10) defined the
international system as being formed ‘when two or more states have sufficient
contact between them, and have sufficient impact on one another’s decisions
to cause them to behave as parts of a whole.’ According to this definition, the
international system is mainly about power politics among states whose
actions are conditioned by the structure of international anarchy. An
international society exists when a group of like-minded states ‘conceive
themselves to be bound by a common set of rules in their relations with one
another, and share in the working of common institutions’ (Bull 1977, 13). In
other words, international society is about the creation and maintenance of
shared norms, rules and institutions. Finally, world society is more
fundamental than international society because ‘the ultimate units of the great
society of all mankind are not states … but individual human beings’ (Bull
1977, 21). Thus, world society transcends the state system and takes individuals, non-state actors and ultimately the global population as the focus of
global societal identities and arrangements. It is important to note here that in
the English school the term ‘institution’ is different to the term ‘organisation’.

29

International Relations Theory

According to English school thought, ‘institutions’ refer to long-term practices
among states (such as diplomacy, law and war) rather than to international
bureaucratic structures (organisations) that may be established to facilitate
state interaction. To refer to international organisations, the English school
uses the term ‘pseudo-institutions’ or ‘secondary institutions’ to show that the
effectiveness of international organisations depends on the function of an
international society’s primary institutions.
The distinction between an international system and an international society
helps us distinguish the pattern and character of relations among and
between certain states and groups of states. For example, historically there
was an essential difference between the type of relations among the
European states and the type of their relations with the Ottoman Empire.
Relations among the European states reflected the existence of a European
international society, while relations between the European states and the
Ottoman Empire reflected the existence of an international system. Likewise,
the interaction among the European Union’s member states reflects the
existence of an international society, while the interaction of the European
Union itself with Turkey (a non-member) describes interaction within a
broader international system. Despite its usefulness, the distinction between
an international system and an international society invited considerable
criticism because even in an international system one could observe the
existence of some rules and the operation of some institutions. This debate
has resulted in the acceptance of the premise that an international system
constitutes a weak or ‘thin’ form of an international society.
Throughout the bulk of history, there was not any single international system
or society. Instead, there were several regional international societies, each
with its own distinctive rules and institutions. All were built upon elaborate
civilisations, including distinctive religions, different systems of governance,
different types of law and different conceptions of the world. This, in turn,
implied that relations between political entities that were members of different
regional international societies could not be conducted on the same moral
and legal basis as relations within the same society, because the rules of
each individual regional society were culturally particular and exclusive. There
was no single agreed body of rules and institutions operating across the
boundaries of any two or more regional international societies to speak for a
broad international society. Moreover, contacts between regional international
societies were much more limited than contacts within them. Thus, the
emergence of a truly universal international society would not be possible
unless one of the regional international societies could expand itself to the
degree that it could merge all the others into a single universal society
organised around a common body of rules and values.

The English School

30

During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, international society came
to be regarded as a privileged association of European and ‘civilised’ states,
which had visible expression in certain institutions such as international law,
diplomacy and the balance of power. There was a sense that European
powers were bound by a code of conduct in their dealings with one another
and that this code did not apply in their dealings with other societies.
Nineteenth-century international lawyers perpetuated the cultural duality
between Europeans and non-Europeans and between ‘civilised’ and ‘noncivilised’ peoples. The distinction between ‘civilised’ and ‘barbarous’ humanity
meant that states belonging to either category were accorded different stages
of legal recognition. As the European international society spread over the
world, many non-European states sought to join international society. Thus,
the European states needed to define the conditions under which nonEuropean political entities would be admitted. The result was the
establishment of a standard of ‘civilisation’, which reflected the norms of the
liberal European civilisation.
The standard of civilisation included such elements as the guarantee of basic
human rights and the maintenance of a domestic legal system guaranteeing
justice for all. Thus, by definition, countries unwilling or unable to guarantee
such rights could not be considered ‘civilised’. Consequently, non-European
candidate states were judged not only by how they conducted their foreign
relations but also by how they governed themselves. The process also led to
the creation of hierarchical relations between two new categories of states:
the ‘civilisers’ and the ‘civilisees’. Or to put it another way, the ‘teachers’ and
the ‘pupils’.
A new international society emerged following the end of the First World War
(1914–1918), watermarked by the establishment of the League of Nations in
1920. The latter’s design for a new global international society incorporated
almost all the rules and practices that had developed in the European
international society, including its international law and diplomacy, as well as
its basic assumptions about sovereignty and the judicial equality of states
recognised as independent members of the society. The impetus for the
League came not from Europe, but from an American president, Woodrow
Wilson – signifying a change in the nature of the international order. The
outbreak of the Second World War in 1939 interrupted the functioning of the
League and consequently led to the destruction of that particular international
society. The establishment of the United Nations (UN) in 1945 constituted the
expression of yet another new international society. In fact, many principles
and structures found in the League were replicated by the United Nations.
Meanwhile, the standard of ‘civilisation’ was insulting to representatives of
non-European civilisations since the privileged legal status which European
states claimed for themselves meant not only the division of the world

31

International Relations Theory

between ‘civilised’ and ‘non-civilised’ states but also the maintenance of a
hierarchical relationship among states. Consequently, non-European states
and colonised communities began campaigning against the ‘standard of
civilisation’, which was eventually abolished when the decolonisation process
commenced – heralding the end of the age of empire and imperialism. The
emergence of the bipolar world of the Cold War (1947–1991), when two
superpowers divided the world into their respective orbits, led to the division
of the relatively ‘thin’ new global international society into two sub-global
‘thicker’ international societies: one associated with the United States and
one with the Soviet Union. The end of the Cold War in 1991 meant two things:
first, the division of the global international society ceased to exist; and
second, a set of regional international societies with different degrees of
‘thickness’ gradually emerged within the confines of the ‘thinner’ global
international society.
A key debate within the English school revolves around pluralism and
solidarism. Pluralism refers to international societies with a relatively low
degree of shared norms, rules and institutions. Solidarism refers to types of
international society with a relatively high degree of shared norms, rules and
institutions. The pluralist/solidarist debate is basically about how international
society relates to world society or, in other words, to people. The main
question has been how to reduce the tension between the needs and
imperatives of states and the needs and imperatives of humankind. These are
regularly in conflict both in real world situations and in the theory. Most
English school scholars operate within this debate, taking the tension
between the imperatives of order and justice as the core problem to be
addressed.
Important to the pluralist/solidarist debate are questions about whether
international law should include natural law or positive law. Natural law is a
philosophy that advocates that certain rights or values are inherent by virtue
of human nature and can be universally understood through human reason.
In other words, natural law refers to a body of unchanging moral principles
regarded as a basis for all human conduct. Positive law, on the other hand,
refers to human-made laws of a given community, society or state. This
debate manifests most acutely between states’ claims to sovereignty (via
pluralism) on the one hand and the idea that universal rights are vested in
people (via solidarism) on the other. A quick example to demonstrate this
would be to use the case of Syria. A pluralist reading would state that despite
terrible atrocities since 2011 as the state has collapsed in a brutal civil war,
Syria is a sovereign country and responsible for its own territory and people.
A solidarist position would stress the overriding obligation to protect human
life and intervene in Syria’s civil war. Both positions would suggest a very
different type of international society. Pluralism and solidarism, while

The English School

32

seemingly opposites, are the framing principles for a debate about the limits
and possibilities of international society. This debate is mostly about how best
to reconcile the desires and needs of both people and states. In this sense,
the English school is an essential tool within IR theory that tries to find a
working balance between how power, interests and standards of justice and
responsibility operate in international society.
The English school and the European Union
Following the end of the Second World War in 1945, six European states
formed a regional international system in the sense that they had ‘sufficient
contact between them, and had sufficient impact on one another’s decisions
to cause them to behave as parts of a whole’ (Bull 1977, 9–10). Applying
Bull’s definition of international society, relatively soon an international society
was formed in the sense that ‘they conceive themselves to be bound by a
common set of rules in their relations with one another, and share in the
working of common institutions’ (Bull 1977, 13). In other words, these
European states that today are associated with the European Union (EU)
created a set of rules and institutions to govern and manage their affairs. As
time progressed, the integration process gained strength, breadth and depth,
resulting in the creation of supranational institutions (legal powers existing
beyond the state), law and policies. This, in turn, led, among other things, to
the creation of an EU world society that underpins the EU international
society. At the same time, EU law and policies seek to regulate the relations
between the Union and, on the one hand, its member states and, on the
other, its people. In this way, the tension between the needs and imperatives
of states and the needs and imperatives of people, as well as the tension
between the imperatives of order and justice, which constitute the core of the
pluralist/solidarist debate, are addressed.
The process of the EU enlargement as it went from six members in 1951 to
28 in 2013 is not very different from the process of the historical expansion of
European international society. As in the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, EU member states had to define the conditions under which they
would admit candidate states. As a result, European states that aspire to EU
membership need to meet specific political and economic criteria. Like the
historical standard of ‘civilisation’, the EU’s membership conditions are an
expression of the assumptions used to distinguish those that belong to the
expanding Union from those that do not. Those that fulfil the political and
economic conditions set by the EU states will be brought inside while those
that do not conform will be left outside. Like the non-European states before,
EU candidate states had to learn to adjust themselves to new realities,
sometimes at significant cost to their own societies.

33

International Relations Theory

The EU’s membership criteria include both economic and political conditions.
Because the EU started as an economic organisation, the definition of the
economic conditions that prospective members must meet was in place from
the beginning. On the other hand, the formulation of political conditions has
undergone considerable evolution. At its Copenhagen Summit in June 1993,
EU norms and values were clarified under the following criteria:
1. Membership requires that the candidate country has achieved stability of
institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law, human rights, and
respect for the protection of minorities.
2. Membership requires the existence of a functioning market economy as
well as the capacity to cope with competitive pressure and market forces
within the Union.
3. Membership presupposes the candidate’s ability to take on the obligations
of membership including adherence to the aims of political, economic and
monetary union.
The EU’s potential for impacting on candidate states varies between two
broad stages: first, pre-negotiations (when the Copenhagen criteria must be
satisfied before negotiations commence); and second, actual negotiations
(when political conditions are monitored regularly). During the first phase,
negotiations may be blocked by a country’s failure to satisfy the political
conditions, while during the second phase, negotiations may be interrupted or
terminated if a negotiating country reverses its fulfilment of the political
conditions or violates any of them. Here the case of Turkey comes to mind,
considering its authoritarian power shifts and troubled human rights record –
which may explain why its path to membership has gone unfulfilled since it
first applied to join in 1987.
The process of EU enlargement, steadily growing to cover the bulk of the
European continent, demonstrates how a ‘thick’ regional international society
expands outwards, gradually transforming the much broader international
system in which it is embedded into an international society. But, as noted
earlier, the international system itself represents a ‘thin’ form of an international society.
However, the expansion process does not end with the entry of candidate
states into the European Union. In fact, elements of order present in the EU
and which are associated with international society and world society are
exported beyond the Union’s boundaries in three additional ways. First, states
located around the EU’s borders are encouraged to adopt norms and

The English School

34

practices compatible with those of the European Union. Second, to access
development assistance or aid, states must fulfil certain political and
economic conditions that reflect EU norms and values. Third, asking trading
partners to adhere to certain norms, rules and practices have become EU
conditions that have shaped the Union’s trade policy and its relations with
external states.
If the study of the EU enlargement is important to understand how regional
international societies expand outwards, thereby slowly transforming the
much broader international system in which they are embedded into an
international society, the investigation of what happens to them if they
contract is equally important. For example, what would happen to the EU
regional international society as a result of ‘Brexit’ (the United Kingdom
leaving the European Union) and the possibility that other states may also
leave? There are two possibilities. First, if core members of a regional
international society depart, then this society may be gradually transformed
into a ‘thinner’ international society, which is equivalent to an international
system. Second, the regional international society may continue to exist, but
the states that leave this society would move into the broader international
system in which the regional international society is embedded.
For example, despite Brexit, the EU regional international society will
continue to exist but the United Kingdom would move into the broader
international system in which the EU regional international society is
embedded. But if other EU member states follow the same path, then the EU
regional international society will be gradually transformed into a ‘thinner’
international society, which is equivalent to an international system. Unless
the EU member states come together to commonly confront its challenges (of
which Brexit is only one), we may gradually see a decrease in the EU’s
‘thickness’, which implies a movement from the world society end of the
spectrum to the international system end of the spectrum.
Conclusion
Two important debates have taken place within the English school. First,
whether the distinction between an international system and an international
society is valid and, if yes, then where does the boundary line between the
two forms of international order lie. The second turns on pluralist versus
solidarist understandings and the relationship between international society
and world society. The first debate has resulted in the acceptance of the
premise that an international system constitutes a weak/thin form of an
international society. Although the pluralist/solidarist debate is still ongoing,
one should recognise that certain changes in international society (e.g. a shift

35

International Relations Theory

from a world of perpetual war pre-1945 to a world of relative peace post1945) are accompanied by some other important developments in world
society. For example, there has been a growing demand for human rights as
people increasingly understand that they are embedded in a single global
economy and a single global environment. At the same time, technology and
social media enable widely shared experiences. These developments have
led to an increased interplay between international society and world society
that has the potential of stabilising international society by embedding ideas
not just in the minds of political and economic elites but also in the minds of
ordinary citizens.

Constructivism

36

4
Constructivism
S AR IN A T H E YS

Constructivism’s arrival in IR is often associated with the end of the Cold War,
an event that the traditional theories such as realism and liberalism failed to
account for. This failure can be linked to some of their core tenets, such as
the conviction that states are self-interested actors who compete for power
and the unequal power distribution among states which defines the balance of
power between them. By having a dominant focus on the state, traditional
theories have not opened much space to observe the agency of individuals.
After all, it was the actions of ordinary people that ensured the end of the
Cold War, not those of states or international organisations. Constructivism
accounts for this issue by arguing that the social world is of our making (Onuf
1989). Actors (usually powerful ones, like leaders and influential citizens)
continually shape – and sometimes reshape – the very nature of international
relations through their actions and interactions.
The basics of constructivism
Constructivism sees the world, and what we can know about the world, as
socially constructed. This view refers to the nature of reality and the nature of
knowledge that are also called ontology and epistemology in research
language. Alexander Wendt (1995) offers an excellent example that illustrates
the social construction of reality when he explains that 500 British nuclear
weapons are less threatening to the United States than five North Korean
nuclear weapons. These identifications are not caused by the nuclear
weapons (the material structure) but rather by the meaning given to the
material structure (the ideational structure). It is important to understand that
the social relationship between the United States and Britain and the United
States and North Korea is perceived in a similar way by these states, as this
shared understanding (or intersubjectivity) forms the basis of their
interactions. The example also shows that nuclear weapons by themselves
do not have any meaning unless we understand the social context. It further

37

International Relations Theory

demonstrates that constructivists go beyond the material reality by including
the effect of ideas and beliefs on world politics. This also entails that reality is
always under construction, which opens the prospect for change. In other
words, meanings are not fixed but can change over time depending on the
ideas and beliefs that actors hold.
Constructivists argue that agency and structure are mutually constituted,
which implies that structures influence agency and that agency influences
structures. Agency can be understood as the ability of someone to act,
whereas structure refers to the international system that consists of material
and ideational elements. Returning to Wendt’s example discussed above, this
means that the social relation of enmity between the United States and North
Korea represents the intersubjective structure (that is, the shared ideas and
beliefs among both states), whereas the United States and North Korea are
the actors who have the capacity (that is, agency) to change or reinforce the
existing structure or social relationship of enmity. This change or reinforcement ultimately depends on the beliefs and ideas held by both states. If these
beliefs and ideas change, the social relationship can change to one of
friendship. This stance differs considerably from that of realists, who argue
that the anarchic structure of the international system determines the
behaviour of states. Constructivists, on the other hand, argue that ‘anarchy is
what states make of it’ (Wendt 1992). This means that anarchy can be
interpreted in different ways depending on the meaning that actors assign to
it.
Another central issue to constructivism is identities and interests. Constructivists argue that states can have multiple identities that are socially
constructed through interaction with other actors. Identities are representations of an actor’s understanding of who they are, which in turn signals
their interests. They are important to constructivists as they argue that
identities constitute interests and actions. For example, the identity of a small
state implies a set of interests that are different from those implied by the
identity of a large state. The small state is arguably more focused on its
survival, whereas the large state is concerned with dominating global political,
economic and military affairs. It should be noted, though, that the actions of a
state should be aligned with its identity. A state can thus not act contrary to its
identity because this will call into question the validity of the identity, including
its preferences. This issue might explain why Germany, despite being a great
power with a leading global economy, did not become a military power in the
second half of the twentieth century. Following the atrocities of Adolf Hitler’s
Nazi regime during the Second World War, German political identity shifted
from one of militarism to pacifism due to unique historical circumstances.

Constructivism

38

Social norms are also central to constructivism. These are generally defined
as ‘a standard of appropriate behaviour for actors with a given identity’
(Katzenstein 1996, 5). States that conform to a certain identity are expected
to comply with the norms that are associated with that identity. This idea
comes with an expectation that some kinds of behaviour and action are more
acceptable than others. This process is also known as ‘the logic of appropriateness’, where actors behave in certain ways because they believe that
this behaviour is appropriate (March and Olsen 1998, 951–952). To better
understand norms, we can identify three types: regulative norms, constitutive
norms and prescriptive norms. Regulative norms order and constrain
behaviour; constitutive norms create new actors, interests or categories of
action; and prescriptive norms prescribe certain norms, meaning there are no
bad norms from the perspective of those who promote them (Finnemore and
Sikkink 1998). It is also important to note that norms go through a ‘lifecycle of
norms’ before they can get accepted. A norm only becomes an expected
behaviour when a critical mass of relevant state actors adopt it and internalise
it in their own practices. For example, constructivists would argue that the
bulk of states have come together to develop climate change mitigation
policies because it is the right thing to do for the survival of humanity. This
has, over decades of diplomacy and advocacy, become an appropriate
behaviour that the bulk of citizens expect their leaders to adhere to. Liberals,
on the other hand, might reject the notion of climate change politics in favour
of continued economic growth and pursuing innovative scientific solutions,
while realists might reject it due to the damage that climate policies may do to
shorter-term national interests.
Although all constructivists share the above-mentioned views and concepts,
there is considerable variety within constructivism. Conventional constructivists ask ‘what’-type questions – such as what causes an actor to act. They
believe that it is possible to explain the world in causal terms and are
interested in discovering the relationships between actors, social norms,
interests and identities. Conventional constructivists assume, for instance,
that actors act according to their identity and that it is possible to predict when
this identity becomes visible or not. When an identity is seen to be undergoing changes, conventional constructivists investigate what factors caused
which aspects of a state’s identity to change. Critical constructivists, on the
other hand, ask ‘how’-type questions such as how do actors come to believe
in a certain identity. Contrary to conventional constructivists, they are not
interested in the effect that this identity has. Instead, critical constructivists
want to reconstruct an identity – that is, find out what are its component parts
– which they believe are created through written or spoken communication
among and between peoples. Language plays a key role for critical constructivists because it constructs, and has the ability to change, social reality.

39

International Relations Theory

Most constructivists, however, position themselves between these two more
extreme ends of the spectrum.
Constructivism and Bhutan’s national interests
Bhutan is a Buddhist kingdom located in the Himalayas. The material
structural conditions are reflected in its population of approximately 745,000,
a territory that amounts to 38,394 square kilometres, a weak economy and a
very small military. On top of this, Bhutan shares a national border with the
two major powers in Asia: China in the north and India in the south. Bhutan’s
location is geographically sensitive as the country serves as a buffer state
between these major powers, which perceive each other as rivals rather than
friends. In addition to this, the Chinese leadership claimed, after it annexed
Tibet in the 1950s, that Bhutan’s territory was also part of its mainland. To
date there remains an ongoing border dispute between Bhutan and China
and there have been reports that the Chinese army has made several
incursions into Bhutan. Likewise, India has had a hand in Bhutan’s foreign
policy. Article 2 of the India-Bhutan Friendship Treaty (1949) notes that
‘Bhutan agrees to be guided by the advice of India in regard to its external
relations.’ Although this Article was revised in 2007, commentators have
reported that India still holds a degree of influence over Bhutan.
From a realist perspective, one would argue that Bhutan is in an unfavourable
position as it is hindered by its geographical location and cannot compete for
power with its neighbours. The preservation of its national sovereignty would
likely depend on the outcome of the greater competition between China and
India. A constructivist view, on the other hand, would argue that these
structural conditions do not necessarily constrain Bhutan’s ability to pursue its
national interests since they are not the only conditions that influence state
behaviour: the meaning given to these structural conditions also matters. For
example, when Tibet was annexed by China, Bhutan felt threatened. As a
result, it closed its border in the north and turned to India, its neighbour in the
south. From that moment onward, Bhutan perceived China as a potential
threat and India as a friend. To date, Bhutan and India perceive each other as
friends whereas Bhutan has no official relations with China. These social
relationships represent the ideational structure that originated from the
meaning given to the material structure. It is important to note, however, that
the social relationships are subject to change depending on the ideas, beliefs
and actions of Bhutan, India and China. For example, an agreement on the
border dispute between China and Bhutan could change how both countries
perceive each other. This change might lead to the establishment of an official
relationship, the nature of which is friendship rather than enmity. A
constructivist is well placed to detect and understand these changes since

Constructivism

40

their object of enquiry focuses on the social relationships between states.
Bhutan has also developed a distinctive national identity that differentiates it
from its larger neighbours. This identity projects Bhutan as ‘the last surviving
independent Mahayana Buddhist Kingdom in the world’ (Bhutan Vision 2020,
24–25). The usage of the word ‘independent’ refers directly to Bhutan’s
national interest – the preservation of its national sovereignty. Bhutan’s
national identity is socially constructed through a Bhutanisation process that
started in the 1980s, when the fourth king of Bhutan introduced the ‘One
Nation, One People’ policy. This policy demanded the observance of a code
of conduct known as Driglam Namzhag. This code of conduct is built upon
strict observance of vows – such as strong kinship loyalty, respect for one’s
parents, elders and superiors, and mutual cooperation between rulers and
ruled. It also reinforced the rules for wearing a national dress – the gho for
men and the kira for women. In addition to this, Dzongkha was selected as
the national language of Bhutan. The Driglam Namzhag can be thought of as
a regulative norm because the aim of the policy is to direct and constrain
behaviour. For example, although Bhutan’s national identity suggests that the
Bhutanese comprise one homogeneous group, Bhutan is actually a multiethnic, multi-religious and multi-lingual country. There are three main ethnic
groups: the Ngalongs, the Sharchhops and the Lhotshampas, who are of
Nepali descent. Of these, the Ngalongs and the Sharchhops are Buddhists,
while the Lhotshampas are mostly Hindus who speak the Nepali language.
The policy had severe consequences for the Lhotshampas as Nepali was no
longer taught in schools and people who could not prove residence in Bhutan
prior to 1958 were classified as non-nationals. Consequently, thousands of
Lhotshampas were expelled from Bhutan in the 1990s. Thus, the code of
conduct is used by the Bhutanese authorities to create cultural unity and to
stimulate citizens to reflect upon their cultural distinctiveness, which is
paramount in creating a national identity.
As mentioned earlier in the chapter, a norm needs to go through a lifecycle
before it becomes established. In the case of Bhutan, we can witness the first
phase, norm emergence, in the creation of the Driglam Namzhag by the
Bhutanese authorities. The second phase, norm acceptance, required
Bhutanese citizens to accept the Driglam Namzhag, including the national
dress and Dzongkha as the national language. Once this acceptance
occurred, norm internalisation occurs. The completion of this process entails
that the behaviour of the Bhutanese citizens is circumscribed by these norms
and practices. This circumscription also shows the constitutive nature of the
Driglam Namzhag, which created new actors – that is, Bhutanese citizens
who act and behave according to specific rules. We can see, for instance,
that these norms and practices are regulated to date. For example,
Bhutanese citizens are obliged to wear the national dress during national

41

International Relations Theory

events and when they attend school or work. This regulation is, as explained
earlier, important as the behaviour of a state and its citizens should comply
with the norms that are associated with Bhutan’s national identity. The
regulation also signifies that these norms are perceived as something good
by the Bhutanese authorities, which underlines the prescriptive nature of
norms.
Members of the Bhutanese elite have also created a second identity, which
projects Bhutan as a leader in advancing a holistic and sustainable
development paradigm. This identity is based on Bhutan’s development
philosophy, Gross National Happiness (GNH), which criticises the well-known
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) approach for being solely focused on the
economy of a state. Instead, GNH promotes a balance between material
wellbeing and the spiritual needs of the mind. It is implemented and
embedded in Bhutan’s political and educational systems. Members of the
Bhutanese elite have predominantly used the United Nations as a platform to
promote the idea internationally. Subsequently, the United Nations adopted
Resolution 65/309, which states that the pursuit of happiness is a
fundamental goal and that the gross domestic product indicator was not
designed to, and does not adequately reflect, the wellbeing of people.
Projecting their country as the last surviving independent Mahayana Buddhist
kingdom in the world and as a leader in advancing a holistic and sustainable
development paradigm enables Bhutanese authorities to signal their country’s
status as an independent sovereign state. It also allows Bhutan to increase its
international visibility, which is advantageous when tensions run high with and
among its neighbours.
Conclusion
Constructivism is often said to simply state the obvious – that actions,
interactions and perceptions shape reality. Indeed, that idea is the source of
the name of this theory family. Our thoughts and actions literally construct
international relations. Yet, this seemingly simple idea, when applied
theoretically, has significant implications for how we can understand the
world. The discipline of International Relations benefits from constructivism as
it addresses issues and concepts that are neglected by mainstream theories
– especially realism. Doing so, constructivists offer alternative explanations
and insights for events occurring in the social world. They show, for instance,
that it is not only the distribution of material power, wealth and geographical
conditions that can explain state behaviour but also ideas, identities and
norms. Furthermore, their focus on ideational factors shows that reality is not
fixed, but rather subject to change.

Marxism

42

5
Marxism
MA ÏA PAL

Marxism is both a critical approach that wants to always question the
mainstream policy-driven approaches to IR theory and a classical approach
via the philosophical and sociological tradition of its namesake, the
philosopher Karl Marx (1818–1883). In fact, Marxism is the only theoretical
perspective in IR that is named after a person. Of the range of great thinkers
available to us, Marx may not automatically qualify as being the most
‘internationalist’. In fact, most of Marx’s (and his sometimes co-author
Friedrich Engels’) work was not primarily concerned with the formation of
states or even the interactions between them. What connected their interests
to IR was the industrial revolution, as this event was ultimately what Marx was
witnessing and trying to understand. He, with Engels, developed a revolutionary approach and outlined a set of concepts that transcended national
differences while also providing practical advice on how to build a
transnational movement of people. Workers from factories across the world –
the proletariat – were to organise themselves into a politically revolutionary
movement to counter the exploitative and unequal effects of capitalism, which
were accelerated and expanded by the industrial revolution. This vision of a
potential link between the bulk of humanity as a global proletariat is where,
and how, Marxism enters IR from a different vantage point to other theories.
The basics of Marxism
Marxist concepts are all connected by the common goal to contribute to what
they perceive as the greater good of humankind and its environment. To
borrow the words of Adrienne Rich (2002, 65), theory is
the seeing of patterns, showing the forest as well as the trees
– theory can be a dew that rises from the earth and collects in

43

International Relations Theory

the rain cloud and returns to earth over and over. But if it
doesn’t smell of the earth, it isn’t good for the earth.
In other words, Marxists must remain informed and reflective of the basic and
most common aspects of societies and their environment. This also means
that if the industrial revolution (and capitalism in general) smells of burning
coal, overcrowded factories and petrol fumes, the smells of the next
revolution should be less deadly, less polluting and more protective of the
earth. To understand Marxism, we need to grasp the basic elements of Marx’s
innovations regarding the origins and functioning of capitalism. In addition, we
must understand that those origins and functioning can simultaneously
happen at the domestic and international level. Combining these tasks leads
to arguably the most important contribution Marxism offers to IR: that the
capitalist mode of production and the modern sovereign states system (that
emerged roughly at the same time) are not natural or inevitable events. They
are interdependent products of particular historical conditions and social
relations. The work of Marxists is to map and retrace those conditions and
social relations and to figure out how the capitalist mode of production and
the sovereign states system emerged – as two sides of the same coin, as
different coins or maybe as different currencies. Debates on the degree of
interdependence between these two major historical phenomena may be
ongoing, but Marxism’s achievement in IR has been to stop us from thinking
about them separately. Marxism also advises that concepts are not just meant
to help us understand the world – they should also help us change it.
To explain Marxism in IR, we need to start with Marx’s main theory for the
development of capitalism: historical materialism. Most simply, historical
materialism asserts that human beings – including their relations with each
other and their environment – are determined by the material conditions in
which they can survive and reproduce. Therefore, Marxism asserts that
material conditions can be changed by the actions of human beings as well
as by events – think of climate change for example, which depends on
physical phenomena as well as human behaviour. In other words, these
material conditions are historical, they change over space and time. But they
are also always dependent on – and often hampered by – the processes and
ideas that preceded them, as the past weighs on the present. A Marxist would
stress that IR is not just about states’ foreign policy or the behaviour of
politicians, but more about survival (or more broadly, life), reproduction,
technologies and labour. If this is correct then the separation between the
political and economic, or public and private, is problematic because those
categories hide the ways in which states and foreign policies are determined
by the social relations and structures of the global economy – such as
multinational corporations or international financial institutions. Put differently,
Marxism fundamentally questions what ‘the international’ is in IR. Whether it

Marxism

44

is anarchy for realists or international society for the English school, Marxists
argue that such concepts are problematic because they make us believe in
illusions or myths about the world. For example, the concept of anarchy
creates the mirage that states are autonomous agents whose rational
behaviour can be predicted. However, this ignores the endurance of regional
inequalities and the structural and historical links between states, violence
and the key actors of the global political economy.
The first application of Marxist ideas to explain international processes was
by communists and revolutionaries of the early twentieth century such as
Rosa Luxemburg, Rudolf Hilferding and Vladimir Lenin. These authors
developed what we now call the classical theories of imperialism to
understand how capitalism expanded and adapted to a world of inter-imperial
rivalry leading to the First World War and the slow disintegration of the
European empires.
In 1974, Immanuel Wallerstein developed ‘world systems theory’ to
incorporate the changes of the late twentieth century and counter the way
traditional approaches tended to understand imperialism as a state-led
process. Wallerstein’s approach used different units of analysis and took a
much longer-term view of the history of states and their interactions. He
distinguished three groups of states or regions: the core, the semi-periphery
and the periphery. The aim was to understand how states have developed
since the sixteenth century in relation to each other, thereby creating relations
of dependency between different groups of states depending on the specific
types of economies and industries they specialised in. Therefore, these
relations of dependency and groups required that we understand the world
through broader units than states. These units – or world systems – helped to
address the dilemma of why states all became capitalist, albeit in very
unequal and different ways. The core group of states (e.g. in Western Europe
and North America) refers to democratic governments providing high wages
and encouraging high levels of investment and welfare services. The semiperiphery states (e.g. in Latin America) are authoritarian governments that
provide low wages and poor welfare services for their citizens. Periphery
states (e.g. sub-Saharan and Central Africa, South Asia) refer to nondemocratic governments where workers can mostly expect wages below
subsistence levels and where there are no welfare services.
The core is able to produce high-profit consumption goods for itself as well as
for the semi-periphery and periphery markets because the periphery provides
the cheap labour and raw materials to the core and semi-periphery necessary
to make these high-profit consumption goods. In other words, although
historically some states have changed their group (e.g. from periphery to

45

International Relations Theory

semi-periphery), capitalism always needs a peripheral region that provides
the means for the core to sustain a high level of consumption and security.
Thus, relations of dependency and inequality are essential to capitalism and
cannot be significantly reduced.
Another influential update of the classical theories of imperialism is the neoGramscian strand of Marxism. Antonio Gramsci’s (1891–1937) concept of
hegemony is thought by some to be more useful today than the concept of
imperialism. It emphasises two things. First, the domination of some groups
of individuals (or groups of states) over other groups also depends on
ideological factors. In other words, capitalism is experienced in different ways
historically and across the globe because people understand it – and
therefore agree to or resist it – in different ways. Second, the relations of
dependency and types of groups (or units) used to understand those relations
are more varied and fluid than world systems theory. Therefore, capitalism
dominates our social relations because it is reproduced through coercive and
consensual means. The concept was used to explain why educated and
organised workers in Western Europe did not ‘unite’ to ‘lose their chains’, as
Marx and Engels had predicted. A neo-Gramscian concept of hegemony
focuses on the consensual ways in which transnational classes, organisations
and international law reproduce capitalism and its inequalities. The
transnational capitalist class – dominated by great powers – forms a ‘global
civil society’ that universalises liberal ideals rather than imposing itself
through more coercive processes of classical imperialism and colonisation, as
was the case in earlier times.
For example, Singapore, Hong-Kong, South Korea and Taiwan were known
as the Four Asian Tigers because of their rapid industrialisation and high
growth rates from the 1960s to the 1990s. In these countries, a strong ruling
elite consented to a specific type of financial economy – often called a
‘neoliberal’ model – which also took hold across the world to varying degrees
as other states sought to emulate this ‘success’. However, vast inequalities
and human rights violations are increasing across and within many societies
despite the dominance of neoliberalism globally. This shows that although
neoliberal hegemony is far from producing the success it originally projected,
this perceived success remains one of the main drivers of capitalism because
it convinces people to consent to capitalism without the threat of force.
A more recent trend of Marxism in IR – historical sociology – returns to some
of the more classical problems of IR. Specifically, it looks at the development
of the modern state system in relation to the transition(s) to capitalism and to
the different moments of colonial and imperial expansion. It looks more
closely at what happened inside Europe but also beyond Europe. More

Marxism

46

specifically, it contests the birth of the sovereign states system following the
treaties of Westphalia in 1648 and instead focuses on more socio-economic
processes in the nineteenth century to define key shifts in modern international relations. This underlines how scholars are taking history beyond Europe
in order to address the Eurocentric assumptions found in Marxism and in the
wider discipline of IR itself.
In sum, Marxism is characterised by interdependence. The Marxist term for
this is dialectics, which underpins the way in which all the previous concepts
explored in this chapter relate to each other. For Marxism, all concepts reflect
social relations, but categories take on a life of their own and often hide those
social relations. It is easy to overcomplicate or abuse this concept. However,
it is a crucial starting point for understanding the world as a whole, rather than
just its individual parts, since ‘dialectics is a way of thinking that brings into
focus the full range of changes and interactions that occur in the world’
(Ollman 2003, 12).
Marxism, migrants and borders
A Marxist IR approach to migration shows the importance of historical
materialism as an approach to IR. First, Marxists are critical of the fixed
aspect of borders because they create relations of dependency and inequality
between peoples by restricting and controlling their access to resources and
labour. Some Marxists argue that we need a global concept of citizenship to
counter how states exclude non-citizens from benefits and access to labour
and resources. After all, from a Marxist point of view, peoples of all nations
are united in their oppression by capitalism and the modern state system that
separates them and sets them against each other, so people should be freed
(or emancipated) from this status. Consequently, Marxists see borders as
fixtures that unfairly determine relations of dependency and inequality – or in
other words, who has the right to what. Second, we need to think of who
decides who is a migrant and what that category entails. For example, being
a migrant who is fleeing a country because of persecution is a necessary
condition according to international law for applying for asylum and becoming
a refugee in a host state. Most states have signed the 1951 Refugee Convention and have agreed to this definition. Hence, the reality of being this
particular type of migrant is dependent on a specific treaty and the will of
states to consent to it. In other words, the category of persecuted migrant or
refugee is relative – it is not real in the sense that the colour of your eyes is
real and cannot be decided differently by someone else.
People who flee from poverty related to conflict, climate change, or lack of
jobs are often designated as economic migrants. Their status does not

47

International Relations Theory

depend on a definition as clear as that of a refugee, and it also does not lead
to the same rights and opportunities. Many people move towards Europe
because it offers more economic opportunities and a relatively safer political
environment. However, decisions at the European and state level are
increasingly resulting in the strengthening (or closing) of borders, because
some feel that economic migration is not a sufficient reason to freely admit a
person. In contrast, being an economic migrant who has a particular skill
needed by the host country is considered legitimate. In other words, the
‘reality’ of being a ‘good’ economic migrant – who is allowed to move across
countries – depends on factors that are often independent of the person
migrating.
Marxism provides us with an original angle that makes us reconsider
migration and shows why closing borders is a sociologically and politically
blind policy in relation to the system we all live in. In effect, capitalism started
a simultaneous process of territorial bordering and of social change through
wage-labour. Mainstream IR separates those processes historically and
theoretically by taking the separation between the domestic and international
as fixed and real. Marxism argues that this leads to obscuring the social
relations and processes linking movements of people and the creation of
borders. In other words, dissociating the domestic and international levels
leads to thinking that being a migrant is the reserve of certain people rather
than a condition we are all subjected to. Crucially, it justifies treating migrants
as second-class people and therefore leads to further racial and social
inequalities.
Movement of peoples occurred long before capitalism, but capitalism shapes
those movements in conjunction with the creation of borders and economic
productivity. The process of enclosure at the beginning of capitalism led to
people moving away from the land on which they hunted, gathered and grew
food. The process involved landowners closing off or fencing common land
so as to graze sheep and develop more intensive methods of agriculture.
This gradually transformed social relations – the ways in which people could
survive and reproduce. Without land to survive on, people had to start selling
their ability to work – what Marxists call labour power – and often had to work
far from their homes. Although people move for a variety of reasons, one that
is particularly familiar is the necessity to move to sell our labour. This can
involve transferring from the countryside to an urban centre within a state or
from one state to another. In other words, it is the same imperative to work
that makes this move happen, whether one crosses an international border or
not. In a capitalist system, it is hard to survive without working and working
implies moving or being prepared to move. In other words, we are all in
theory migrants. Acknowledging this means that closing borders, which
involves fixing peoples’ status as ‘good’ or ‘bad’ economic migrants, is based

Marxism

48

on two illusions revealed by Marxism and should therefore be questioned and
reconsidered. The first is the distinction between domestic and international.
Capitalism is an expanding international system and allows domestic borders
only in so far as it can transcend them economically. The second illusion is
the distinction between categories of people as real and fixed. Capitalism
allows the elite to transcend borders economically but also allows the
potential to close them politically. Thus, it allows certain people (the most
wealthy) to decide that others (the least wealthy) cannot try and change their
situations.
Conclusion
The role of theories and knowledge more generally is to reveal what is real
and what is an illusion. Historical materialism – the theory that drives Marxism
– tries to apply this advice by grounding the understanding of international
relations in the ways in which people have transformed the land, produced
things on it and are ultimately dependent on its resources for shaping political
institutions such as the state and international organisations. Marxism has
made several inroads in the development of the discipline of IR by being
intrinsically concerned with the ways in which people – and groups – interact
and produce things across borders, as well as how they organise themselves
through institutions to manage and contest the production and distribution of
things across the world. More specifically, it argues that the construction of
modern borders is determined by, or linked in various ways to, the development of capitalism. Therefore, it makes us question the natural or inevitable
character we tend to ascribe to our economic and political systems. In other
words, if a system is not as real and fixed as we first thought, because it has
a particular and relatively short history in the broader course of humanity,
then it becomes much easier for us to imagine the various ways it is
challenged and how it could be transformed to a system that, Marxists hope,
will better redistribute the wealth of the world. Marx himself wrote that
philosophy is often too concerned with interpreting the world, when the real
point is to change it. Marxism as a theory of IR has certainly answered that
call and, regardless of variations within the theory family, to be a Marxist
always means to challenge one’s ideas about the world.

49

International Relations Theory

6
Critical Theory
MA R C OS FA R IA S F E R R EIR A

Critical theory incorporates a wide range of approaches all focused on the
idea of freeing people from the modern state and economic system – a
concept known to critical theorists as emancipation. The idea originates from
the work of authors such as Immanuel Kant and Karl Marx who, in the
eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, advanced different revolutionary ideas of
how the world could be reordered and transformed. Both Kant and Marx held
a strong attachment to the Enlightenment theme of universalism – the view
that there are social and political principles that are apparent to all people,
everywhere. In the modern era, both authors became foundational figures for
theorists seeking to replace the modern state system by promoting more just
global political arrangements such as a federation of free states living in
perpetual peace (Kant) or communism as a global social and economic
system to replace the unequal capitalist order (Marx). Critical theory sets out
to critique repressive social practices and institutions in today’s world and
advance emancipation by supporting ideas and practices that meet the
universalist principles of justice. This kind of critique has a transformative
dimension in the sense that it aims at changing national societies, international relations and the emerging global society, starting from alternative
ideas and practices lingering in the background of the historical process.
The basics of critical theory
Although critical theory reworks and, in some ways, supersedes Kantian and
Marxian themes, both authors remain at the base of the theory’s lineage.
Through critical philosophy, Kant discussed the conditions in which we make
claims about the world and asserted that the increasing interconnectedness
of his time opened the door for more cosmopolitan (i.e. supranational)
political communities. Marx’s critical mode of inquiry was grounded on the will
to understand social developments in industrialised societies, including the
contradictions inherent in capitalism that would lead to its collapse, the

Critical Theory

50

suppression of labour exploitation and the setting up of a more just system of
global social relations. This way, the writings of Kant and Marx converge to
demonstrate that what happens at the level of international relations is crucial
to the achievement of human emancipation and global freedom. Consequently, the tracing of tangible social and political possibilities or change
(those stemming from within existing practices and institutions) became a
defining feature of the strand of critical thought entering IR via authors
reworking Marxian and Kantian themes during the twentieth century.
Of course, neither Marx nor Kant were IR theorists in the contemporary
sense. Both were philosophers. We must therefore identify two more recent
sources for how critical theory developed within the modern discipline of IR.
The first is Antonio Gramsci and his influence over Robert Cox and the
paradigm of production (economic patterns involved in the production of
goods and the social and political relationships they entail). The second is the
Frankfurt school – Jürgen Habermas in particular – and the influence of
Habermas over Andrew Linklater and the paradigm of communication
(patterns of rationality involved in human communication and the ethical
principles they entail). There are two themes uniting these approaches that
show the connective glue within the critical theorist family. First, they both use
eman-cipation as a principle to critique, or assess, society and the global
political order. Second, they both detect the potential for emancipation
developing within the historical process, but consider that it may not be
inevitable. The paradigms of redistribution and recognition relate to what
Nancy Fraser (1995) has called the two main axes of contemporary political
struggle. While redistribution struggles refer directly to the Marxist themes of
class struggles and social emancipation, recognition struggles have to do with
aspirations to freedom and justice connected to gender, sexuality, race and
national recognition. Therefore, while Cox focuses on contemporary redistribution struggles, Linklater turns to questions of identity and community as
more significant than economic relations in today’s quest for emancipation.
Cox sets out to challenge realism’s assumptions, namely the study of
interstate relations in isolation from other social forces. He stresses the need
to see global politics as a collective construction evolving through the
complex interplay of state, sub-state and trans-state forces in economic,
cultural and ideological spheres. His purpose is to pay attention to the whole
range of spheres where change is needed in contemporary global politics. For
example, when realism focuses only on great powers and strategic stability, it
ends up reinforcing a set of unjust global relations stemming from power and
coercion. For this reason, Cox challenges the idea that ‘truth’ is absolute – as
in realism’s assertion that there is a timeless logic to international relations, or
liberalism’s assertion that the pursuit of global capitalism is positive. Instead,
he asserts that ‘theory is always for someone and for some purpose’ (Cox

51

International Relations Theory

1981, 128). Drawing on Gramsci, Cox comes up with a picture of the world
political system brought into being by the hegemony and hierarchies of power
manufactured in the economic arena. Therefore, power is understood in the
context of a set of globalised relations of production demanding the transformation of the nation-state, and depends on the combination of material
elements and ideas for acquiring legitimacy (Cox and Jacobsen 1977). Cox
explores the economic contradictions spurring change in power relations and
guiding transitions towards a fairer world order, even if acknowledging that
emancipation is not inevitable.
As Hutchings (2001) points out, the critical project connecting Linklater to Cox
sets out to uncover all sorts of hegemonic interests feeding the world order as
a first step to overcome global systems of exclusion and inequality. Linklater’s
critical project aims at reconstructing cosmopolitanism, drawing not from
some abstract or utopian moral principle but from non-instrumental action and
ideal speech (open and non-coercive communication) assumptions developed by Habermas. Ideal speech is the critical tool used in the reconstruction
of political communities (from local to global levels) through open dialogue
and non-coercive communication, a process whereby all affected by political
decisions put forward their claims and justify them on the basis of rational and
universally accepted principles of validity. This method poses questions of the
‘good life’ (what a society ought to be like) and questions of justice (fairness
in the way members of a society choose what their society ought to be like).
Thus, emancipation is conceived not with reference to an abstract universal
idea but based on a process of open discussion about who can be excluded
legitimately from specific political arrangements and what kinds of
particularities (gender, race, language) entitle people to special sets of rights.
For Linklater, the historical development of citizenship attests to both the
potential and the limitations of such a process of open discussion about rights
– who is entitled to what in the context of the state system. Citizenship has
been the critical concept and set of practices permitting the enjoyment of
universal rights inside a community (freedom of conscience, freedom of
movement, freedom of association), but also the protection of vulnerable
minorities by granting them particular rights in order to avoid or mitigate the
effects of discrimination. On the other hand, however, citizenship has divided
humanity into national groupings and has therefore been a barrier to the
universal fulfilment of human freedom.
According to Linklater then, emancipation demands global interactions guided
by open, inclusive and non-coercive dialogue about the ties that bind
communities together. This also extends to our obligations to strangers and
how fair it is to restrict outsiders from the enjoyment of rights granted to

Critical Theory

52

insiders. For Linklater, the answer lies in the potential for a more universal
concept of citizenship, refashioned through open dialogue among those
affected by the global processes that are changing the world. These
processes are issues like non-state forms of violence (such as sexual
violence and terrorism), forced migration, climate change and resource
depletion. Therefore, critical theory can be seen as an instrument of the
powerless to advance more equitable types of global relations. More
importantly for us, within IR theory it combats the traditional approaches,
mainly liberalism and realism, and shines a light on how they feed the
imbalances of an unjust global order by failing to question (or critique) their
foundational claims. Linklater’s work is marked by the awareness that
modernity is an unfinished project in its potential for accomplishing human
freedom, namely through the transformation of the competitive system of
separate states into a global community.
By admitting that immediate security needs press humans to set up bounded
communities and to act according to national loyalties, Linklater recognises
the limits to cosmopolitan politics. At the same time however, he underlines
that there is a growing awareness that global interconnectedness and
vulnerabilities impose their consequences on how communities define
themselves and live side by side with others. Proximity with strangers
prompts, for instance, a heightened sense of sharing a finite planet and finite
resources and leads individuals to question exclusive obligations to the state
in favour of a degree of cosmopolitan responsibility towards those who do not
belong to one’s national community.
Accordingly, Linklater explores the moral tensions emerging between
humanity and citizenship (‘humans’ and ‘citizens’) in order to devise practical
possibilities for creating more inclusive communities, with a civilising effect
upon the conduct of international relations. Linklater does not underestimate
the historical movement towards the creation of bounded moral communities
(nation-states) but also sees potential within the historical process to enhance
the expansion of rights and duties beyond the state. The fact that it has been
possible for states in the modern international system to agree upon the
protection of human rights and the political relevance of avoiding human
wrongs is a sign of the relevance of these ideas.
What unites critical theorists like Cox, Linklater and others, then, is a political
inquiry with an explicit emancipatory purpose. It aims at uncovering the
potential for a fairer system of global relations resulting from already existing
principles, practices and communities that expands human rights and prevents harm to strangers.

53

International Relations Theory

Critical theory and the European migrant ‘crisis’
Haman stares at the long night behind him when I surprise his
absent gaze on the deck of the Blue Star ferry carrying us to
the Greek port of Piraeus. Departing from Rhodes, the ferry
had made its first stop at the island of Kos where dozens of
refugees from the Syrian war lined up patiently for hours and
eventually got a place on board. Haman was one of them.
After talking for hours about the war and his expectations for
the future, it was clear to me that ferry on the Aegean Sea was
a metaphor of a global community plagued with obstacles to
human freedom but holding the resources for its fulfilment.
After Kos though, I could not really tell anymore who was a
tourist and who was a refugee, who was Greek or Athenian
and who was neither – and it occurred to me why these
categories had to matter at all. The common human condition
aboard the ferry would stand for the night, but the following
morning tourists would continue their tranquil journey home
while refugees would have to improvise their way across
Europe, begging for hospitality. At the port of Piraeus, on that
early morning of August 2015, I said goodbye to Haman and
wished him luck for the journey. It is Friday and he knows he
must reach the Hungarian border before Tuesday or risk being
trapped by the fence erected hastily in the previous days to
block migrants on the Serbian side. ‘It’ll be cold’ he says, in a
premonition of what lay ahead for those like him seeking
refuge in Europe. That was the last I heard from Haman. I
stayed there for a while, looking at him blending into the crowd
conveyed throughout Europe as a crisis of refugees and illegal
migrants.
This brief encounter with Haman and his story is a trigger for recalling how in
recent years increasing numbers of people escaping persecution, war and
famine have tried to reach safe havens like Europe. While this has been
approached mostly as a ‘crisis’ affecting Europe and the national communities
composing it, some voices have underlined how the history of humanity has
always been a history of migration, peaceful or otherwise, and that today
more people than at any time since the Second World War are being
displaced from their homes. A critical perspective assumes that the security
claims of refugees fleeing war-torn countries constitute a cosmopolitan
responsibility for the whole of humankind, especially for those with the
resources to address them. It proceeds by critiquing security arrangements
pleading exclusive loyalty to a bounded community and refusing refugees a
number of cosmopolitan rights (hospitality and refuge). The point is not simply

Critical Theory

54

to understand how the world is constituted by moral tensions opposing
nationals to strangers, but to contribute to more equitable political solutions to
the current refugee ‘crisis’ by taking to the negotiating table the most vulnerable and their legitimate security concerns. Contrary to more traditional
theories, critical theory does not see refugees as apart from the violence and
inequality that produce them. In fact, it sets out to locate current waves of
forced migration in the context of deeper economic and geopolitical structures
producing harm and exclusion in a globalising world. Along the Cox/Linklater
axis, current migration must be seen as forced upon individuals and the byproduct of the current world order. The state of these relations excludes the
potential for human understanding and mutual recognition, as it has come
about through the harmful globalisation of production and connected
dynamics of nation-building, war and environmental degradation. Therefore, a
critical perspective inquires deeper into how global economic forces, and
related hierarchies of power, become complicit in creating the chaos and
insecurity forcing people to leave their homes in different parts of the world.
This entails looking in particular to how the dynamics of global capitalism are
producing failed states throughout Africa and the Middle East, not just as an
unintended misfortune but as part of how power itself works.
The main challenge for critical theory then is to connect theory to practice, to
be able to set up a theoretical lens that results in a real-world transformative
outcome. It is not enough to understand and trace the origins of harm and
displacement in the world; it is crucial to use that understanding to reach
fairer security arrangements that do not neglect refugees’ claims to basic
rights. Someone wanting to pursue a critical line of inquiry about the refugee
‘crisis’ might want to start with Haman and his journey from Syria to Europe
as a mirror image of the current plight of so many people in the Global South.
For critical theory today, politics, knowledge and global orders are for people
like Haman and should serve the purpose of freeing them from unnecessary
harm and unfair or unbalanced globalised interactions. Institutions like the
state must be assessed in terms of how they fare in overcoming various types
of exclusion vis-à-vis insiders and outsiders. Critical theory, more than other
approaches, promises to go deeper in understanding why refugees have to
leave their homes. This entails producing knowledge about direct reasons
(war in Syria or elsewhere) but also about global structures of power and
harm as well as the agents complicit in it (broader geopolitical interests, the
workings of the global economy, climate change and its effects over the lives
of communities). Moreover, critical theory examines the moral consequences
(what must be done) of Haman’s journey and what kind of responsibility
others might bear for Haman’s plight.
Cosmopolitan in character, critical theory refuses to see states as bounded
moral communities by nature and instead finds in them the potential to protect

55

International Relations Theory

strangers in need and include them in a broader notion of national interest. In
the context of the current refugee ‘crisis’, critique is directed to the different
norms and practices approved by states vis-à-vis incoming refugees. A basic
move is to distinguish which ones are and which are not compatible with
cosmopolitan duties already enshrined in international law and upheld by
many people and organisations in different societies. A second move is to
promote civic initiatives capable of consolidating fairer and more balanced
relations (solutions to the ‘crisis’) between those who seek refuge from harm
and those who are in a position to guarantee protection from harm. Solutions
must be sought in open dialogue, resorting to rational arguments that take
into consideration everyone’s concerns and interests. Leaving solutions to
national governments alone is not an option due to their rather strict position
on national interests. On the contrary, a more balanced position would result
from the active involvement of civil society, local authorities, European
authorities and refugees themselves. After all, Europe is a pertinent case here
as it is the home of the European Union – a project that united the bulk of
European states in a supranational, and relatively open-bordered, union in
which all citizens are legally free to work and live wherever they please within
the Union. Clearly, there is an existing framework within European politics to
work with to reach a more just solution to the migration ‘crisis’ than the one
advanced by those nations who closed their borders. The reward for
someone following a critical line of inquiry is therefore to understand to the
full that theory is always implicated in practice and that the way we conceive
the refugee ‘crisis’ shapes the kind of solution we envisage for it. From a
critical perspective, then, there is only a true solution to this ‘crisis’ when
political actors embrace cosmopolitan criteria that balance the whole range of
interests and respect the rights of everyone involved.
Conclusion
Recognising that there are very different strands of thought within critical
theory, this chapter has narrowed its approach to introduce critical theory as a
specific line of inquiry seeking to advance emancipation, or human freedom,
in the conduct of global affairs. A relevant critique seeks to trace forms of
exclusion that instigate both redistribution and recognition struggles and then
identify the potential for progressive change inspired by immanent ideas,
norms and practices. From a critical perspective, then, people – not states –
must be put at the centre of politics, global or otherwise. Additionally, political
arrangements should be judged, or critiqued, according to their capacity to
advance emancipation and the broadening of moral boundaries. Critical
theory assumes an active role in the betterment of human affairs according to
the potential for freedom inherent in modernity and the identification of
political alternatives at hand in the globalising society and the historical
process bringing it into being.

Poststructuralism

56

7
Poststructuralism
A ISH L IN G MC M ORR OW

Poststructuralism encourages a way of looking at the world that challenges
what comes to be accepted as ‘truth’ and ‘knowledge’. Poststructuralists
always call into question how certain accepted ‘facts’ and ‘beliefs’ actually
work to reinforce the dominance and power of particular actors within
international relations. Poststructuralism doubts the possibility of attaining
universal laws or truths as there is no world that exists independently of our
own interpretations. This viewpoint is underscored by Foucault’s (1984, 127)
assertion that ‘we must not imagine the world turns towards us a legible face
which we would only have to decipher’. For this reason, poststructuralists
encourage researchers to be sceptical of universal narratives that attempt to
offer an objective worldview, as these assumptions are heavily influenced by
pre-existing assumptions of what is true – and usually underlined by the
views of those in power. This renders poststructuralism openly critical of any
theory that claims to be able to identify objective fact – as truth and
knowledge are subjective entities that are produced rather than discovered.
Therefore, by design, poststructuralism conflicts with the bulk of other IR
theories as it finds them unable (or unwilling) to fully account for the true
diversity of international relations.
The basics of poststructuralism
Poststructuralists argue that ‘knowledge’ comes to be accepted as such due
to the power and prominence of certain actors in society known as ‘elites’,
who then impose it upon others. Elites take on a range of forms and occupy
many different roles in contemporary society. For instance, they include
government ministers who decide policy focus and direction for a state,
business leaders who leverage vast financial resources to shape market
direction, and media outlets that decide how a person is portrayed while
reporting a story. Additionally, elites are often also categorised as ‘experts’
within society, giving them the authority to further reinforce the viewpoints that

57

International Relations Theory

serve their best interests to a wide audience. Jenny Edkins (2006) uses the
example of famines to show that when elite actors refer to famine as a natural
disaster, they are removing the event from its political context. Therefore, the
ways that famines occur as a result of elites taking particular forms of political
action, through processes of exploitation or inaction due to profits on
increased food prices, are lost when they are presented as unavoidable
natural disasters.
Although great emphasis and focus is placed upon the authority of the elite
actors to decide what we count as valid knowledge and assumptions within
society, poststructuralism asserts that the way in which this power is achieved
is through the manipulation of discourse. Discourses facilitate the process by
which certain information comes to be accepted as unquestionable truth.
Discourses which augment the power of elites are called dominant or official
discourses by poststructuralists. The strength of dominant discourses lies in
their ability to shut out other options or opinions to the extent that thinking
outside the realms set by the discourse is seen as irrational.
An example of this can be found in the security versus liberty debate. The
wish to increase security levels across society – in response to crime,
irregular migration and terrorist threats – has been presented as a sliding
scale whereby if a state wishes to be secure then the public must endure a
reduction in personal freedoms. Personal freedoms – such as the freedom of
expression and freedom of assembly – have been placed as the limit against
which security exists. In this discursive construct, then, people are presented
with the choice between a state that respects civil liberties but is left
potentially insecure or a state that must curb personal freedoms in order to be
secure and protected. In practice, the dominant discourse of securing the
state often works to silence any concerns about enhanced state power. An
elite programme to restrict civil liberties can be justified to a society
conditioned by the ‘expert’ repetition of this discourse by appealing to the
objective logic it asserts and discounting all other interpretations. Therefore,
the move to achieve increased levels of security without the infringement
upon personal or civil liberties is excluded from the argument, as the two are
constantly being positioned in direct opposition to each other.
For poststructuralists, language is one of the most crucial elements for the
creation and perpetuation of a dominant discourse. Through language, certain
actors, concepts and events are placed in hierarchical pairs, named binary
oppositions, whereby one element of the set is favoured over the other in
order to create or perpetuate meaning. The power relation that is embedded
within this relationship (for example, good versus evil or developed versus
undeveloped) serves to reinforce the preferred meaning within the discursive

Poststructuralism

58

construct. International Relations as a discipline is full of these oppositions
and they are used by elites to both create favourable meaning out of certain
events and to allow for this meaning to be easily absorbed and accepted by
the wider public. One of the most common binary oppositions is to establish
different groups or countries in terms of ‘them’ versus ‘us’.
If we look to the aftermath of the events of 11 September 2001 (commonly
known as 9/11) we can see these categories of differentiation and their
influence begin to manifest themselves. President George W. Bush described
Iran, Iraq and North Korea as an ‘axis of evil’ – making these countries the
‘them’ that were rhetorically and politically positioned as international pariahs
in contrast to the innocent ‘us’ of the United States and its allies. Hence, this
binary opposition enabled Bush to claim that the United States was opposite
to all that this trio represented and would be justified in taking various actions
during a global campaign against states that were judged to sponsor, or
harbour, terrorists.
If we look to the work of one of the leading scholars of poststructuralism,
Michel Foucault, then the concepts of elites, discourses and the power of
language and binary oppositions all tie together to create what he labels a
‘regime of truth’. This model applies to the ruling discourse that operates
unquestioned within society, masquerading as the truth or fact. A regime of
truth, then, is constituted by the dominant discourse, elite actors and the
language that is used to create and sustain meaning and truth that serves the
interest of the favoured actors.
The importance of poststructuralism is to highlight existing regimes of truth
and show that conventional ways of thinking and analysis in international
relations are unable to point out how certain other possibilities are excluded
by these discourses from the very start. Butler (2003) builds upon this idea of
discourses excluding other possibilities by proposing that certain lives, in
certain conflicts or terrorist atrocities, are deemed as more ‘grievable’ than
others. Butler argues that thousands of people are lost to conflict in countries
such as Palestine and Afghanistan, often at the hands of Western powers,
and yet these people are not mourned or memorialised or even heard of
within Western reports of war.
This hierarchy of grief can also be seen in the outpouring of sympathy for
victims of terrorist attacks in Paris in November 2015 and Nice in July 2016.
Yet, similar attacks in Beirut and Nigeria in November 2015 and Baghdad in
July 2016 (to name but a few) went largely unnoticed and were silenced
within regimes of truth that mourned for, or favoured, the ‘innocent’ Western
victim.

59

International Relations Theory

Poststructuralism and media representations of terrorists
The media is a prime example of a site where discourses within regimes of
truth are (re)produced and can be identified. How we receive information and
the way that news events are presented to a society shapes how we
conceptualise and react to political events. As such, if we want to observe
how people have come to conceive and frame both terrorism and terrorists,
the poststructuralist can analyse media accounts in order to analyse the
discursive construction of these political actors and associated terrorist
events.
As the defining global terrorist attack of the twenty-first century, the attacks of
11 September 2001 on the United States can be used to convey how
dominant discourses, instigated by governmental elites, were perpetuated
and reinforced by the media.
In newspaper reports – specifically, in the week after the attacks – the
terrorists were presented as evil and irrational, their stated political
motivations were effaced and instead terrorists were repeatedly spoken of as
crazed and apolitical. The terrorists were plagued by ‘inexplicable neurosis’
and driven by ‘ethnic, superstitious and tribal madnesses’ (Toynbee 2001).
Additionally, these terrorists were set apart as different from more traditional
forms of terrorism that the world had previously witnessed through the
highlighting of the lethality and deadliness of mass murdering transnational
terrorism – a move which heightened the emotions of fear and anxiety further.
To underscore this link to death and destruction, the media narrative also
consistently linked both the acts and actors of 9/11 to images and metaphors
of pestilence and disease. In contrast to this, was the cultivation of the idea of
‘American innocence’ (Boswell 2001) that was ‘vulnerable to hate’ (Boyd
2001), coupled with the persistent repetition and reminder of the suffering of
the victims of 9/11 and the heroism of the first responders. Interspersed with
this, the widespread international outcry to the attacks simultaneously worked
to further emphasise the immorality and inhumanity of these actors. Themes
of patriotism and civility were deployed within the media to further distance
the cohesive ‘us’ from the generic barbarian terrorist. The reactions of the
public that gathered together to pray, support each other, volunteer and
eventually join the military juxtaposed radically with the destructive actions of
the terrorists. Moreover, the emotions that the narratives of these actions
evoked related back to feelings of love, empathy and altruism that the media
utilised to engender further cohesion in society against the ‘other’ of the
terrorist.

Poststructuralism

60

The importance of the recognition of this discourse is not to attempt to
present these political actors – the terrorists – in a better light, but to
recognise how the consistent and universal portrayal of them as evil and
irrational made certain reactions and foreign policy actions more amenable
and immediately cut off other methods of responding to these terrorist
attacks. From this, poststructuralism critically questions what purpose did the
construction, by both the media and the government, of a dominant discourse
that posited the terrorists and the society that they belonged to as evil and
barbaric serve? How did the positing of an unbridgeable chasm between the
civilised society and the primeval terrorist, within this regime of truth, favour
elite agendas? One answer has been the identification of how this ‘good
versus evil’ construct prepared and almost rallied the American public for war.
It certainly prevented the chance of dealing with these attacks through
diplomacy, as the overarching discourse stated that these terrorists merely
wanted to destroy the world before them. While some may support the wars
in Afghanistan (2001) and Iraq (2003) that followed these attacks, the
poststructuralist contribution deconstructs how this militaristic and aggressive
response to 9/11 was legitimised by the discursive construction of the
terrorists, the emotions that were manipulated and the divide between ‘us’
and ‘them’ that was fashioned.
The pervasion of this discourse also served to conflate the motivations and
acts of these terrorists with the construction of a wider Muslim and Arab
society. With the simplistic interpretation of the historical relations between
the ‘West’ and ‘East’ that was encouraged in this discursive construction, the
regime of truth played upon and amplified the notion of the Muslim or Arab
world as backward and primordial. Within the regime of truth of the War on
Terror, then, this emotive discourse was extended to every Muslim, every
Arab, and, eventually, every non-Westerner.
With the passage of time, we are also able to trace the gradual disruption to
and destabilising of this regime of truth. As the United States was drawn
further into destructive and protracted conflicts in Afghanistan and Iraq, the
public opinion that had supported intervention began to wane. Over time, the
discursive construction of terrorists by the media was not strong enough to
override the concurrent media accounts of large numbers of casualties
resulting from the intervention. Along with these fatalities, as the media began
to report on the abuses that were carried out, the regime of truth that had
been centred on the foreign policy directives of the Bush presidency started
to falter. Thus, the official discourse regarding terrorism and intervention was
changing and this shift can be identified by a shift to more clandestine forms
of intervention in the Middle East from 2009 onwards – watermarked by the
presidency of Barack Obama. The increased use of special forces and drone
strikes allowed Obama to continue to exert influence over the region without

61

International Relations Theory

overtly declaring war – while also distancing his administration from the military intervention that defined that of his predecessor.
The official discourse across an event, although powerful, never fully
accounts for the reading of the entire situation. While the presentation of
terrorists as irrational and evil has found solid ground and the dominant
perceptions of terrorism and terrorists are of an illogical and apolitical act and
actor, there always will be deviation from this conceptualisation. As such, the
official discourse as crafted by elites never fully accounts for or subsumes the
whole of a society. For example, despite the warmongering in the wake of
9/11, there were large-scale anti-war protests by members of the public
across many nations. This messy entanglement of the everyday and the elite
shows that a plethora of discourses can coexist and craft the view of
international relations that we are offered. From this we must recognise that
elite and everyday discourses co-exist and, although one assumes a dominant position, there are still many other competing discourses at play that
shape international relations and have the potential to contribute to understandings commonly seen as ‘knowledge’ and ‘truth’.
Conclusion
The impact of poststructuralism within IR theory comes from its ability to not
only identify and uncover power relations that dictate political events but also
make space for alternative discourses to emerge that can also affect the
course of events. By examining elite actors, we can see how commonly
accepted facts about the political system are not ‘natural’ but, instead,
constructed in order to favour a dominant discourse. Furthermore, by tracing
the rise and fall of regimes of truth as they take on new forms and favour new
actors, poststructuralism shows how discourses can change over time and be
destabilised. Most importantly, poststructuralism allows you to become carefully attuned to – and interrogate – the many ways that power is exercised.

Feminism

62

8
Feminism
SA R A H S M IT H

From the outset, feminist theory has challenged women’s near complete
absence from traditional IR theory and practice. This absence is visible both
in women’s marginalisation from decision-making and in the assumption that
the reality of women’s day-to-day lives is not impacted by or important to
international relations. Beyond this, feminist contributions to IR can also be
understood through their deconstruction of gender – both as socially constructed identities and as a powerful organising logic. This means recognising
and then challenging assumptions about masculine and feminine gender
roles that dictate what both women and men should or can do in global
politics and what counts as important in considerations of international
relations. These assumptions in turn shape the process of global politics and
the impacts these have on men and women’s lives. Rather than suggest that
traditional IR was gender-neutral – that is, that gender and IR were two
separate spheres that did not impact on each other – feminist theory has
shown that traditional IR is in fact gender-blind. Feminist scholarship
therefore takes both women and gender seriously – and in doing so it
challenges IR’s foundational concepts and assumptions.
The basics of feminism
If we start with feminism’s first contribution – making women visible – an early
contribution of feminist theorists is revealing that women were and are
routinely exposed to gendered violence. In making violence against women
visible, an international system that tacitly accepted a large amount of
violence against women as a normal state of affairs was also exposed. For
example, former UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon’s ‘UNiTE’ campaign to
end violence against women estimated that up to seven out of ten women will
experience violence at some point in their lives – and that approximately 600
million women live in countries where domestic violence is not yet considered
a crime. Violence against women is prevalent globally and is not specific to

63

International Relations Theory

any particular political or economic system. Jacqui True (2012) has demonstrated the links between violence against women in the private sphere (for
example, domestic violence) and the kinds of violence women experience in
public, in an increasingly globalised workplace and in times of war. In short,
nowhere do women share the same economic, political or social rights as
men and everywhere there are prevalent forms of gendered violence,
whether this be domestic violence in the home or sexual violence in conflict.
In looking at violence against women in such a way, it is possible to see a
continuum of gendered violence that does not reflect neat and distinct
categories of peace, stability and so on. Many societies are thought of as
predominantly peaceful or stable despite high levels of violence against a
particular portion of the population. It also presents a very different image of
violence and insecurity to that viewed through the security agendas of states,
which is characteristic of traditional IR viewpoints.
In making women visible, feminism has also highlighted women’s absence
from decision-making and institutional structures. For example, in 2015 the
World Bank estimated that globally women made up just 22.9% of national
parliaments. One of the core assumptions of traditional perspectives that
feminism has challenged is the exclusionary focus on areas that are
considered ‘high’ politics – for example, sovereignty, the state and military
security. The traditional focus on states and relations between them overlooks the fact that men are predominantly in charge of state institutions,
dominating power and decision-making structures. It also ignores other areas
that both impact global politics and are impacted by it. This is a gendered
exclusion as women contribute in essential ways to global politics even
though they are more likely to populate those areas not considered high
politics and their day-to-day lives may be considered peripheral. Traditional
perspectives that ignore gender not only overlook the contributions of women
and the impact global politics has on them but also perpetually justify this
exclusion. If women are outside these domains of power, then their experiences and contributions are not relevant. Feminist theorists have worked to
demonstrate that this distinction between private and public is false. In doing
so they show that previously excluded areas are central to the functioning of
IR, even if they are not acknowledged, and that the exclusion and inclusion of
certain areas in traditional IR thinking is based on gendered ideas of what
counts and does not count.
This brings us to the second key contribution of feminism – exposing and
deconstructing socially constructed gender norms. In making sense of IR in a
way that takes both women and gender seriously, feminism has demonstrated the construction of gendered identities that perpetuate normative
ideas of what men and women should do. In this regard, it is important to
understand the distinction between ‘sex’ as biological and ‘gender’ as socially

Feminism

64

constructed. Not all gender considerations rest on the analysis of women, nor
should they, and gender relates to expectations and identities attached to
both men and women. Gender is understood as the socially constructed
assumptions that are assigned to either male or female bodies – that is,
behaviour that is assumed to be appropriate ‘masculine’ (male) or ‘feminine’
(female) behaviour. Masculinity is often associated with rationality, power,
independence and the public sphere. Femininity is often associated with
irrationality, in need of protection, domesticity and the private sphere. These
socially and politically produced gender identities shape and influence global
interactions, and IR as theory – and global politics as practice – also
produces such gendered identities in perpetuating assumptions about who
should do what and why. These gender identities are also imbued with power,
in particular patriarchal power, which subordinates women and feminine
gender identities to men and masculine gender identities. What this means is
that socially constructed gender identities also determine distributions of
power, which impact where women are in global politics. Whereas men can
be feminine and women masculine, masculinity is expected for men and
femininity of women.
Cynthia Enloe (1989) asked the question ‘where are the women?’,
encouraging IR scholars to see the spaces that women inhabit in global
politics and demonstrating that women are essential actors in the
international system. She focused on deconstructing the distinctions between
what is considered international and what is considered personal, showing
how global politics impacts on and is shaped by the daily activities of men
and women – and in turn how these activities rest on gendered identities.
Traditionally, the military and war making have been seen as masculine
endeavours, linked with the idea that men are warriors and protectors, that
they are legitimate armed actors who fight to protect those in need of
protection – women, children and non-fighting men. In practice this has meant
that the many ways that women contribute to conflict and experience conflict
have been considered peripheral, outside the realm of IR’s considerations.
For example, the issue of sexual and gendered violence in conflict has only
recently entered the international agenda. Comparatively, the mass rape of
women during and after the Second World War was not prosecuted as the
occurrence was either considered an unfortunate by-product of war or simply
ignored. This has since changed, with the 2002 Rome Statute recognising
rape as a war crime. However, this recognition has not led to the curtailment
of conflict related sexual violence and this form of violence remains endemic
in many conflicts around the world, as does impunity for its occurrence.
In turn, these issues highlight the importance of intersectionality –
understanding that IR is shaped not only by gender but also by other identities, such as class, race or ethnicity. Intersectionality refers to where these

65

International Relations Theory

identities intersect, and in turn how different groups of people are marginalised, suggesting that we must consider each in tandem rather than in
isolation. In examining wartime rape, Lori Handrahan (2004, 437) has shown
the intersection of gender and ethnic identities, where the enemy’s women
become constructed as ‘other’ and violence against them consequently
comes to represent the ‘expansion of ethnic territory by the male conqueror.’
This rests on gendered constructions, which occur at the intersections with
other forms of identity, such as ethnicity or race. Gendered constructions that
see women characterised as protected mean that conquering them – through
rape or sexual violence – is representative of power and domination over
one’s enemy. Applying feminist theory to the issue of male wartime rape also
shows the gendered logics that inform its occurrence, in particular that the
rape of male opponents is seen to ‘feminise’ (that is, humiliate, defeat) opponents. This again highlights the contribution of feminism in understanding
how gender influences IR and how the feminine is undervalued or devalued.
As discussed above, feminism has exposed gender violence and women’s
marginalisation in global politics. However, it also challenges gendered
constructions of women as inherently peaceful, as in need of protection or as
victims. Feminists see these constructions as further evidence of gender
inequality and also as contributing to the exclusion of women from traditional
IR perspectives in the first instance. If women are assumed to be victims
rather than actors or as peaceful rather than aggressive or as only existing in
the domestic or private realm (rather than the public sphere), then their
experiences and perspectives on global politics are more easily ignored and
justified as marginal. Accounts of women disrupting these gender identities,
such as being agents of political violence for example, have challenged these
assumptions. This is an important contribution of feminism and one that
challenges the construction of gendered identities that do not reflect the
diversity of women’s engagements with IR and in practice perpetuate women’s limited access to power. Therefore, taking feminism seriously is not
simply about upending the historical marginalisation of women, it also
provides a more complete picture of global politics by taking into account a
broader range of actors and actions.
Feminism and peacekeeping
Building peace after conflict is an increasingly central concern of IR scholars
– especially as conflicts become broader and more complex. There are also
questions regarding how post-conflict societies are to be rebuilt and how best
to prevent relapses into conflict. Peacekeeping missions are one way that the
international community seeks to institute sustainable peace after conflict and
the United Nation’s traditional peacekeeping role (understood as acting as an

Feminism

66

impartial interlocutor or monitor) has broadened considerably. Missions now
frequently include a laundry list of state-building roles, including reestablishing police and military forces and building political institutions.
Feminist theorists have demonstrated the ways that peacekeeping, as
security-seeking behaviour, is shaped by masculine notions of militarised
security. Post-conflict situations are generally characterised as the formal
cessation of violence between armed combatants, ideally transitioning to a
situation where the state has a monopoly on the use of force. It is this shift
that peacekeeping missions seek to facilitate, conducting a wide range of
tasks such as disarming combatants, facilitating peace deals between various
state and non-state groups, monitoring elections and building rule of law
capacity in state institutions such as police forces and the military.
However, as feminist IR scholars have shown, violence against women often
continues in the post-conflict period at rates commensurate to or even greater
than during the conflict period. This includes rape and sexual assault,
domestic violence and forced prostitution, as well as those selling sex to
alleviate financial insecurity. The dominant approach to keeping peace often
obscures these kinds of violence. Issues like gender equality and domestic
violence (and human rights) are considered ‘soft’ issues as opposed to the
‘hard’ or real issues of military security. This understanding of peace, then, is
one in which women’s security is not central.
In terms of structural and indirect violence, women are generally excluded
from positions of power and decision-making in reconstruction efforts and
have limited access to economic resources. Donna Pankhurst (2008) has
theorised what she terms a post-conflict backlash against women, one that is
chiefly characterised by high rates of violence and restrictions on women’s
access to political, economic and social resources post-conflict. The
restriction of women’s access to such resources – such as basic food,
housing and education – makes them more susceptible to gendered violence.
This often begins with women’s exclusion from peace negotiations and deals,
which instead focus on elite actors who are predominantly men, often
militarised men. In peacekeeping missions, women are also underrepresented. In 1993, women made up only 1% of deployed personnel. That
figure had only risen to 3% for military and 10% for policy personnel by 2014.
As gender inequality has become increasingly acknowledged, those involved
in peacekeeping have paid more attention to the causes and consequences
of women’s insecurity in post-conflict settings.
In October 2000 the UN Security Council devoted an entire session to
Women, Peace and Security – adopting Resolution 1325 as a result. This
resolution called for a gender perspective to be ‘mainstreamed’ throughout

67

International Relations Theory

peace operations and for women to be included in peace agreements and
post-conflict decision-making – in addition to the protection of women and
girls during conflict. Resolution 1325 calls on all actors to recognise the
‘special needs’ of women and girls in post-conflict societies, to support local
women’s peace initiatives, and advocates for the protection of women’s
human rights in electoral, judiciary and police systems. However, consistent
with the construction of a gendered understanding of peace discussed above,
there remain limitations to the full implementation of Resolution 1325.
A United Nations study by Radhika Coomaraswamy (2015) found that gender
in peacekeeping continues to be under-resourced politically and financially,
and the gendered elements of post-conflict reconstruction are still
marginalised in missions. Women still experience high rates of violence postconflict, are still excluded from peace processes and still ignored in peacebuilding policy. This is demonstrated, for example, in national and international attempts to disarm former combatants after conflict and reintegrate
them into post-conflict society. This is a post-conflict policy area that feminist
scholars have routinely exposed as being highly gendered and exclusionary
of women who are former combatants. Megan Mackenzie (2010) has attributed this to constructed gender identities that minimise the idea that women
are agents in conflict or involved in war-making, instead constructing them as
victims with limited agency. In other words, they are subject to war rather than
war’s actors.
This means not only that women are excluded from disarmament programmes because of socially produced gender norms but also that they are
unable to access the material and economic benefits that may flow from such
programmes – or the political and social gains they could make from being
recognised as legitimate veterans in post-conflict societies. This example
demonstrates the power invested in gendered identities, the ways they can
shape policy and how gender inequality is perpetuated via such policy.
Finally, international interventions such as peacekeeping missions also
contribute to the continuation of violence post-conflict and are a site in which
gendered identities are produced. There have been numerous reports of
peacekeepers perpetrating sexual violence against women, girls and boys
while on mission. This issue gained much attention in 2015 and into 2016,
when a United Nations whistle blower exposed not only reports of sexual
abuse of children in the Central African Republic by French peacekeepers but
also the United Nation’s inaction in the face of these reports. From a feminist
perspective, the impunity that peacekeepers enjoy – despite rhetorical
commitments to zero tolerance – is a result of gendered security imperatives
in which militarised security and the coherence of the institution (whether that

Feminism

68

be an international organisation or a state) is prioritised over the welfare of
the individual.
Conclusion
Feminist research has demonstrated the value in taking women’s experiences
and contributions seriously and used that as a base to demonstrate how IR
rests on, and perpetuates, gendered ideas about who does what, who
experiences what – and why – in global politics. Beyond this there is also
recognition that women are important agents in political, economic and social
processes. Despite its designation, feminism does more than focus on
women, or what are considered women’s issues. In highlighting both inequality and relations of power, feminism reveals gendered power and what it
does in global politics. Being concerned with women’s subordination to men,
gendered inequality and the construction of gendered identities, feminism has
challenged a homogenous concept of ‘women’ in IR and exposed gendered
logics as powerful organising frameworks.

69

International Relations Theory

9
Postcolonialism
S H E IL A N AIR

Postcolonialism examines how societies, governments and peoples in the
formerly colonised regions of the world experience international relations. The
use of ‘post’ by postcolonial scholars by no means suggests that the effects
or impacts of colonial rule are now long gone. Rather, it highlights the impact
that colonial and imperial histories still have in shaping a colonial way of
thinking about the world and how Western forms of knowledge and power
marginalise the non-Western world. Postcolonialism is not only interested in
understanding the world as it is, but also as it ought to be. It is concerned with
the disparities in global power and wealth accumulation and why some states
and groups exercise so much power over others. By raising issues such as
this, postcolonialism asks different questions to the other theories of IR and
allows for not just alternative readings of history but also alternative perspectives on contemporary events and issues.
The basics of postcolonialism
Postcolonialism has specifically drawn attention to IR theory’s neglect of the
critical intersections of empire, race/ethnicity, gender and class (among other
factors) in the workings of global power that reproduce a hierarchical IR. This
hierarchy is centred not on striving for a more equal distribution of power
among peoples and states but on the concentration of power.
A key theme to postcolonialism is that Western perceptions of the non-West
are a result of the legacies of European colonisation and imperialism.
Discourses – primarily things that are written or spoken – constructed nonWestern states and peoples as ‘other’ or different to the West, usually in a
way that made them appear to be inferior. In doing so, they helped European
powers justify their domination over other peoples in the name of bringing
civilisation or progress.

Postcolonialism

70

To better understand postcolonialism we can consider the discourses that
make certain power relations seem natural or even inevitable. Postcolonialism
views key issues in International Relations as constituting discourses of
power. This notion of a discourse allows scholars to utilise a frame of
reference for thinking about the world and its problems that does not merely
reside in the empirically verifiable and ‘fact’-based inquiry that drives
traditional IR theories such as realism and liberalism. Take, for example, the
issue of global inequality. Postcolonialism suggests that in order to better
understand how global class relations emerge and are maintained we must
address ideas about why these relations appear normal. This approach points
to how characterisations of global poverty are often accompanied by images
and narratives of non-Western governments and societies as simultaneously
primitive, hyper-masculine, aggressive, childlike and effeminate. In short,
postcolonialism argues that addressing and finding solutions to poverty and
global inequality come up against representations of the other that make it
difficult for Western policymakers to shed their biases and address the
underlying global structural factors such as how capital and resources are
accumulated and flow around the world generating inequality. For this reason,
solutions often focus only on intervening to support a seemingly less
developed state, rather than addressing the underlying causes of global
inequality.
In analysing how key concepts such as power, the state and security serve to
reproduce the status quo, postcolonialism proposes a more complex view of
such concepts than is characteristic of traditional theories. For example, the
concept of sovereignty, and with it the contours of the modern state, were
imposed on the colonial world by European powers. Yet it is a concept that is
usually taken for granted by scholars of realism and liberalism. Postcolonialism also challenges the Marxist perspective that class struggle is at the
root of historical change – instead demonstrating how race shapes history.
Analyses that focus only on class fail to consider how the identification of the
‘Third World’ (a term developed during the Cold War to describe those states
unaligned to the United States or the Soviet Union) as ‘backward’, ‘primitive’
or ‘non-rational’ are linked to persistent economic marginalisation. Similarly,
while mainstream IR theories see the international system as an anarchy,
postcolonial scholars see it as a hierarchy. Colonialism and imperialism
fostered a long process of continued domination of the West over the rest of
the world and cultural, economic and political domination still characterise
global politics.
Postcolonialism also demonstrates how Western views about Islam and its
adherents are a manifestation of the West’s own insecurities. The rise of
political Islam across the Muslim world – watermarked by Iran’s Islamic
Revolution in 1979 – not only confronted neo-imperialist interventions but also

71

International Relations Theory

revealed the impacts of core cultural and social shifts accompanying a more
interconnected global economy. In the West, however, the view of this
resurgence has been interpreted by prominent policymakers and academics
as heralding a ‘clash of civilizations’ (Huntington 1993) and worse,
constituting a direct threat to Western civilization. Edward Said (1997)
showed how Western media, film, academia and policy elites rely on a
distorted lens or framework used to describe the history and culture of Arab
peoples and adherents of Islam. He called it Orientalism because it constructs a particular idea of the so-called ‘Orient’ that is distinct from the West
and that in a binary or dualistic way of thinking ascribes to the Orient and its
inhabitants characteristics that are essentially the opposite of the West. For
instance, people of the Orient may be characterised as being exotic,
emotional, feminine, backward, hedonistic, non-rational and so forth. This is
in contrast to the more positive attributes usually associated with the West
such as rationality, masculinity, civilization and modernity.
Many postcolonial scholars emphasise how orientalist discourses are still
visible in Western representations today. Representations and perceptions
matter to postcolonial theorists because they dictate what comes to be seen
as normal or as making sense.
Postcolonialism owes a significant debt to Edward Said for his work on
developing Orientalism. Yet Said himself was influenced by the writing of anticolonial and nationalist thinkers such as Frantz Fanon (1967) and Albert
Memmi (1991) whose works discuss the power of ‘othering’. For example,
Fanon shows how race shapes the way that the coloniser relates to the
colonised and vice versa by capturing how some people under colonial rule
began to internalise – that is, identify with – ideas of racial difference that saw
‘others’ as inferior to white Europeans. Fanon explains that the ‘black man’ is
made to believe in his inferiority to the ‘white colonisers’ through psychological aspects of colonisation, such as the imposition of the coloniser’s
language, culture, religion and education systems. Through such impositions,
the colonised come to believe they are a culturally inferior other. This
internalisation made it easier for colonisers to justify and maintain their rule.
Postcolonialism thus brings into focus how racial binaries – that is, how races
are constructed as different, opposite or ‘other’ – continue even after the end
of formal colonial rule. It highlights how racialised othering frames not just
history, but contemporary debates such as national security, nuclear politics,
nationalism, culture, immigration, international aid and the struggle for
indigenous rights.
An example of racialised othering can be found in discourses around nuclear
non-proliferation. In such discourses, countries and their leaders in the Global

Postcolonialism

72

South are usually deemed not to be trusted with nuclear weapons. These
dominant discourses construct these states as dangerous, unpredictable or
unaccountable and as violating basic norms on human rights. One need only
look at how North Korea and Iran, two states that have pursued nuclear
proliferation, are portrayed as rogue states in US foreign policy discourse.
Yet, for decades, the West’s disregard for human rights may be seen in
uranium mining that has often taken place on lands that are populated by
indigenous peoples around the world – including in the United States – and
has caused death, illness and environmental degradation. Most importantly,
what is often missing from the nuclear debate is the fact that the United
States is the only power to have ever used nuclear weapons (aside from
testing), when it dropped atomic bombs on the Japanese cities of Nagasaki
and Hiroshima in 1945, with horrific and devastating loss of life.
Therefore, for postcolonial scholars such as Shampa Biswas (2014), the
notion that some states can be trusted with nuclear weapons while others
cannot because they are less developed, less mature in their approach to
human life or less rational is a racialised discourse. In debates such as these,
postcolonialism asks not who can be trusted with such weapons, but rather
who determines who can be trusted – and why? Simply looking at the competition between states to accrue nuclear weapons will not tell us enough
about the workings of power in international relations – such as how a nuclear
arms race is underpinned by the power of some states to construct other
states so that they are deemed not capable of having any such weapons at
all.
Postcolonialism and the marginalisation of women of colour
As with all theories of IR, there are internal debates among postcolonial
scholars and in this case also a significant overlap with feminism – especially
‘third wave’ feminism that became prominent in the 1990s. bell hooks (2000)
observed that the so-called ‘second wave’ of feminism of the mid- to late
twentieth century had emerged from women in a position of privilege and did
not represent African American women such as herself who remain on the
margins of society, politics and the economy. She called for an alternative,
critical and distinctive feminist activism and politics.
For example, does a black woman from a poor neighbourhood on Chicago’s
south side experience sexism in the same way as a white woman from its
wealthier suburbs? Women who share the same ethnic identity might
experience sexism in different ways because of their class. The same might
be true for women of colour and white women from the same social class.
Women of colour and white women in the United States experience

73

International Relations Theory

‘heteropatriarchy’ – a societal order marked by white male heterosexual
domination – differently even if they come from the same social class. An
illustration of how this works may be found in the video of Beyonce’s
‘Lemonade’ which not only draws on how sexism is filtered through this
patriarchal order but also explores how race, gender, class and sexuality are
intimately intertwined in the history of black women.
The fact that some black women may be more privileged in relation to class
may not take away from their experience of racism. For this reason (and
others), feminist postcolonial scholars (see Chowdhry and Nair 2002) call for
more attention to the intersections of race and/or ethnicity, nationality, class
and gender. By doing so they address the ways that different aspects of one’s
identity, such as race, gender, class, sexuality and so forth, intersect to create
multiple and distinct forms of oppression so that no one aspect can be privileged over another in understanding oppression. Instead, various identities
must all be understood as intersecting in producing one’s experience of
oppression. This idea of ‘intersectionality’ is central to third-wave feminist
approaches.
Postcolonial feminists share a desire to go beyond simply analysing the
impacts of patriarchy, gender inequality and sexual exploitation. Instead, they
highlight the need to fight not only patriarchy (broadly understood as the
power of men over women) but also the classism and racism that privileges
white women over women of colour. They question the idea of universal
solidarity in women’s movements, arguing that the struggle against patriarchy
as well as social inequality must be situated in relation to racial, ethnic and
sexual privilege. For example, while Western feminism has often portrayed
the veil as a symbol of oppression of women, many Algerian women adopted
the veil, standing alongside men, when protesting French rule. To them, it
was a symbol of opposition to white, colonial patriarchy. In many other parts
of the colonised world, women stood shoulder to shoulder with men in
nationalist movements to overthrow colonial rule, showing that women in
different cultural, social and political contexts experience oppression in very
different ways. Postcolonial feminists are committed to an intersectional
approach that uncovers the deeper implications of how and why systemic
violence evident in war, conflict, terror, poverty, social inequality and so forth
has taken root. Understanding power thus requires paying attention to these
intersections and how they are embedded in the issue at hand.
Postcolonial feminism asserts that women of colour are triply oppressed due
to their (1) race/ethnicity, (2) class status and (3) gender. An example can be
found in the employment conditions of the many women in the Global South
who work in factories producing textiles, semi-conductors, and sporting and

Postcolonialism

74

consumer goods for export to the West. In one such factory in Thailand, the
Kader Toy Factory, a fire in 1993 killed 220 female factory workers and
seriously injured over 500 more. The doors to the building were locked at the
time of the fire. The tragedy revealed the exploitation and deplorable working
conditions of these women, who were employed by local contractors of
American companies to make toys and stuffed animals for sale in Western
markets. Despite decades of such abuses, there was little attention given to
the conditions in these factories, or to the tragedy of the fire, in the
mainstream Western media. One opinion piece captured the shocking
disregard for these women’s lives,
These executives know that their profits come from the toil of
the young and the wretched in the Far East; they can live with
that – live well, in fact. But they do not want to talk about dead
women and girls stacked in the factory yard like so much
rubbish, their bodies eventually to be carted away like any
other industrial debris (Herbert 1994).
In another tragedy, the Rana Plaza – a garment factory in Dhaka, Bangladesh
– collapsed, killing 1,135 garment workers, mostly women. It threw a spotlight
on the workings of the global garment industry. Popular Western clothing lines
profit from low wages, exploitation and sweatshop conditions by producing
their clothes in countries with lax building codes and regulations and nonexistent (or inadequate) labour standards. The clothing lines do not then hold
the factories to account for working conditions or safety. Postcolonial scholars
argue that the deeply exploitative conditions and the disregard for the safety
of these workers show that lesser value is ascribed to brown bodies
compared to white ones.
While there was much more coverage of this industrial accident in the
Western media and the brands whose clothing was being made at the Rana
Plaza did suffer some momentary bad publicity, there has been little
sustained effort to right the wrongs in the operations of multinational firms.
The quest for the highest possible profit margins forces developing countries
into a ‘race to the bottom’ in which they compete to have the cheapest labour
and production costs in order to attract investment from multinational
corporations.
The results are low wages, exploitation and low safety standards. Postcolonial scholarship explains the failure to change these conditions by
exposing how race, class and gender come together to obscure the plight of
these workers, meaning that the factory overseers, like the owners of the
Rana Plaza and Kader operations, are not held accountable until tragedy

75

International Relations Theory

strikes. Even when they are held accountable, the punishment does not
extend to the Western corporations further up the chain who sub-contract the
task of exploiting workers – and ultimately killing some of them in these
cases. It is almost impossible to imagine that a tragedy of a similar scale in a
Western state would prompt so little action against those responsible or allow
the conditions that caused it to continue virtually unchecked.
Conclusion
Postcolonialism interrogates a world order dominated by major state actors
and their domineering interests and ways of looking at the world. It challenges
notions that have taken hold about the way states act or behave and what
motivates them. It forces us to ask tough questions about how and why a
hierarchical international order has emerged and it further challenges mainstream IR’s core assumptions about concepts such as power and how it
operates. Postcolonialism forces us to reckon with the everyday injustices
and oppressions that can reveal themselves in the starkest terms through a
particular moment of crisis. Whether it has to do with the threat of nuclear
weapons or the deaths of workers in factories churning out goods for Western
markets, postcolonialism asks us to analyse these issues from the perspectives of those who lack power. While postcolonialism shares some
common ground with other critical theories in this regard, it also offers a
distinctive approach. It brings together a deep concern with histories of
colonialism and imperialism, how these are carried through to the present –
and how inequalities and oppressions embedded in race, class and gender
relations on a global scale matter for our understanding of international
relations. By paying close attention to how these aspects of the global play
out in specific contexts, postcolonialism gives us an important and alternative
conceptual lens that provides us with a different set of theoretical tools to
unpack the complexities of this world.

Towards a Global IR?

76

10
Towards a Global IR?
A M ITAV A C H ARYA

The study of International Relations is growing rapidly all over the world. IR
students in Western universities are an increasingly multicultural lot, drawn
from many different parts of the world. There is also a proliferation of IR
departments and programmes in universities outside the West, especially in
large countries such as China, India, Turkey, Brazil and Indonesia. However,
IR is not yet a truly global discipline that captures the full range of ideas,
approaches and experiences of both Western and non-Western societies. IR
theories and concepts remain heavily biased in favour of Western Europe and
the United States. Consequently, they neglect the experiences and relationships in other parts of the world, or offer a poor fit for understanding and
explaining them.
The idea of a global IR challenges traditional IR’s neglect and marginalisation
of the voices and experiences of the non-Western world, or the Global South.
The principal aim of global IR is to ‘bring the Rest in’. It calls for greater
participation from scholars from the Global South in the IR discipline and the
broadening of the way IR is taught and written in the dominant centres of
knowledge in the West. The purpose of global IR is to ensure the transformation of the discipline into something that actually captures and explains
the relationships among states and societies in all parts of the world: East,
West, North, South. A global IR perspective on IR theory does not seek to
displace existing theories, but challenges them to broaden their horizons and
acknowledge the place and role of the non-Western world.
The reasons for the hitherto Western dominance of IR are many. One is the
hegemonic status of Western scholars, publications and institutions in IR and
their widespread belief that the Western IR theory has discovered the right
path to understanding IR, or the right answers to the puzzles and problems of
the day. Compounding the problem is a serious lack of institutional resources
in the non-Western world. Add to this the challenges facing scholars from

77

International Relations Theory

non-English speaking countries in getting published in major IR journals or to
pursue the major debates and developments in the field that are mainly
carried out in the English language. Another factor is the close link between
IR academics and governments in many developing countries (although this
is also a feature in the West), which promotes policy-oriented research at the
expense of theoretical work. There is also the tendency among many IR
scholars in the Global South towards an uncritical acceptance of Western
theory – and a resulting lack of confidence to take on Western theorists. In
this situation, what passes as theory is mostly the application of Western
theoretical concepts and models to the local context, rather than injecting
indigenous ideas and insights from local practices to the main body of IR
theory.
The discipline of International Relations, as often presented in its mainstream
textbooks and the learning and training programmes of major institution
teaching, is said to have nominally begun in the United Kingdom in 1919
when the first named department and professorship in international politics
was created in Aberystwyth, Wales. But it really developed in the United
States after the Second World War. It can hardly be a coincidence that these
countries were the leading powers of the world before and after the Second
World War. According to the traditional view, IR begins with the Peace of
Westphalia (1648), when Europe developed the sovereign nation-state. This
also coincided roughly with the rise of ‘the West’ via the European states
system that expanded to the rest of the world due to European colonialism.
As non-Western nations became independent during the period of
decolonisation post-1945, they inherited and adopted European ideas,
institutions and practices. After the Second World War, while some European
ideas retained their centrality, the United States added its own ideas and
approaches. Europe before 1945 had managed international relations through
a balance of power system, based on the idea that the stability of an
international system is best ensured through an approximate parity among its
major powers. Any attempt by any single power to become hegemonic
(dominate the rest) should be defeated by an alliance among other powers in
the system. The United States on the other hand sought to manage international order through multilateral institutions, such as the United Nations and
the International Monetary Fund. Although these institutions were theoretically
open to participation by all nations, their purpose and agenda were heavily
influenced by the interests and preferences of the United States and its allies.
Shaped by the ideas and practices of the West, the field of IR gave little
attention to ‘the Rest’. The traditional literature viewed non-Western countries
as ‘norm-takers’ or ‘passive subjects’ – recipients of Western ideas and

Towards a Global IR?

78

institutions – rather than active contributors to international order in their own
right. Against this traditional view, Global IR offers an alternative narrative. IR
as a discipline might have been invented in the West, but the substance of IR
did not begin with the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, which marked the
beginnings of the period of Western dominance. Other and older civilisations
– such as India, China and Islam – pioneered different international systems
and world orders. For this reason, their contribution should be more central to
the study of IR. IR should study not only anarchic international systems like
the Greek city-states system and Europe after the Peace of Westphalia, but
also hierarchical systems such as prevailed in Asia and the Middle East
before the advent of European colonialism.
Global IR also argues that international systems should be studied in terms of
not only political-strategic interactions but also cultural and civilizational
interactions. Many of the so-called modern concepts such as economic
interdependence, balance of power, and collective management of security –
which are often traced by traditional IR to European ideas and practices –
actually have multiple points of origin, both within and outside of Europe. With
such a broader scope, IR then offers more space to the history, culture,
economic systems and interactions and contributions of non-Western
civilizations and states. IR is best understood as the product of interactions
and mutual learning between all civilisations and states, even though some
have been more powerful than others at different stages in history.
Broadly stated, the idea of global IR revolves around six main dimensions
(see Acharya 2014 and 2016).
First, global IR calls for a new understanding of universalism or universality.
The dominant meaning of universalism in IR today is deeply influenced by the
European Enlightenment. As Robert Cox (2002, 53) puts it, ‘In the Enlightenment meaning, universal meant true for all time and space.’ His conception
of universalism may be called ‘particularistic universalism’, in the sense of
one set of ideas from Europe applying to all of humankind. This conception of
universalism had a dark side: the suppression of diversity and the justification
of European imperialism – which was inspired by the belief that European
ideas, institutions and practices are superior to those of others and hence
deserve to be imposed over other societies through force and occupations.
An alternative to particularistic universalism is pluralistic universalism. This
recognises the diversity among nations, respects it and yet seeks to find the
common ground among them. It views IR as a discipline with multiple and
global foundations.
Second, global IR calls for IR to be more authentically grounded in world

79

International Relations Theory

history, rather than Western history – and in the ideas, institutions, intellectual
perspectives and practices of both Western and non-Western societies.
‘Bringing the Rest in’ does not mean simply using the non-Western world as a
testing ground to revalidate existing IR theories after a few adjustments and
extensions. Global IR must be a two-way process. A key challenge for
theories and theorists of global IR is to develop concepts and approaches
from non-Western contexts on their own terms, and apply them not only
locally but also to other contexts, including the larger global canvas.
Third, global IR subsumes, rather than supplants existing IR knowledge,
including the theories, methods and scientific claims that we are already
familiar with. I fully recognise that IR theories are hardly monolithic or
unchanging when it comes to dealing with the non-Western world. Some
theories, especially postcolonialism and feminism, have been at the forefront
of efforts to recognise events, issues, agents and interactions outside the
West and drawing theoretical insights from them to enrich the study of IR.
Realism is ahead of liberalism in drawing insights from the non-Western
world. For example, realists recognise the thinking of India’s Kautilya or
China’s legalist thinkers, such as Han Feizi, as forerunners of Machiavelli or
Hobbes. Realism has also added new variants to its theoretical family that
have rendered it more relevant to the non-Western world than in its classical
forms. Constructivism has been especially important in opening space for
scholarship on the non-Western world because of its stress on culture and
identity. Realism and liberalism privilege material determinants of
international relations, such as power or wealth. These are often in short
supply in the developing world. But ideas and norms are not, and they are
often the main mechanisms through which the developing countries make
their contribution to international relations. Liberalism is also useful in this
sense as it identifies and prescribes three major pathways to peace:
economic interdependence, multilateral institutions and democracy. The
world has seen increasing trends towards these in the developing world.
Global economic interdependence has grown since the end of the Cold War.
There has been growing regional economic interdependence in East Asia, a
critical region of the world. Multilateral institutions have proliferated, including
in relatively newer areas such as cyberspace and climate change. To a lesser
degree, democratisation has taken hold in the developing world, especially in
Latin America and parts of East Asia, such as Indonesia and Myanmar. These
developments could potentially make liberalism more relevant to understanding the international politics of the non-Western world.
At the same time, global IR does not leave the mainstream theories –
realism, liberalism and constructivism – as is. Instead, it urges them to rethink
their assumptions and broaden the scope of their investigation. For realism,
the challenge is to look beyond conflicts induced by national interest and

Towards a Global IR?

80

distribution of power and acknowledge other sources of agency, including
culture, ideas and norms that make states and civilisations not clash, but
embrace and learn from each other. For liberals, there is a similar challenge
to look beyond American hegemony as the starting point of investigating
multilateralism and regionalism and their institutional forms. Liberalism also
needs to acknowledge the significant variations in cooperative behaviour that
exist in different local contexts, as no single model of integration or
interactions can account for all or most of them. For constructivism, taking
stock of different forms of agency in the creation and diffusion of ideas and
norms remains a major challenge.
Fourth, global IR gives centre stage to regions. Regionalism today is less
state-centric and encompasses an ever-widening range of actors and issues.
Regionalism is sometimes viewed as the antithesis of universalism, but the
two can be complimentary. Groupings such as the European Union (EU),
Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), and the African Union (AU)
actually compliment the role of the United Nations in peacekeeping,
humanitarian operations and conflict management. The study of regions is not
just about how regions self-organise their economic, political and cultural
space – it is also about how they relate to each other to shape global order. In
addition, focusing on regions is central to forging a close integration between
disciplinary approaches (which often have a global scope) and area (or
regional) studies.
Fifth, a truly global IR cannot be based on cultural exceptionalism and
parochialism. Exceptionalism is the tendency to present the characteristics of
a social group as homogenous, collectively unique and superior to those of
others. Claims about exceptionalism are frequently associated with the
political agendas and purposes of the ruling elite, as evident in concepts such
as ‘Asian Values’ or ‘Asian human rights’ or ‘Asian Democracy’. These are
usually associated with variations of authoritarian rule because they
originated in the 1990s from such countries as Lee Kuan Yew’s Singapore,
Mahathir Mohamad’s Malaysia and Deng Xiaoping’s China. Similarly,
exceptionalism in IR often justifies the dominance of big powers over the
weak. Before its defeat in the Second World War, Japan sought to establish
an empire over Asia under the pretext of a distinctive pan-Asian culture and
identity. Today, the rise of China has raised the possibility of an international
system in Asia dominated by Chinese (Confucian) values and suzerain
institutions, such as its historical tributary system.
Finally, global IR takes a broad conception of and multiple forms of agency.
Not so long ago, agency in international relations was primarily viewed in
terms of a ‘standard of civilisation’ in which the decisive element was the

81

International Relations Theory

capacity of states to defend their sovereignty, wage war, negotiate treaties,
enforce compliance and manage the balance of power. This self-serving,
ahistorical and brazenly racist formulation by the European colonial powers
ignored the fact that even the most sophisticated forms of statecraft were
present in many early non-Western civilisations. While the mainstream IR
theories viewed the so-called Third World or Global South as marginal to the
games that nations play, some of the critical theories actually thrived on this
presumed marginality. They rightly criticised mainstream theories for
excluding the South but did little exploration of alternative forms of agency in
the South. While global disparities in material power are not going to
disappear, we need to adopt a broader view of agency in international
relations, going beyond military power and wealth. Agency is both material as
well as ideational. Agency is not the prerogative of the strong, but can
manifest as the weapon of the weak. Agency can be exercised in global
transnational space as well as at regional and local levels. Agency can take
multiple forms. Agency means constructing new rules and institutions at the
regional level either to challenge or to support and strengthen global order.
For example, China’s nationalist leader before the Second World War, Sun
Yat-sen, is the father of the idea of international development that came to
underpin post-war institutions such as the World Bank. India’s Jawaharlal
Nehru was the first to propose a ban on nuclear testing. The Latin American
countries adopted a declaration of human rights months before the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights was drafted at the United Nations in New York.
And Asian nations played an important role in the making of subsequent
United Nations covenants on civil and politics rights and economic, social and
cultural rights.
Agency means conceptualising and implementing new pathways to security,
development and justice. In the 1960s, African countries developed formal
and informal rules to maintain their postcolonial boundaries within the
framework of the Organization of African Unity, which was later replaced by
the African Union in 2000. Along with the African Union, a major role in the
creation of the ‘Responsibility to Protect’ (R2P) norm was played by African
political leaders such as Nelson Mandela, diplomats such as Francis Deng (a
Sudanese) and Mohamed Sahnoun (an Algerian) and the former United
Nations Secretary-General, Kofi Annan. Indian economist Amartya Sen and
Pakistani economist Mahbub ul Haq frontally challenged the orthodox
Western model of development that focuses on national economic power and
growth rates in Gross Domestic Product (GDP). They put forward the
alternative and broader notion of human development, which focuses on
enhancing individual capabilities through primary education and health. As is
evident, some of these acts of agency are not just for specific regions or for
the South itself, but are important to global governance as a whole. Using this

Towards a Global IR?

82

broader framework of agency, global IR gives a central place to the voices
and agency of the South, to Southern perspectives on global order and to the
changing dynamics of North–South relations.
With the fundamentals of global IR now laid out it is important to recall Robert
Cox, who warned that ‘theory is always for someone and for some purpose’
(1981, 129). Who is global IR for and for what purpose? Because global IR
does not reject IR’s existing theories, but seeks to accommodate them, it is
open to criticism that it might end up preserving IR’s basic structure – albeit
filling in new contents by collecting concepts around the world. In other
words, global IR might end up globalising traditional IR theories and
concepts. There is also the risk of over-focusing on the stronger and more
resource-rich non-Western countries at the expense of the weaker countries
of the developing world. Another challenge for global IR is how to study all
nations, civilisations and issue areas under one framework without obscuring
the cultural, political and economic variations among them. Attempting this
also carries the risk of making IR too broad, lessening its analytic value and
making theory-building difficult. These risks are not trivial, but keeping them in
focus would help scholars to positively advance a discipline that clearly
requires a new, global, perspective.

83

International Relations Theory

Part Two

EXPANSION PACK

Green Theory

84

11
Green Theory
H U GH C . D YE R

In the 1960s there was public recognition of the global environmental crisis
arising from the ‘tragedy of the commons’, which is the idea that as selfinterested individuals, humans will overuse shared resources such as land,
fresh water and fish. In the 1970s the first United Nations conference on the
subject was held and by the 1980s green political parties and public policies
had emerged. This coincided with a demand for a green theory to help
explain and understand these political issues. By the 1990s, International
Relations had come to recognise the natural environment as an increasingly
significant source of questions for the discipline, requiring theoretical as well
as practical attention – especially in the wake of mounting evidence that
human actions were significantly changing our global climate and presenting
security problems as well as ecological ones.
The basics of green theory
Ecological thought addresses the interests of nature itself rather than only the
interests of humanity in nature. Green theory captures this orientation in
political terms of value and agency (Goodin 1992) – what is to be valued, by
whom and how to get it. Green theory belongs to the critical theory tradition,
in the sense that environmental issues evoke questions about relations
between and among ourselves and others in the context of community and
collective decision-making. In turn this has always raised the question of
where the boundaries of political community are. For environmental problems,
which transcend boundaries, these questions take the form of asking at what
level of political community we should seek a solution. For green theorists,
the answers are found in alternative ideas about political association based
on our ecological relationships.
The introduction of environmental issues into IR has had some influence, but

85

International Relations Theory

their theoretical significance and practical policy implications may be viewed
either as compatible or as irreconcilable with traditional assumptions and
current practices. If viewed traditionally, then environmental issues can simply
be added to the list of issues dealt with by existing means, for existing ends. If
viewed alternatively, then these issues may lead to theoretical and practical
transformation. Because theory and practice are linked, when environmental
issues challenge existing practice they also raise new questions that IR
theory must contend with. The obvious practical challenges of environmental
change have not yet transformed IR theory – or even practice very much. The
continued prevalence of competitive state relations is not conducive to
environmental cooperation or encouraging to green thought. However, there
has been theoretical development and some practical progress and a wideranging literature has emerged viewing a variety of environmental issues from
different theoretical perspectives. If this doesn’t amount to a single clear
vision, it certainly represents a longer-term view about humankind’s common
future.
Typically, environmental issues are buried in IR texts under other headings
and with little acknowledgement of their unique theoretical significance.
Environmentalism-themed scholarship is generally accepting of the existing
framework of political, social and economic structures of world politics. While
there are of course established forms of critical thought, these address
relations within and between human communities, rather than human
relations with the non-human environment. For example, liberalism emphasises individual rights of choice and consumption but is not fundamentally
concerned with the environmental consequences of that consumption.
Consequently, most forms of environmentalism seek to establish theoretical
positions and practical solutions through existing structures, or in line with
existing critiques of such structures. If less critical in orientation, then these
views are likely to be compatible with a liberal position in IR (viewing
international cooperation as being of general benefit to states). If more critical
in orientation, then environmentalism may align itself to a critique of the capitalist world system (maldistribution of benefits to people), if not challenging its
commitment to production and consumption per se. An environmentalist
perspective, while identifying environmental change as an issue, attempts to
find room for the environment among our existing categories of other
concerns, rather than considering it to be definitional or transformational.
Those frustrated by the lack of recognition of the environmental challenge in
international relations turned to the interdisciplinary science of ecology.
Political ecology has allowed both an ecological perspective to inform political
thought and a political understanding of our environmental circumstances. In
particular, our circumstances have long been determined by a particular
developmental path that depends on the over-consumption of natural

Green Theory

86

resources. Specifically, our political-economic practices of production,
distribution and consumption are intended to meet our immediate human
needs and desires. However, these practices are reflected in a growthdependent global market economy that is not designed to achieve
environmental sustainability or recognise ecological limits. This economy has
provided material development of a kind, but with such uneven benefits and
widespread collateral damage – including to the environment – that it has not
provided human development in an ecological context. From an ecological
perspective, there has been a general criticism of development and even
apparently progressive sustainable development practices. The well-known
model of the ‘tragedy of the commons’ (Hardin 1968), in which our short-term,
individual, rational choices destroy our environmental resources, has thus
been applied to the planet as a whole. It is tragic because we can see it
coming but seem unable or unwilling to do anything about it. That inability is
more than a practical problem; it is a profound theoretical challenge. Hardin
pointed out that such issues cannot be solved by technical means, but require
a change in human values.
Moving beyond environmentalism and political ecology, green theory more
radically challenges existing political, social and economic structures. In
particular, it challenges mainstream liberal political and economic assumptions, including those extending beyond the boundaries of existing political
communities (for conventional IR, this means states). Goodin (1992) suggests
that a distinguishing feature of green theory is its reference to a coherent
moral vision – a ‘green theory of value’ – which operates independently of a
theory of practices or political agency. For example, a green morality might
suggest that human material development should be curtailed in the interest
of preserving non-human nature. This would limit our freedom to consume
however much we can acquire. The need to put some limits on traditional
liberties suggests an approach that puts nature before people. Green theory,
in this sense, is ecocentric.
Ecocentrism (ecology-centred thought) stands against anthropocentrism
(human-centred thought). This is not because ecocentrism ignores human
needs and desires, but rather because it includes those within a wider
ecological perspective. Ecocentrism prioritises healthy ecosystems because
they are a prerequisite to human health and wellbeing. In contrast,
anthropocentrism sees only the short-term instrumental value of nature to
humans. This ecocentric/anthropocentric distinction is at the heart of green
theory. The holistic ecocentric perspective implies a rejection of the split
between domestic and international politics, given that arbitrary boundaries
between nations do not coincide with ecosystems. For example, air and water
pollution can cross a border and climate change cuts across all borders and
populations. Simply, human populations are ecologically interconnected. This

87

International Relations Theory

impacts on how we understand and deal with transboundary and global
environmental issues collectively, setting aside national self-interest.
The traditional IR concern with the state, in an international system of states,
is a challenge to thinking about environmental issues. As a central feature of
the historical Westphalian model of sovereign (self-determining) nation-states,
the concept of sovereignty (ultimate authority) has been particularly troubling.
Sovereignty neither describes the modern reality of political control nor offers
a reliable basis for human identity or wellbeing. Global environmental
problems require global solutions. This requires that we develop our understanding of the ‘global’ as an alternative organising principle and perhaps look
to green social movements rather than states for theoretical insights. This
gives rise to the question of whether we need to give up on the idea of
countries with borders as still being relevant to people’s lives, or recast them
in some more ecologically appropriate way with reference to how people live
in relation to their environment. This will likely entail a more global than local
kind of ethics. In part this hinges on our view of the need for political
structures (big government, small government or no government) and the
level or extent of their development. For example, we could promote
centralised global political structures, such as an institution for governing
environmental issues (Biermann 2001), or allow a variety of decentralised,
even anarchical, interconnected local structures to emerge as circumstances
require (Dyer 2014).
Decentralisation, or the transfer of authority and decision-making from central
to local bodies, has certain attractive features, such as self-determination and
democratic accountability. Ecologically there seem to be advantages as well,
since small communities may depend more on immediate local resources and
so be more likely to care for their environment. Local communities are more
likely to conceive of the natural environment and their relationship to it in less
instrumental terms, viewing it more as their home, thus addressing one of the
key reasons for the environmental crisis.
For example, the concept of ‘bioregionalism’, where human society is
organised within ecological rather than political boundaries, raises intriguing
issues of knowledge, science, history, culture, space and place in an
ecological context (McGinnis 1999). For instance, our sense of identity might
derive more from familiar environmental surroundings than from the idea of
nationality, such that we have greater inherited knowledge and understanding
of our local environment than of our political location. However, there are also
a number of objections to decentralisation, or greater localisation of decisionmaking. These include the concern that it would not promote crosscommunity cooperation as it is too parochial (too exclusively local; the

Green Theory

88

problem of nationalism), and this would mean little chance of developing
effective mechanisms to deal with global problems. In effect, it might just
reproduce a troublesome sovereign-state model of politics on a smaller scale.
To date IR theory has shown concern with transformations in our political
communities but somewhat less concern with transformations in our
ecological communities. Perhaps this is because we are not yet sure how a
cosmopolitan global sense of community colours our local relationships.
Green theory and climate change
Climate change is the dominant environmental issue of our age, caused by
our dangerous reliance on fossil fuels. Green theory helps us to understand
this in terms of long-term ecological values rather than short-term human
interests. These interests are generally pursued by states through investments in technology, but there is no easy technical solution to human-induced
climate change. From the perspective of green theory, this technical impasse
requires a change in human values and behaviour and therefore presents an
opportunity for political innovation or even a transformative shift in global
politics. IR theory can explain why climate change is a difficult problem for
states to solve because of economic competition and disincentives to cooperation. However, it cannot provide an alternative framework to explain how
this might be addressed. IR remains overly focused on states and their
national interests rather than other actors that may be more cooperative, such
as cities and communities or non-governmental organisations and green
social movements.
A green theory perspective on climate change understands it as a direct
consequence of human collective choices. Specifically, these choices have
led to historically anthropocentric economic practices of historically arbitrary
political groups (states), who have exploited nature in their own short-term
interests. Climate change presents a clear case of injustice to both present
and future humans who are not responsible for causing it and to the
ecosystem as a whole. Therefore, a solution requires an ecocentric theory of
value and a more ethical than instrumental attitude to human relations in our
common future. Green theory helps us to redefine issues such as climate
change in terms of long-term ecological values rather than short-term political
interests.
At the international level efforts have been underway since before the 1992
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio, which
gave rise to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
and other environmental agreements. As with many issues caught up in the

89

International Relations Theory

direct tension between environmental goals and developmental goals, any
bargains struck are inadequate compromises.
For green theory there is no such tension in an ecological path to development, even if that path seems more costly in the short term. This is not least
because some countries have developing still to do and hold already
developed countries historically responsible for climate change – and no
national actor is willing to bear global costs. After faltering efforts to address
climate change through the terms of the UNFCCC’s Kyoto Protocol, an
outline agreement was eventually achieved in the Paris Accords of December
2015. Whether or not this effort will actually address the sources and consequences of climate change remains to be seen, but green theory suggests
that a focus on human values and choices in communities is better than a
focus on bargaining between states.
In a world of states with primary responsibilities to their own citizens, finding
acceptable trade-offs between immediate economic wellbeing and longerterm ecological wellbeing is difficult. There is some prospect of powerful
states (like China) or groups of states (like the European Union) leading the
way and altering the structural parameters. However, the common ground
available from an IR perspective of competing states is unlikely to be
anywhere near the common ground envisioned by green theory. More
fundamentally, it is unlikely to meet the challenge of climate change. Even
with some political agreement, there remain significant differences about
responsibility for historic climate change and the costs of adapting to an
already changing climate that is affecting the least developed populations
hardest. While it is possible for states to cooperate in order to make helpful
environmental commitments, this is not directly related to action or change.
In any case, while international agreements are formally implemented by
governments and other constitutional bodies, the key agents of change are a
much wider range of non-state actors, smaller groups and individuals, which
may suggest a kind of anarchy rather than hierarchy. In sum, a green solution
to climate change could involve global governance institutions and
communities working together – largely bypassing the state – in order to
reduce damaging emissions, protect the climate and preserve the planetary
ecology on which humans depend.
Green theory equips us with a new vantage point for analysing these
developments. It also allows a broader ecological perspective on our common
human interests and emphasises choices made within the ecological
boundaries of climate change, rather than the political boundaries of economic advantage.

Green Theory

90

Conclusion
For IR, the contribution of green theory helps us re-examine the relationship
between the state, the economy and the environment. IR normally sets this in
the context of globalisation viewed from the limited perspective of states and
markets – but globalisation also involves opportunities for developing shared
global ecological values. Green theory has the potential to radically challenge
the idea of sovereign nation states operating in competition and is thus part of
the post-Westphalian trend in IR thought. Of course, the greater contribution
of green theory, or its capacity for critical engagement with IR, lies in its very
different origins – taking planetary ecology as a starting point and looking
beyond our current political-economic structures. Green theory is thus able to
offer not just an alternative description of our world but also a different logic
for understanding it – and how we might act to change it. IR theory is likely to
be disrupted and re-oriented by green theory, not so much because greens
will win the arguments but because IR theorists will inevitably have to provide
a coherent account of how we all live sustainably on our planet. This means
that at some point we may have to stop theorising about the state-centric
‘inter-national’ and find another political point of reference in human
relationships, such as policy networks or social movements.

91

International Relations Theory

12
Global Justice
A L IX D IET Z E L

Global justice is a theory that exists within the broader school of cosmopolitanism, which focuses on the importance of the individual as opposed to
the state, community or culture. Cosmopolitans take the individual as their
starting point because they believe that all human beings have equal moral
worth and therefore have the right to equal moral consideration. In this sense,
even if cosmopolitans disagree on how to ensure that individuals are the
subject of equal moral concern, the focus of these differing approaches is the
value of the individual. This focus on the moral importance of the individual
has led some cosmopolitan scholars to critically engage with theories of
justice, which are traditionally confined to the state and contained within the
realm of political (not international) theory. This endeavour has led to the
theory of global justice, which seeks to investigate the question of how best to
secure a just life for all individuals on Planet Earth, regardless of their
nationality or status.
The basics of global justice
Justice, at its core, concerns itself with who deserves what and why. True to
their cosmopolitan roots, contemporary global justice scholars concern themselves with the moral worth of the individual, regardless of place of birth, and
focus on problems of global cohabitation in which individuals are not yet
treated as morally equal or where the moral focus has traditionally been on
states. To engage with such problems, global justice scholars usually focus
on what individuals across the world deserve and how distribution of these
entitlements can be achieved. The answers to these types of questions vary
significantly depending on which problem is being addressed.
John Rawls’ (1971) Theory of Justice set out a theory that political structures
(typically states) can determine who deserves what and why due to the power

Global Justice

92

to make laws, raise taxes and dispense public spending. Therefore, such
structures should be built carefully to ensure a just distribution of rights and
duties between all citizens. Hence, Rawls’ idea was one of distributive justice.
Rawls was not advocating for communism, where all wealth is shared equally,
but for a society where inequality was moderated so that those who were
disadvantaged (for whatever reason) were at least able to live a decent life.
Rawls theorised that such a structure could only exist within a democratic
society, or in other words, a specific type of state. Therefore, Rawls’ account
of justice describes the potential for a just human existence for those
fortunate enough to live within such a state – but his theory was not designed
to apply internationally as no such formal structure of global distributive
justice exists.
Cosmopolitan scholars take issue with Rawls’ state-centric approach to
justice and argue that questions of justice must include all humans,
regardless of state association. For example, Charles Beitz (1975) argues
that limiting questions of justice to the national level in the modern global era
is morally inappropriate, because we now have global institutions that may be
able to perform some of the basic functions of the state, such as collect forms
of taxation or make laws. Thomas Pogge (1989) stresses that global inequalities between individuals call for a global approach to justice that can
effectively respond to these inequalities. Although these scholars ground their
arguments in different ways, they both advocate for a widening of the scope
of justice to the global level. These types of arguments are where the term
‘global justice’ originates and provide the bedrock for its emergence as a
theory of IR.
When discussing global poverty, Thomas Pogge (2001) and Gillian Brock
(2010) argue that poverty alleviation should focus on redistributing wealth and
resources between rich and poor individuals. When analysing humanitarian
intervention, scholars such as Mary Kaldor (2010) and Daniele Archibugi
(2004) make the case that individuals must be prioritised over state-centric
non-intervention laws. Furthermore, scholars such as Garrett Brown (2012)
analyse the issue of global health and argue that the health of individuals is
determined by global structures to make the case for reform. Contemporary
global justice scholars focus on problems as diverse as gender inequality,
immigration and refugees, warfare and climate change. This implies that the
question of who deserves what, and why, covers a wide range of topics, most
of which are contemporary international relations problems. This is why the
discipline of global justice is so relevant to IR, because global justice scholars
concern themselves with analysing and assessing fundamental problems
caused by global cohabitation. In this sense, it is a modern theory that will
continue to be relevant as long as global problems exist.

93

International Relations Theory

Although global justice scholars usually assert that individuals must be the
central unit of moral concern when exploring global problems, it is important
to note that these scholars often prioritise different goals in order to ensure
that individuals are the subject of equal moral concern. For example, some
scholars emphasise human rights, some discuss the importance of
institutions operating fairly (referred to as procedural justice), some emphasise the importance of human capability, while others are concerned with fair
global social processes. It is important to keep this diversity in mind when
studying global justice. No two scholars have the exact same aims, which
implies a healthy diversity of ideas within the field. This is true even within
more narrow subjects, such as climate justice, where authors have many
different ideas on how to achieve a just response to the problem of climate
change.
While you might assume that an approach that seeks to treat all humans on
Earth better is popular, or logical, global justice also attracts some notable
criticisms. David Miller (2007) argues that national borders are more
important than cosmopolitan global justice. Miller believes that coming to an
agreement on principles of justice requires a common history and culture and
that defining global principles is not possible because of national differences
on conceptions of what is ‘good’ or ‘right’. Thomas Nagel (2005) and Michael
Blake (2001) both argue that global justice cannot be achieved without the
backing of powerful global institutions. However, global institutions that have
power over individuals and states simply do not exist (yet), rendering
discussions about global principles of justice futile. Finally, Iris Marion Young
(2011) regards cosmopolitanism as a Western-centric theory that does not
have the global appeal it purports to have. After all, global justice is based on
the importance of the individual and often makes appeal to human rights and
other liberal norms, which some perceive as Western ideals, not universal
ones. These criticisms do not take away from the importance of global justice:
like all theories of IR, its theoretical development is spurred on by answering
its critics.
Global justice and climate change
Climate change requires actors from around the world to come together and
agree on how to move forward. As temperatures continue to rise and the
global response lags behind what scientists recommend, global justice
scholars are becoming increasingly interested in climate change and its
global (mis)management. Spurred on by the global nature of the problem and
the injustices it presents, global justice scholars have also turned their
attention to climate change for several important reasons.

Global Justice

94

First, climate change is undoubtedly a global problem and global justice
scholars are keen to engage with such problems. Greenhouse gas emissions
cannot be confined within a state, they rise into the atmosphere and cause
global temperature changes within and outside of their original state borders.
Although it is difficult to establish direct blame or fault, it is nonetheless
undeniable that virtually all individuals, states and corporations contribute to
some degree to climate change. In this sense, the global nature of the climate
change problem defies conventional assumptions about state sovereignty and
justice, which is what makes it so interesting to global justice scholars.
Second, climate change requires a global solution, which suits global justice
scholars who are interested in providing recommendations for problems of
global cohabitation. No one state can stop climate change on its own. There
is no doubt that combatting climate change will require a collaborative effort,
implying the need for global agreements. Coming to such agreements will
inevitably involve discussion about which actors must lower emissions and by
how much or even which actors should contribute to the costs of climate
change – such as helping certain populations adapt to rising sea levels or
extreme weather. These are, by their nature, questions of distributive justice
and are therefore of interest to global justice scholars.
Third, climate change presents an unfair distribution of benefits and burdens
between morally equal individuals, who are the key concern of global justice
scholars. Climate change will most negatively affect those living in less
developed countries who have done the least to contribute to the causes of
climate change, while those living in developed countries, who have
contributed the most emissions, will likely suffer the least. This is because
less developed countries are more often located in areas which will bear the
brunt of the problems associated with climate change. Furthermore, developing states typically do not have as many resources as developed states to
adapt to dangerous weather patterns. For example, the Solomon Islands has
already lost five small islands as a result of climate change and yet it is one of
the lowest emitting countries in the world. Paul Harris (2010, 37) argues that
the climate change problem ‘cries out for justice’ because the effects of
climate change fall disproportionately on people who are already vulnerable,
cannot adequately protect themselves and have not significantly contributed
to the problem.
Although global justice scholars agree that climate change will affect
individuals and are therefore concerned with addressing the problem, these
scholars have different ideas on what exactly is at stake and what should
therefore be prioritised. For example, Simon Caney (2010) defines three
distinct rights that are predicted to be threatened by climate change: the right

95

International Relations Theory

to life, the right to food and the right to health – and any programme combating climate change should not violate these.
Tim Hayward (2007) defines a right specific to the climate change problem:
ecological space – a human right to live in an environment free of harmful
pollution adequate for health and wellbeing. Hayward’s approach differs from
Caney’s because his priority is not protecting human rights that already exist
in international law but rather creating new climate related rights that must be
defended.
Patrick Hayden’s (2010) conception of rights encompasses both environment
specific substantive and procedural rights. Hayden’s substantive rights
include the right to be protected from environmental harm and his procedural
rights include the right to be fully informed about the potential effects of
environmental hazards, the right to participate in democratic procedures for
climate policymaking and the right to complain about existing conditions,
standards and policies (Hayden 2010, 361–362). In this sense, Hayden is
concerned not merely with basic rights but also with fair procedures.
The debate about rights is important because defining who deserves what
can help guide a discussion on what should be done about climate change
and who should be responsible for climate change action. For example, if the
right to health must be protected, this could imply that lowering emissions is
not enough and that populations must be protected from disease in other
ways – for example, by inoculating vulnerable people against certain diseases
or providing clean drinking water in drought-prone areas.
The question of who is responsible for climate change action is another key
point of discussion amongst global justice scholars. The discipline of IR is
traditionally concerned with relationships between states. Some scholars
following this tradition and these debates usually focus on which states
should contribute how much to climate change action.
Henry Shue (2014) advocates for the Polluter Pays Principle, which is based
on examining who caused the problem to determine who should pay (and
how much) for climate change action – and the Ability to Pay Approach, which
asserts that the responsibility should be borne by the wealthy. Thomas Risse
(2008) takes issue with these approaches and advocates for an index that
measures per capita wealth and per capita emission rates, then groups
countries into categories.
In this sense, the debate concerns how responsibility for climate change
should be allocated, which is important for international relations as it reflects

Global Justice

96

ongoing discussions between states, most recently when putting together the
2015 Paris Agreement. Other scholars are keen to include non-state actors in
their conceptions of climate justice and responsibility.
Paul Harris points out that cosmopolitanism is traditionally concerned not only
with states but also with individuals. For this reason he studies how individuals are affecting climate change and discovers that it is rich individuals who
produce the most greenhouse gases, regardless of which state they live in.
As he puts it, ‘affluence is the primary and disproportionate cause of global
environmental degradation’ (Harris 2010, 130). These individuals have
responsibility to act on climate change by (for example) travelling less,
reducing meat consumption and buying fewer luxury items. Simon Caney
(2010) argues that all agents (not just the wealthy) who contribute to
emissions and have the means of lowering these, including individuals,
states, corporations, sub-state political authorities and international financial
institutions, should be held accountable.
These debates about the climate responsibilities of non-state actors are
important to IR theory, which is traditionally concerned with how states relate
to one another. By discussing which other actors might be responsible for
climate change, global justice scholars are able to move the discipline of
International Relations in a new direction.
Conclusion
International relations theory has traditionally been overly concerned with
global (dis)order. Global justice scholars have contributed to widening the
scope of IR theory by shifting the focus to individuals, on a planetary scale,
and thereby approaching problems of global cohabitation in a new way. Yet
despite signs of progress in academia, states seem to be more focused on
managing conflict, distrust and disorder than on reaching global agreements
and treating one another fairly. For that reason, global justice as an issue has
been underrepresented in policy and global justice scholarship has not yet
reached the same prominence as mainstream IR theories such as realism or
liberalism. Nevertheless, in times of transnational terrorism, rising global
inequalities, migration crises, pandemic disease and climate change –
considerations of global cooperation, fairness and justice are more important
than ever.

97

International Relations Theory

13
Queer Theory
MA R K U S T H IEL

Queer theory offers a significant avenue through which to deconstruct and
then reconstruct established IR concepts and theories. Stemming from
various fields that transcend a narrow view of IR, queer research applies an
interdisciplinary outlook to advance new critical perspectives on sexualities,
gender and beyond. A single viewpoint in a field as diverse as IR would
unnecessarily limit the range of scholarly viewpoints. It would also preclude a
nuanced debate about the contents and forms of lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender (LGBT) perspectives, queer scholarship and queer scholarly
politics in IR. Due to these themes, and because of its diversity, it is difficult to
define queer theory precisely. Indeed, a narrow definition of it would not be in
line with queer theoretical tenets. Queer theory is not just confined to
sexualities or sexual rights. It also questions established social, economic
and political power relations – and critically interrogates notions of security.
The basics of queer theory
Queer theory’s origins are in LGBT studies – which focus on sexuality and
gender. It soon distanced itself from those approaches due to disagreements
with the stable identities that LGBT studies suggest. Queer theory
emphasises the fluid and humanly performed nature of sexuality – or better,
sexualities. It questions socially established norms and dualistic categories
with a special focus on challenging sexual (heterosexual/homosexual),
gender (male/female), class (rich/poor), racial (white/non-white) classifications. It goes beyond these so-called ‘binaries’ to contest general political
(private/public) as well as international binary orders (democratic/
authoritarian). These are viewed as over-generalising theoretical constructs
that produce an either/or mode of analysis that hides more than it clarifies
and is unable to detect nuanced differences and contradictions. But queer
theory also analyses and critiques societal and political norms in particular as
they relate to the experience of sexuality and gender. These are not viewed

Queer Theory

98

as private affairs. Just as feminists perceive of gender as a socially
constructed public and political affair, so queer theorists argue with regards to
sexuality and gender expression.
As the word ‘queer’ was used to describe homosexuals in the nineteenth
century, queer theory traces its lineage from the study of sexuality in its
private and public forms. A commonplace meaning attributed to the term
revolves around being non-conforming in terms of sexuality and gender, thus
adding an ambiguous notion to being or acting queer. Hence a queer
approach towards sexual equality complicates identity-based LGBT advocacy,
as queer thinking expresses a more challenging, fluid perspective. This split
has become even more pronounced as the international politics of sexual
orientation and gender identity receives an ever-increasing degree of public
attention. Some states have implemented substantial equality provisions in
order to prove that they are ‘modern’ or ‘Western’ enough, while others have
responded with pushback in the form of homophobic legislation and
persecution. Sexual orientation and gender identity rights, which themselves
are questioned by queer theorists as overly reliant on Western liberal norms
of human rights and democracy, have become points of political contention,
eliciting domestic culture wars as well.
Consider the debate in the United States over whether transgender
individuals should be free to use the toilet of their personal choice. The status
of sexuality and gender politics in IR has clearly been elevated via cases
such as this which can quickly transcend domestic politics and enter the
international realm. In addition, it has also impacted apparently unrelated
policies such as defence policies, health care and labour market regulations
and thus created new avenues for the re-construction of conventional IR
concepts. As a result, new perspectives are needed to explain this inherent
part of the social and political world. Queer theory does not assume a uniform
access to reality, but rather acknowledges that subjective knowledge(s) about
sexuality, gender and other social aspects are constructed rather than preexistent, fluid rather than stable, and not always in line with societal norms. In
this sense, queer theory has moved beyond focusing simply on the
experience of sexuality and gender.
Sexuality politics and the queer scholarship connected to it arrived late on the
theoretical scene in part because sexuality and gender initially were anchored
in the private, rather than the public, spheres. Scholars advanced critical and
feminist viewpoints emerging from the writings of Michel Foucault (1976),
Judith Butler (1990) and Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick (1990) among others.
Foucault’s groundbreaking linking of sexuality and knowledge to political
power, and Butler’s rejection of stable sexual orientation and gender identities

99

International Relations Theory

in favour of everyday performed ones remain foundational notions. Kosofsky
Sedgwick’s calling attention to the discursive definition of homo/
heterosexuality in society further defined queer thinking. These scholarly
statements were hardly accepted in mainstream political science because
they rejected objectivity and highlighted the conditional and unstable human
nature of social and political orders, including IR questions of security and
governance. Hence queer theory evolved largely in literature, philosophy,
sociology and queer studies programmes without making substantial inroads
into IR theorising.
Despite the distinct emergence of queer theory from these wider origins,
some questions remain. One of the major issues is to what extent ‘queer’
should be adopted as a label for transgressive (socially unacceptable) forms
of thinking and acting – as this would in turn create a queer/mainstream
binary. This is something that queer scholars argue against. Another issue
lies in the vague definition of queer theoretical tenets and terms, leading to
uncertainty about how a queer theoretical lens can best be deployed in
various disciplines by a wide range of individuals. In its application to IR,
queer theory challenges many assumptions about world politics unrelated to
sexuality and gender. It aims to deconstruct established simplistic binaries –
such as insecurity/security or war/peace – and recognises the inherent
instability of political and social orders. Instead, it embraces the fluid, performative and ambiguous aspects of world politics. Hence, it criticises those
approaches to politics and society that assume natural and moral hierarchies.
It problematises, for instance, the way in which non-traditional sexualities
have become normalised according to ‘hetero-normative’ standards, including
the aspiration towards marriage and child rearing. Queer theorists argue that
this results in a societal integration of sexual minorities into mainstream
consumer society – making them less willing (or able) to contest deeper
political inequalities.
Queer theory perceives sexuality and gender as social constructs that shape
the way sexual orientation and gender identity are displayed in public – and
thereby often reduced to black-and-white issues that can be manipulated or
distorted. With regard to more classical IR topics, it critically assesses the
assumption that all societies find themselves at different points along a linear
path of political and economic development or adhere to a universal set of
norms. Hence it embraces ambiguity, failure and conflict as a counterpoint to
a dominant progressive thinking evident in many foreign or development
policies. As a scholarly undertaking, queer theory research constitutes of ‘any
form of research positioned within conceptual frameworks that highlight the
instability of taken-for-granted meanings and resulting power relations’ (Nash
and Browne 2012, 4).

Queer Theory

100

Weber (2014) highlights a lack of attention to queer theory by decrying the
closed-mindedness of standard IR theories, arguing that queer scholarship in
IR exists but is not recognised. The invisibility of queer theory is slowly
changing, with case-study work on state homophobia (Weiss and Bosia 2013)
or collective identity politics (Ayoub and Paternotte 2014) and the increasing
relevance of transnational LGBT rights discourses for IR scholarship. But if
empirical work in this area concentrates mainly on the agency of groups in
their surrounding political structure, what is ‘queer’ about LGBT advocacy
perspectives? These works offer comparative case studies from regional,
cultural and theoretical peripheries to identify new ways of theorising the
political subject by questioning the role of the state as we have come to
accept it. They add to IR by broadening the knowledge about previously
under-recognised perspectives that critically examine IR’s apparently obvious
core concepts (or ‘myths’, as Weber calls them) such as sovereignty, power,
security and nationalism. They do so from the vantage point of the outsider
and infuse these well-worn IR concepts with critical considerations and
interpretations. Importantly, they contest existing dualistic binaries in
mainstream IR – such as state/system, modern liberalism/premodern homophobia, and West/Rest. Queer IR scholars look for the contribution queer
analysis can provide for re-imagining the political individual, as well as the
international structure in which people are embedded.
Reflecting on the possible futures of queer theory, there are various important
aspects to consider. Progress in LGBT politics is mainly limited to the Global
West and North and evokes culture wars about how hetero-normative such
advocacy should be. And, it elicits international (homo)colonialist contentions
about the culturally intrusive manner by which LGBT rights are promoted.
This becomes clear when powerful transnational groups, governments or
international organisations propose to make foreign aid disbursement
conditional on equality reforms in certain countries. At the same time, they do
not sufficiently recognise that their explicit LGBT support increases the
marginalisation of minorities in certain states. It has to be mentioned though,
that many LGBT organisations have a better understanding of local contexts
and often act with the cooperation of local activists, though typically in a
weaker position than the intergovernmental institutions they are allied with.
LGBT politics and queer IR research can inspire and parallel each other as
long as sexual advocacy politics does not fall prey to overly liberal,
patronising politics. No matter if in the domestic or international arenas a
number of problematic issues remain with the alleged progress of LGBT
politics: if predominantly gay and lesbian rights such as marriage and
adoption equality are aimed for, can one speak of true equality while
transgender individuals still lack healthcare access or protection from hate
crimes? And if the normalisation of Western LGBT individuals into consuming,
depoliticised populations leads to a weakening of solidarity with foreign LGBT

101

International Relations Theory

activists and appreciation of their difference, what effects does this have on
global LGBT emancipation? Queer theory is an important tool for helping to
better appreciate the complexity of these debates.
Queer theory and sexual equality in Europe
Globalisation has equipped queer theorists and activists with an expanded
terrain for intervention. With reference to LGBT advocacy politics, the
emergence of numerous Western-organised non-governmental organisations
but also local LGBT movements with the significant publicity they generate –
be it positive or negative – expands transnational politics to a previously
unknown degree. Both chip away at the centrality of the state in regulating
and protecting its citizens. A key place this can be detected is within debates
in the European Union (EU), which is an international organisation with
supranational (law-making) powers over its member states.
The inclusion of LGBT individuals not as abject minorities but as human rights
carriers with inherent dignity and individual rights of expression may
transform the relationship between a marginalised citizenry and governmental
authority – both at the state and EU level. But queer theory does not always
align comfortably with the predominant political strategies advanced through
transnational LGBT rights advocacy in Europe. It disputes many existing
socio-political institutions such as neoliberal capitalism or regulatory
citizenship that form the bedrocks of European politics. LGBT advocacy is, at
times, viewed by queer theory as conforming, heteronormative, stereotyping
and even (homo)nationalistic in its particular value-laden Western overtones.
This is because it assumes that striving for Western standards of equality and
inclusion is universally applicable and leads to liberation and inclusion. These
become evident in the pressuring of more conservative European states to
adopt certain policies, which often produce counter-productive tensions and
expose vulnerable minorities. LGBT advocacy is aimed at inclusion within
existing forms of representation rather than the appreciation of difference that
queer theory strives at. Thus, LGBT organisations often appear ‘de-queered’
for political purposes to gain approval by the rest of society, which often leads
to internal debates about their representation and goals.
Tensions between mainstream advocacy and radical queer approaches
signify the need to rethink simplistic IR analytical approaches. Political
tensions in the ‘real’ world prompt the queer IR theorist to question generally
accepted, established conceptions of international governance. In doing so,
queer theorists use existing literature or audio-visual material such as movies
or even performances to go beyond the apparently obvious to deconstruct
and then reconstruct IR events and processes. They often exhibit a critical

Queer Theory

102

perspective towards naturally assumed conditions of space and time that tend
to conceal and flatten differences among actors and interpretations of
international events. For example, Cynthia Weber (2016) uses Hillary
Clinton’s sexual rights speech at the United Nations in 2011 and contrasts it
with Conchita Wurst’s winning performance at the Eurovision song contest in
2014 to highlight a ‘queer logic of statecraft’ that contests traditional,
gendered and binary approaches to governance. Weber highlights how
despite transforming the notion of the homosexual from deviant into normal
rights-holder in her speech, Clinton still produced an international binary of
progressive versus intolerant states. On the other hand, Conchita Wurst – a
character created by Thomas Neuwirth – challenged accepted notions of
what is considered normal or perverse by performing in drag with a beard. In
the course of this, Wurst destabilised racial, sexual, gendered and geopolitical notions of what it means to be a European. Taken together, both
cases show how seemingly stable ideas in international relations are far from
natural. Instead, they are intentionally created, normalised, challenged and
reconfigured.
Looking deeper at issues within Europe, the EU’s justification of sexual nondiscrimination on neoliberal market policies highlights the ambiguous
positioning of the EU when it advocates limited equality provisions (Thiel
2015). This anti-discrimination policy is being implemented in the EU’s
complex multi-level governance system that includes EU institutions as rights
‘givers’, member states as not always compliant ‘takers’, and LGBT groups
somewhere in the middle. In addition to this potentially problematic setting,
the EU’s anti-discrimination policy package applies only to employmentrelated discrimination. But Europe’s largest LGBT advocacy group, the
International Lesbian, Gay, Trans, Bisexual and Intersex Association (ILGA
Europe), together with many other groups has been pressing the case for a
broader anti-discrimination law covering all areas of life. This is complicated
by the fact that a few powerful states do not want to broaden the existing
market-based law and by EU hesitancy to reach beyond its focus on
economic rights and freedoms.
It becomes evident that the dominance of neoliberalism as the EU’s main
rationale limits the rights attainment of LGBT individuals because it restricts
alternative critical views. Given the EU’s orientation, non-governmental
organisations are pressured to prioritise market-principles such as labour
participation, while becoming more dependent on governmental or EU
funding. At the same time, this increase in non-governmental advocacy coincides with a retreat of governments in social and welfare sectors. This
diminishes the potential for contesting existing policies and potentially their
legitimacy, as groups have to link anti-discrimination activities with more
societal and labour market inclusion if they want to retain funding from the

103

International Relations Theory

EU. Such reorientation around neoliberal EU objectives produces a hierarchy
of rights which risks putting social inclusion and a wider sense of equality at
the bottom.
This case study thus questions the cooperation of non-governmental advocacy organisations with a supranational governance system that is at least
partly responsible for constraining national welfare policies. Moreover, the
EU’s valuation of rights is problematic because inalienable rights are being
made an object of economic value and output. Yet it cannot be criticised in a
system in which EU policy planning is protected by its supposed non-political
regulatory, expert-led nature – reminding us of Foucault’s knowledge–power
linkage. It also implies that a reflection of norms is needed, in the way
neoliberal heteronormativity is desired by political actors in the EU policy
process and accordingly (re)produced or challenged by gender/sex-based
rights groups. The feminist contribution to IR highlights uneven gendered
power relations, but a critical political economy perspective that merges
concerns about structural injustice with the thoughtful critique of queer
theory’s view on civil society inclusion adds profound insights into the politics
of sexual rights recognition. This is most relevant here when considering
queer theory’s theoretical tenets such as taking seriously the distinct positions
of political actors and the often troubling content of public policy.
Conclusion
The development of queer theory in IR suggests that more rigorous questions
of the impact of LGBT issues in international politics have begun to be
successfully answered. It highlights the valuable contribution to analysing IR
through until now unrecognised perspectives on sexual and gender
expression. Queer theory has also proven to be theoretically inclusive in ways
that LGBT and feminist scholarship sometimes has not. A question that
remains is whether queer theorists can recognise – and perhaps transcend –
their own racial, class and Western-centric orientations. Such broadening
would also make it easier to find common cause with other affected minorities
– not least to move from a purely critical or deconstructive mode to a more
transformative and productive one. Precisely because queer theory is able to
transcend the focus on sexuality and gender through general analytical
principles, it lends itself to interrogating a wide range of IR phenomena. In a
time when IR is often accused of being parochial, queer theory is a necessary
corrective to powerful myths and narratives of international orders.

Securitisation Theory

104

14
Securitisation Theory
C L AR A E R OU KH M AN OFF

Securitisation theory shows us that national security policy is not a natural
given, but carefully designated by politicians and decision-makers. According
to securitisation theory, political issues are constituted as extreme security
issues to be dealt with urgently when they have been labelled as ‘dangerous’,
‘menacing’, ‘threatening’, ‘alarming’ and so on by a ‘securitising actor’ who
has the social and institutional power to move the issue ‘beyond politics’. So,
security issues are not simply ‘out there’ but rather must be articulated as
problems by securitising actors. Calling immigration a ‘threat to national
security’, for instance, shifts immigration from a low priority political concern
to a high priority issue that requires action, such as securing borders.
Securitisation theory challenges traditional approaches to security in IR and
asserts that issues are not essentially threatening in themselves; rather, it is
by referring to them as ‘security’ issues that they become security problems.
The basics of securitisation theory
The end of the Cold War sparked a debate over ideas of security in IR
between ‘narrowers’ and ‘wideners’. The narrowers were concerned with the
security of the state and often focused on analysing the military and political
stability between the United States and the Soviet Union. Dissatisfied with
this, wideners sought to include other types of threat that were not military in
nature and that affected people rather than states. This expanded the security
agenda by including concepts such as human security and regional security –
together with ideas of culture and identity. Feminism had an important role in
widening the agenda by challenging the idea that the sole provider of security
was the state and that gender was irrelevant in the production of security. On
the contrary, the state was often the cause of insecurities for women.
Widening the agenda from a feminist perspective brought gender into focus
by placing gender and women as the focus of security calculations and by
demonstrating that gender, war and security were intertwined. It was an

105

International Relations Theory

important development in the rise of a wider perspective on security. Whether
one agrees with the wideners or the narrowers, the end of the Cold War
indicated that security was an essentially contested concept – ‘a concept that
generates debates that cannot be resolved by reference to empirical evidence
because the concept contains a clear ideological or moral element and deﬁes
precise, generally accepted deﬁnition’ (Fierke 2015, 35). By pointing at the
essentially contested nature of security, critical approaches to security argue
that ‘security’ is not necessarily positive or universal, but context and subject
dependent and even negative at times.
Because some administer security while others receive security, security
produces uneven power relations between people. For example, in the
context of the Global War on Terror, a person who looks Arab has been
regarded with suspicion as a dangerous ‘other’ and there has been an
increase in surveillance operations in Muslim communities on the presumption that because they fit a certain profile, they may be connected to
terrorism. Viewed in this light, surveillance becomes a security apparatus of
control and a source of insecurity. It is by questioning the essence of security
in cases such as this that securitisation theory developed and widened the
scope of security to include other referent objects beyond the state. A referent
object, a central idea in securitisation, is the thing that is threatened and
needs to be protected.
Securitisation theorists determined five sectors: the economic, the societal,
the military, the political and the environmental sector. In each sector, a
specific threat is articulated as threatening a referent object. For example, in
the societal sector, the referent object is identity, while the referent objects in
the environmental sector are the ecosystem and endangered species. It is
only in the military sector that the referent object remains the state. By
‘sectorialising’ security, we understand that existential threats are not
objective but instead relate to the different characteristics of each referent
object. This technique also highlights the contextual nature of security and
threats. Suicide bomb attacks, for example, are a greater source of anxiety
for some people today than they are for others. Yet we often hear suicide
terrorism framed as a ‘global’ threat. Securitisation shows that it is incorrect to
talk about issues such as terrorism as if they concern everyone around the
world equally. By talking about referent objects we can ask: Security for
whom? Security from what? And security by whom?
Central to securitisation theory is showing the rhetorical structure of decisionmakers when framing an issue and attempting to convince an audience to lift
the issue above politics. This is what we call a speech act – ‘by saying the
words, something is done, like betting, giving a promise, naming a ship’

Securitisation Theory

106

(Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 26). Conceptualising securitisation as a
speech act is important as it shows that words do not merely describe reality,
but constitute reality, which in turn triggers certain responses. In the process
of describing the reality we see, we also interact with that world and perform
an action that will greatly contribute to seeing that reality in a different way.
For example, referring to an immigration camp in Calais as ‘the Jungle’ is not
simply describing what the camp really is, but portraying it as a lawless and
dangerous place. Hence, threats are not just threats by nature, but are
constructed as threats through language. In order to convince an audience to
take extraordinary measures, the securitising actor must draw attention and
often exaggerate the urgency and level of the threat, communicate a point of
no return, i.e. ‘if we do not tackle this problem, everything else will be
irrelevant’, and offer a possible way out (lifting the issue above politics) –
which is often framed in military terms. In so doing, the securitising actor
makes some actions more intelligible than others and enables a regime of
truth about the nature of the threat and about the referent object’s nature.
An issue becomes securitised when an audience collectively agrees on the
nature of the threat and supports taking extraordinary measures. If the
audience rejects the securitising actor’s speech act, it only represents a
securitising move and the securitisation has failed. In this respect, the focus
on the audience and on process requires considerably more than simply
‘saying security’. This has generated criticism from some scholars, who
recommend understanding securitisation as a long process of ongoing social
constructions and negotiation between various audiences and speakers. Any
security issue can be presented on a spectrum ranging from non-politicised
(the issue has not reached public debate) to politicised (the issue has raised
public concerns and is on the agenda) to securitised (the issue has been
framed as an existential threat). When an issue is securitised, actions are
often legitimised under the language of ‘urgency’ and ‘existential threats’ and
are measures that may be deemed undemocratic in normal situations.
Security measures in the War on Terror, such as the Guantanamo Bay
detention camp, the use of torture, the increased surveillance of citizens,
extraordinary renditions and secretive drone strikes, illustrate the logic of
exceptionality. Had the War on Terror not been framed in a context in which a
suspension of normal politics was permissible and necessary, these security
measures would probably not have existed – nor would they have endured to
the present day.
A successful securitisation places ‘security’ as an exceptional realm, investing
securitising actors (nominally states) with the power to decide when the
democratic framework should be suspended and with the power to
manipulate populations. For Wæver (2015 and 2000), securitisation theory
was built to protect politics against the disproportionate power of the state by

107

International Relations Theory

placing the success and failure of securitisation in the hands of the audience,
rather than in the securitising actor. Wæver also voiced his preference for
‘desecuritisation’ – a return to normal politics. After all, audiences are not
complete dupes at the mercy of the securitising actor, and by making the
process more transparent, securitisation theory endows the audience with
agency and responsibility. In this context, the role of the security analyst
moves from objectively analysing the threat to studying the processes by
which securitising actors construct a shared understanding of what is
collectively recognised as a threat. Securitisation theory is thus not so much
involved with answering ‘why’ an issue has been securitised. It is more
important that we be concerned with the conditions that have made the
securitisation possible by asking ‘how’ questions: how has a specific language enabled the actor to convince the audience of the threat?
Securitisation theory and the Islamic State group in Europe
Following attacks in a range of European cities, the Islamic State group (also
known as Daesh, ISIS or ISIL) became a high priority on security agendas
from 2015 onwards. The group has been presented as a threat to the security
of the state, to the security of individuals in Western Europe and more broadly
as a threat to the Western way of life. This means that the securitisation of
the Islamic State group affects at least three sectors: the societal, the military
and the political. Securitisation theory observes that sometimes in a
democracy the government must justify the suspension of normal politics to
the public. Hence, if the Islamic State group is securitised in European states,
which are regarded as democratic, we should be seeing securitising moves
from government officials – a rhetorical justification of why intervention, for
instance, is the only way to remove the threat of the Islamic State.
It is important to note that securitising actors are not limited to politicians.
Security professionals like the police, intelligence services, customs,
immigration services, border guards and the military all play an important role
in defining the security landscape. They operate within a field of security
characterised by competition over the ‘right’ knowledge over the threat and
other risks associated, as well as competition over the ‘right’ solution.
Although disagreements and confrontation occur between security
professionals, Bigo, Bonditti and Olsson (2010, 75–78) argue that they are
still guided by a set of common beliefs and practices. Securitising actors take
security threats objectively and seek to solve them by undertaking various
missions. In addition, there are also functional actors who can influence the
dynamic of the field of security but who do not have the power to move an
issue above politics. Functional actors are paramount since they help frame
storylines about the existentially threatening nature of the issue, often

Securitisation Theory

108

creating divides between ‘us’ and ‘them’ – and often implicated in ‘othering’
processes. Examples of functional actors can be the media, academia, nongovernmental agencies and think tanks. It can also include individuals
themselves, by telling and sharing stories between friends, families and
colleagues. For example, extreme claims made in tabloid newspapers across
Europe create a narrative in which the Islamic State group is infiltrating
society and working to bring on the demise of the democratic state.
Noticeable examples of securitising moves in the United Kingdom can be
found during the House of Commons debate on the motion for British military
action in Syria on 2 December 2015. British Prime Minister David Cameron
argued that ‘we face a fundamental threat to our security’ from the threat of
the Islamic State group, who ‘attack us because of who we are, and not
because of what we do’ (this was the presentation of the nature of the threat
and establishment of a regime of truth). He then said that ‘we should not wait
any longer’ to reduce the threat (this was the point of no return). Finally, he
pointed out that it is ‘not about whether we want to fight terrorism but about
how best we do that’ (this was the solution provided).
It is more evident in France, when, after the Paris attacks of 13 November
2015, President Francois Hollande declared that ‘France is at war’ against an
army of jihadists that ‘has attacked France because France is a country of
liberty’ (again, focus on ‘what and who we are’). In this framing, the French
people are ‘a people that is fierce, valiant and courageous’ and are victims of
such attacks for simply ‘being alive’. At the other end of the spectrum is
‘them’, ‘an army of jihadists’, of ‘coward murderers’ who constitute an
‘abomination’ and ‘vile attack’ that can only be characterised by ‘horror’. A
point of no return is invoked when Hollande claims that the Islamic State
group is an organisation that ‘threatens the whole world’ and that this ‘is the
reason why the destruction of Daesh is a necessity for the international
community’. Finally, the solution, lifting the issue ‘above politics’ is offered:
‘immediate border controls and a state of emergency have been commanded’
(Hollande 2015).
The grammar of the security speech act is discernible. The speech points to
the existentially threatening nature of the Islamic State group, a point of no
return and a solution which breaks free of the normal democratic processes.
In the months after the Paris attacks, Hollande increased French military
strikes in Syria and ordered a state of emergency that gave French security
forces controversial domestic powers. Hence, we have a case of successful
securitisation. It is important to note that when arguing that the Islamic State
group is securitised, securitisation theorists do not challenge the existence of
the group, or that the group has indeed coordinated attacks in Europe.

109

International Relations Theory

Instead, securitisation questions the processes by which this group has come
to be viewed as a threat and argues that by naming the group a threat,
leaders of European states such as France and the United Kingdom are also
implicated in the making of war. In that sense, securitisation highlights how
Hollande’s securitising speech act does not merely describe a state of affairs
‘out there’, but constitutes the attacks as an act of war and by doing so,
brings war into being. Describing the threat of the Islamic State group is thus
not impartial or objective, rather it is in an action in and of itself, and one that
should be viewed as a political act.
Using securitisation theory shows that the politics of terrorism and
counterterrorism is about threat magnification and that the symbolic violence
caused by attacks is out of proportion to the number of deaths it is
responsible for. For example, the number of victims in Western Europe was
higher in the 1970s and 1980s as a result of groups such as the IRA than the
number that can be attributed to Islamic terrorists in recent times. Yet leaders
of European countries claim that the world has never faced such ‘barbarity’,
‘horror’ and ‘atrocity’. This threat magnification demonstrates the exceptionality of the threat, which, in turn, requires urgent and extraordinary
responses. Thinking of terrorism in this way is not only detrimental to the
deliberative process but also limits our understanding of terrorism more
generally.
Conclusion
Securitisation is a useful tool for students in IR as it contests traditional
approaches to security that are overly focused on the security of the state,
rather than on other referent objects. Adopting a securitisation framework
entails challenging hegemonic and taken-for-granted ideas about the
universality and objectivity of security and emphasises the ways in which
knowledge is not merely ‘out there’ but is driven by interests. Securitisation
theory reminds us that securitisation is not a neutral act but a political one.
From that starting point we are able to dig deeper and investigate the various
insecurities that are found in international relations.

Critical Geography

110

15
Critical Geography
I RE NA LE I S BE T C ER ID W E N C ON N ON & A R C H IE W. S IMP S ON

Critical geography is based upon the notion that humanity has the potential to
transform the environment. It challenges the dominant ideologies that
characterise international political structures, hence contesting traditional
categories and units of analysis in IR such as anarchy, security and the
concept of the state. Critical geography is based upon the principle that
questions about spatial relations, which refer to how an object located within
a particular space relates to another object, are important because political
behaviour is embedded in socio-political structures based on ideas about
space. Following from this, if scholarship and political behaviour are ingrained
in socio-political structures, an objective analysis of international politics
becomes impossible. IR theory cannot reflect the global situation from a
neutral standpoint. Critical geographers suggest that alternative ways of
thinking about space have the potential to change fundamental ideas,
theories and approaches that dominate the study of international politics. In
turn, they hope that this alternative scholarship will help to transform
international politics and reduce human inequality.
The basics of critical geography
Critical geography emerged in the 1970s as a critique of positivism, which is a
form of scholarship based upon the idea that the world exists independently
of observers. Critical geography is rooted in neo-Marxism and draws upon the
ideas of Jürgen Habermas and the Frankfurt school, who expanded upon
ideas within classical Marxism by exploring how freedom from inequality
could result from peaceful processes rather than revolutionary action. At this
time, scholars began examining how dominant political structures and
scholarship perpetuated existing political inequalities.
The end of the Cold War in 1991 saw new global economic developments,

111

International Relations Theory

accompanied by changes in global demographics. In the early 1990s, the
increasing importance of non-state actors such as non-governmental
organisations and multinational corporations accompanied by increasing
ethno-nationalism – whereby nations are defined on the basis of ethnicity
rather than civil state membership – fostered new ideas about security and
the role of the state.
Critical IR scholarship began focusing on how dominant theories like realism
reinforced unequal power relations by favouring the states that dominated
international politics. Drawing on the ideas of Ken Booth and Richard Wyn
Jones from the Welsh school, they argued that human insecurity was
perpetuated by existing political structures (Booth 1991 and 1997). From this,
scholars began looking towards critical geography and Lefebvre’s (1991)
critical theory of space to examine how assumptions about space perpetuated
these existing insecurities and inequalities. Two important scholars
associated with this are David Harvey and John Agnew, who highlight how
traditional conceptions of space decontextualise processes of state formation
and cement traditional polarised conceptions of space between East and
West, North and South, developing and developed countries in International
Relations thinking (Agnew 1994; Harvey 2001 and 2006).
Critical geography offers a means of examining international political
behaviour, including the relationship between governments and people,
between states at regional and global levels, and between international
organisations and states. There are a number of key ideas and concepts
within critical geography that offer alternative analyses of international
relations. One key idea relates to the notion of territorial space. Philosopher
Henry Lefebvre (1991) argued that there are three ways to think about space:
in absolute, relative and relational terms. From an absolute perspective,
space is viewed as fixed and measurable. This fixed idea about territory
underpins traditional theories of IR. But, if you assume that territory is fixed, it
reinforces assumptions about relationships within and between particular
territories.
For example, think about how the world is represented on a standard political
map. A political map represents the world in terms of individual states
separated from each other by territorial borders. An absolute view of global
space takes this mode of representation as fixed, meaning it would not
consider the possibility of alternative ways of mapping the world. This fixed
view also ignores how international politics changed throughout history,
altering the shape of the global space as new states and international
institutions emerged.

Critical Geography

112

The absolute view of space is not the only option that scholars have for
thinking about the international global space. Lefebvre’s concept of relative
space challenges the absolute view of space. This concept involves thinking
about space in a way that views the international space not ‘as an “empty
container” or fixed space, but one filled with objects and interconnecting
relationships’ (Meena 2013). Furthermore, a relative view of space views the
existence of this space as a result of the relationships between the objects
within this space. From this, the ways in which we understand space can be
argued to be a product of a particular set of relationships.
For example, if we consider particular spaces in terms of how they relate to
other spaces, we can see that when scholars talk about the ‘Global South’
they are referring to the south in relation to the ‘Global North’. Ideas and
representations of the ‘Global North’ and ‘Global South’, or of ‘East’ and
‘West’ are presented as resulting from the polarised relationships that
characterised international politics until the end of the Cold War.
A relative view of space can be used to demonstrate the existence of multiple
views and alternative ways of conceptualising space from the views of
particular states and other international actors. For example, when IR
scholars classify all states in the southern hemisphere as representing the
Global South, this view fails to acknowledge the differences and complex
relationships that exist between states. It leads us to assume that all states in
the south are equal in terms of their political and economic power, when this
is not the case as powerful states in the Global South like Brazil have far
more political and economic power than poorer states like Malawi. It assumes
that states in the South also see themselves as existing together on an equal
basis with all the other states in the South, which is an oversimplification as it
ignores the many economic and political rivalries that exist between different
states in this region. It also fails to acknowledge how particular states within
the Global South are politically and economically linked to states within the
Global North through trade agreements.
A relational view of space suggests that space cannot exist without the
perspective of an observer, as objects only exist in terms of their relations
with other objects. For example, when we think about a place, we can only
think about it in terms of what we know about it. What we know leads us to
form opinions which influence the form and shape that the space takes and to
the development of arguments that either support or reject pre-existing ideas
and political developments. In turn, these opinions influence the political
decisions taken by international state actors that shape the global
international space. This can be seen, for example, in terms of approving
state membership to regional organisations like the European Union. The way

113

International Relations Theory

that most scholars think about and represent international political space in
terms of sovereign states and their territorial borders can therefore be said to
be a product of a perspective of space.
Developments in the literature examine how processes of global change and
the growth of alternative political organisations, such as transnational
environmental movements and indigenous government institutions, have
contributed to shaping the contemporary global space (Harvey 2009). One
such development looks at how the rise of indigenous government institutions
in the Arctic offer alternative views of space that challenge traditional
conceptions of international space and look at how Inuit approaches to
governance emphasise collective responsibility for the environment beyond
state borders (Zellen 2009). Another recent development examines how the
expansion of neoliberal capitalism has resulted in rising socio-economic
inequality on a global scale, marginalising the poor within and across nation
states, with state-based representation in international political institutions
contributing to these growing inequalities (Harvey 2009). In addition, as
concerns about human security associated with the risks and impacts of
global climate change increasingly come to the fore in IR, critical geography
can show us how the mainstream ideas about space embedded in
international politics and IR theory may serve to perpetuate human inequality
and the marginalisation of those most directly at risk from global environmental change. Alternative ideas about space compel scholars to re-assess
the global scale of the risks and impacts of climate change and lend support
to arguments that call for representational reform in international politics to
reduce inequality and to address the increased risks that climate change
poses for traditionally marginalised groups, such as for indigenous people.
Critical geography and Inuit views of space
The Inuit are a group of culturally similar indigenous people living in the Arctic
regions of Alaska, Canada, Greenland, Denmark and Russia. Their view of
territorial space is based upon cultural similarity and use of land for traditional
hunting practices rather than nation-state boundaries. The spatial extent of
Inuit occupancy of Arctic territory reaches across five states, illustrating their
historic sovereignty over a large area. Yet political maps of the world do not
represent this area as Inuit territory. Rather, the area that Inuit territory covers
is broken down and subsumed within individual state boundaries. When Inuit
territories were colonised by European, American and Russian powers, their
territories became part of colonial nation-state territories and the Inuit
became subject to the colonial state governments. Today, the legacy of
colonialism can still be seen in representations of the international political
space, as the majority of membership within international political institutions

Critical Geography

114

continues to be designated on the basis of sovereign states, resulting in the
ongoing political marginalisation of the Inuit.
Without adequate representation at the international political level, Inuit
concerns about security and environmental sustainability cannot influence
international policy to the same extent that state governments can.
Furthermore, the extent to which Inuit interests are represented in the
decisions made at the international level is poor. This is especially so when
Inuit interests conflict with the interests of governments, such as over pipeline
constructions through Inuit territory to transport oil between states. However,
by adopting an Inuit perspective of territory that rejects nation-state
delineation of the global space, critical geographers can offer alternative
definitions of territory and provide more accurate representations.
The Inuit represent only a small segment of the total population of residents
within an individual state – for example, only 0.2% of the total Canadian
population were registered as Inuit in the 2011 census. But, when thinking
about how Arctic sea ice loss (due to climate change) affects the total
numbers of Inuit across each of the five nation states by defining territory as
consisting of cultural commonality rather than state boundaries, a much
spatially larger picture emerges (Huntington 2013). The loss of ice endangers
the economic and cultural livelihoods of the Inuit, as it affects hunting
activities and puts coastal villages at risk of erosion and flooding.
When viewed from this perspective, the security risk to the wellbeing of
people right across such a large area of the globe appears much more
prominent than that afforded by most other IR theories. When scholars adopt
traditional spatial definitions, they over-simplify the global space and, as we
can see in this example, oversimplify the geographic extent of threats to
human security. Furthermore, when scholars define space as existing solely
of independent states, it limits the examination of the impacts of environmental disaster to simple comparisons between two or more nations, such as
between Canada and United States. This undermines differences in the
severity of impacts of natural disasters within particular regions of the world.
Moreover, this traditional method of analysis also overlooks how the human
security threats posed by environmental disasters are not evenly spread
within individual state territories. For example, it downplays the fact that the
Inuit living in Alaska are at risk of far greater disruption from the effects of
melting sea ice than people living in other areas of the United States. It also
downplays how coastal communities within Alaska are at a greater risk from
the devastation caused by flooding and erosion than communities located
within the interior of the state.

115

International Relations Theory

Inuit understandings of territorial space can also provide scholars with an
alternative tool to make assessments of international political action taken to
mitigate the impacts of global environmental change. Critical geographers
contend that traditional analyses of patterns of international political activity
are prone to focus on actions taken by formal institutions, like the United
Nations, that use a nation-state means of political representation – but stress
that this places limits on our appreciation of the wider forms of political action
that have been taken to mitigate climate change.
For example, the majority of the scholarly analyses of the International Panel
on Climate Change (IPCC) in Copenhagen in Denmark in 2009 described
how opinions of state representatives regarding action on climate change and
emission on greenhouse gases fell into three camps that consisted of: 1)
North America and Europe, whose past industrial activities contributed to
most of the problems of climate change, 2) industrialising countries such as
the BRICS nations, which tended to see no alternative to carbon emissions as
a means to fuel economic growth, and 3) poorer countries, which were more
likely to disagree to changes on the basis that development and poverty
alleviation represented more pressing goals (Meena 2013). However, this
mode of analysis is based on divisions of territory defined by tiers of industrial
development and ignores differences in influential capacities across and
within nations grouped within each tier – for example, between Brazil and
China, or between large segments of the South African population.
Over-simplistic ways of thinking about the international political space lead to
a lack of consideration for alternative forms of political action, particularly
action that takes place outside formal international political institutions
including that taken by indigenous organisations, whose spheres of
representation and governance transcend nation state boundaries. For
example, the Inuit are members of the Arctic Council, which is an international
governmental organisation that addresses issues faced by Arctic governments and indigenous people. The Inuit take prominent decision-making roles
in the Council rather than having their participation restricted to mere
observer status – as at the United Nations climate summits. The decisions the
Inuit take are based upon their sense of commonality that transcends state
boundaries. Because of their influence in the Arctic Council they have been
able to achieve success in fostering a culture of collective governance on
environmental management by seeking discussion and resolution of a matter
of common concern to all Inuit.
However, despite the success of Inuit representation in the Arctic Council, the
vast majority of indigenous governmental bodies continue to fall outside the
formal political representational structure in larger international climate

Critical Geography

116

change negotiations. The Inuit Circumpolar Council (ICC) is a United Nationsrecognised non-governmental organisation that defines its constituency as
Inuit populations in Greenland, Alaska, Canada and Russia. However, their
participation is restricted at UN summits on climate change to that of
‘observer’ status as it is not a sovereign state – thereby constraining its voice.
It is on this basis that the state system of representation within the United
Nations climate summits can be argued to further marginalise indigenous
groups like the Inuit. As representation is afforded on the basis of state
territory rather than Inuit conceptions of territory it reinforces the decisionmaking power of the former colonial governments, enabling them to exercise
greater control over international affairs, which hinders Inuit selfdetermination efforts.
The power of the Inuit to shape international political decision-making risks
becoming further marginalised if IR scholarship does not critically question
nation-state ideas about territory and representation. By bringing alternative
conceptualisations of territory to the foreground, critical geography opens up
a space for recognising and exploring alternative modes of representation
that reduce inequality between indigenous people and state governments. If
the Inuit are at greater direct risk from the impacts of global climate change,
representational reform would enable them to have a greater voice in
managing these risks.
Conclusion
By drawing attention to alternative ways that space can be imagined, critical
geographers have sought to transform international politics and the global
space. Critical geography highlights how issues of economics and climate
change impact upon people and shows that the spatial effects of these
processes differ to how they are dealt with by states, international organisations and within academia. The unique vantage point of critical geography
provides useful ways to rethink what we know about International Relations in
both theoretical and empirical terms. It challenges assumptions about space
and territory, offers new conceptual and analytical tools and encourages
students to question mainstream thinking.

117

International Relations Theory

16
Asian Perspectives
PIC H A M ON Y EOP H A N TO N G

With the emergence of the so-called ‘Asian Century’, which sees rising
powers like China and India assume a more prominent role in shaping world
affairs, Asia has become an important region of study. These global trends
have been matched by new directions in scholarship, whereupon Asia has become a conceptual anchor for the development of non-Western approaches
to the study of world politics. It is, therefore, within the Asian IR context that
some of the most exciting theoretical challenges to, and innovations in, IR
scholarship are being mounted and produced. Given the vast socio-cultural
and political diversity found across the continent, Asian IR is made up of an
array of different perspectives. Some originate in countries in the Global
South while others, such as Japanese perspectives, do not. Asian IR
therefore feeds into Global South IR perspectives, but remains distinct from
them, just as it speaks to mainstream IR theories but is founded on unique
political traditions and practices.
The basics of Asian perspectives
IR theory is primarily based on assumptions derived from Western modes of
thinking and viewing the world. This, in turn, renders it ‘too narrow in its
sources and too dominant in its influence’ (Acharya and Buzan 2010, 2). The
result of this is that non-Western perspectives and theoretical insights have
been systematically neglected or ignored altogether by the discipline. For
many scholars, this silence of non-Western IR voices constitutes a profound
cause of concern, and one that casts a doubtful light on the utility of
mainstream theories as a lens to make sense of a complex and culturally
diverse world. Consider the English school of IR. The key concepts underpinning the English school and its conception of ‘international society’ – for
example, the principles of national sovereignty and sovereign equality – are
founded upon the historical European experience. China, for one, only learnt
these concepts through its encounter with the colonial-era European powers,

Asian Perspectives

118

as was also the case for other Asian countries. The Chinese empire had, until
then, conducted its dealings with other nations on the basis of a Sinocentric
worldview, where it acted as the political and cultural centre of the world, with
the Chinese emperor seen to rule over Tianxia or ‘All-under-Heaven’
(basically, the rest of the world). Sovereign equality never existed as a
concept to the Chinese mind until the nineteenth century. Given the distinctive
histories, cultures and interstate dynamics seen in Asia, we clearly cannot
take for granted the universality of the assumptions and concepts prevalent in
IR scholarship.
Asian perspectives on interstate politics exist – and have existed – for
millennia. Ancient Indian and Chinese political theorists like Kautilya (circa
300 BCE) and Confucius (551–479 BCE) have provided some salient
observations on foreign policy. It would only be in the mid-1990s, when efforts
began to make IR scholarship more representative, that the contributions of
these thinkers started to be taken seriously by the discipline. In the years
since, we are seeing language barriers being broken down along with growing
theoretical innovation challenging old thinking in IR. Discussions have
converged on the feasibility of constructing various schools and theories of
Chinese, Japanese, Korean and Southeast Asian IR – among other possibilities. As such, though still mired in debate and a degree of uncertainty, the
ultimate outcome of these discussions will prove central to the future of IR as
a global discipline.
At present, there is no single, unifying, pan-Asian school or theory of
International Relations. Various reasons can be given for why this is the case.
For example, the ‘hidden’ nature of non-Western IR theories, referring to the
difficulty of recognising non-Western perspectives even when we see them
(Acharya and Buzan 2010, 18) – or the failure to challenge the theoretical
‘imports’ and acknowledge the value of non-Western theory-building (Puchala
1997, 132; Chun 2010, 83). There is, of course, nothing inherently ‘Western’
about IR theorising. But whether we can rightly speak about an Asian IR
theory depends in large part on how we define ‘theory’ and understand
‘Asian’.
In this light, Asian IR should not be viewed as a self-contained, monolithic
discourse, nor as an intellectual enterprise aimed purely at the production of
grand theories. Although having garnered plenty of attention in non-Western
IR scholarship, the Chinese and Japanese schools of IR represent but two
strands of Asian thought among several others. Rather than ‘theory’ in the
sense of advancing testable observations about how the international system
operates, it may be better to describe the bulk of Asian IR approaches as
perspectives for making sense of the world. This, in turn, raises the important

119

International Relations Theory

question of whether a unified Asian IR theory is in fact desirable. Siddharth
Mallavarapu (2014), for one, is less interested in putting forward monolithic
theories, being more ‘curious about how the world is viewed from this
particular location’. Navnita Chadha Behera (2010, 92) likewise rejects the
notion of creating an Indian school of IR out of concern that such an
undertaking would result in a ‘self-other binary’ that simply pits Indian IR (self)
against Western IR (other). This speaks to a broader concern that the
construction of unified schools of thought risks creating grossly simplified and
polarising categories that end up supplanting one dominant body of
knowledge with another. Similar sentiments also pervade debates on the
Chinese school, with some scholars remaining sceptical about the feasibility
of a single school representing the diversity of Chinese perspectives.
Conceptual pluralism better serves the original intention of non-Western IR
theorists – that is, to bring diversity back into the study of world politics.
Following from this, it is also important that we don’t overstate the differences
between Western and Asian IR approaches. Indeed, a common attribute of
Asian and Western approaches lies with their normative qualities – that is,
their interest in how the world ought to be. Kautilya, for example, noted the
necessity of waging a just war (for example, for a king not to take the land of
an ally), whereas Confucian scholars were concerned with how to sustain
‘harmony’ (peace and stability) in the world through able statecraft.
Much like Western IR theories, Asian perspectives have deep roots in political
thought. In many cases, it is a matter of transposing theories of statecraft,
society and human nature to the global realm. Just as Enlightenment-era
philosophers like Thomas Hobbes and John Locke were central to the
development of IR theory, ancient and modern philosophers from Confucius
and Sun Tzu (544–496 BCE) to Shiratori Kurakichi (1865–1942) and Nishida
Kitarō (1870–1945) are important sources of inspiration for Asian scholars.
According to Benoy Kumar Sarkar (1919), early Hindu political theorists
already had an indigenous conception of sovereignty that recognised the
importance of ‘self-rule’ and national independence to the exercise of state
authority. The Indian statesman and philosopher Kautilya, who is often lauded
as one of the world’s earliest realists, is a critical figure in this regard. In
setting out the principles of conduct central to the task of empire-building, his
mandala (spheres of influence) theory advanced ideas as to how a king
should manage alliances and relations of enmity with surrounding countries.
It acknowledged, for instance, the utility of non-intervention as a means for
building confidence between kings and avoiding unnecessary foreign
entanglements, having also proposed an early conceptualisation of ‘strength’
as a tool for attaining ‘happiness’ (Vivekanandan 2014, 80).

Asian Perspectives

120

Similarly, elements of Confucian thinking on power, order and statecraft can
be distilled from how China conducts its foreign policy today. The importance
of maintaining harmony to safeguarding the global order is a Confucian
concept that remains a popular refrain in China. Similarly, the notion that to
wield power a state must shoulder commensurate domestic and international
responsibilities is one that defines China’s contemporary identity as a
responsible stakeholder. It has also served as the basis for the corresponding
‘responsibility thesis’, which advances the notion that China has certain
unavoidable duties and obligations as a rising power, particularly with respect
to managing and securing global order and stability (Yeophantong 2013).
In seeking to identify its own unique contributions to the field, Japanese IR
has also drawn extensively upon the works of celebrated philosophers,
including Nishida Kitarō, who was the pioneer of the Kyoto School. Often
labelled as a ‘proto-constructivist’ due to the prominence he gave to cultural
factors and identity construction, Nishida advanced a philosophy of identity
for addressing a fundamental Japanese conundrum of whether Japan
belongs to the East or the West. Here, he adopted a dialectic approach,
arguing that Japanese identity exists within a ‘coexistence of opposites,
Eastern and Western’, which consequently allows it to cultivate a universal
appeal (Inoguchi 2007, 379). In other words, Japan is accorded a special role
in the world, as it is positioned to encourage both Eastern and global
awareness. This argument fits with Nishida’s broader vision of a multicultural
world, where a ‘true world culture’ was to be achieved through the recognition
of cultural difference and the union of these differences (Krummel 2015, 218).
Despite criticism against their hegemonic position in the discipline, it warrants
note how mainstream IR theories have helped to provide fertile ground for
new ideas and approaches to germinate among Asian IR scholars. South
Korean IR scholars, for example, have been heavily influenced by mainstream IR – specifically, its theories that are focused on addressing real-world
issues. The rationale behind efforts to build a Chinese IR School also stems
from the desire to better represent Chinese ideas and interests within an
American-dominated discipline. It is possible, however, to divide Chinese IR
scholars working in the pre-1949 period and during the 1980s-90s into two
camps (Lu 2014): those who sought to learn from and emulate Western
theories and those who used Western IR as the basis for critique and the
development of alternative perspectives.
It is interesting to recall how Samuel Huntington’s 1993 ‘Clash of Civilizations’
article, which argued that culturally driven conflicts will invariably define the
post-Cold War world, had sparked heated discussion within China during the
mid-1990s due to its controversial speculation of a coming conflict between

121

International Relations Theory

the West and ‘Confucian-Islamic’ states. Not only did this lead to a deepening
of Chinese dissatisfaction with Western theories and their misrepresentations
of Eastern cultures, it also gave Chinese scholars renewed impetus to establish a Chinese school of IR.
You are probably wondering, if there is no Asian IR theory, then can Asian
perspectives really provide a (more) compelling account of interstate
dynamics than mainstream IR theories?
Certainly, we can view the lack of a unifying set of core theoretical
assumptions as a sizeable limitation of current Asian IR approaches. While
we can easily identify the major tenets of realism or constructivism, Asian
perspectives tend to exhibit a greater degree of conceptual fluidity and
context-specificity. In practical terms, however, there are instances where
Asian IR has made noteworthy contributions to ‘middle-range theorising’ (the
formulation of fact-driven theories to explain a specific real-world phenomenon) and ‘soft IR theory’, which refers to the policy-driven theories
informed by the ‘thinking and foreign policy approaches of Asian leaders’
(Acharya and Buzan 2010, 11). These are normally relied upon to generate
policy prescriptions, as well as insights into the factors that motivate the
foreign-policy behaviour of Asian states.
An influential middle-range theory is Akamatsu Kaname’s ‘flying geese model’
of regional development. Not only has the theory been used to justify Japan’s
economic leadership within Asia (Korhonen 1994), but it also serves as the
rationale behind the country’s economic assistance to developing countries.
Kaname posited the theory in the 1930s to explain how a developing country
can catch up with industrialised countries through their interactions. With
Japan’s rapid industrialisation from the late nineteenth century onwards and
the remarkable economic development of East Asian countries in the postSecond World War period, Japan came to be depicted within this theory as
the ‘lead goose’ in a V-shaped formation comprised of emerging Asian
economies. Here, Japan helped to stimulate regional industrialisation and
economic growth by passing down its older technology and know-how
(through economic assistance programmes, for instance) to other developing
countries.
An example of a soft theoretical contribution is the concept of ‘non-alignment’
(not taking sides). Developed by India’s Jawaharlal Nehru against the
backdrop of divisive Cold War politics, non-alignment became an influential
policy framework adopted by Asian and African countries that had sought to
occupy the middle ground between the rival powers during the 1950s and
1960s.

Asian Perspectives

122

Asian perspectives on developing a Chinese school of IR
In China, the construction of a Chinese school of IR theory has become a
national preoccupation that resonates strongly with China’s global aspirations. At a time when the Chinese government is emphasising the country’s
rich cultural – namely, Confucian – heritage in official rhetoric, Chinese IR
scholars are increasingly turning to ancient Chinese political thought for
insights that transcend both time and geography.
Although having been in development since the late 1920s, early attempts to
build a Chinese school can be traced back to the late 1950s, when the focus
of academic debates began to earnestly shift from learning from the West to
rejecting Western IR and developing a distinct Chinese IR approach. This
shift crystallised with the rift in Sino-Soviet relations during the 1960s, 1970s
and 1980s, whereupon the Soviet Union’s approach to IR was officially
denounced within China. The late 1980s saw a clearer division emerge
between Chinese scholars who favoured Western IR approaches and those
who pushed for IR theory with Chinese characteristics. Maoist scholars like
Liang Shoude argued for the rejection of Western theories and the
development of a Chinese model instead. Subsequent debates in the early
2000s largely centred on the hegemonic status of Western IR. Here, the
notion of establishing a Chinese school replaced the more ideologically driven
objective of theorising with Chinese characteristics.
The Chinese school project thus came to be defined not only in opposition to
a ‘prejudiced’ IR discipline, but also in light of the challenges faced by China
as a rising power within an American-dominated, globalising world (Wang and
Han 2016, 54). It is in this way that Chinese IR perspectives draw upon
Western IR theories, while being equally coloured by Maoist-socialist ideas,
ancient Chinese political thought and China’s own experiences in navigating
the international terrain.
According to Qin Yaqing (2016), a theory of ‘relationality’ postulates that
states as social actors base their actions on the nature of the relations they
have with others. The logic of relationality thus dictates that ‘an actor tends to
make decisions according to the degrees of intimacy and/or importance of her
relationships to specific others’ (Qin 2016, 37). This logic is founded upon
ancient Chinese philosophy that emphasises the importance of respecting,
and behaving in line with, the hierarchy of relationships (e.g. between the
emperor and heaven, king and subject, father and son) to social and even
cosmological stability. But of particular significance here is the relationship
between the two opposite forces, yin and yang, which is seen to govern all
other relationships. The existence of yin is seen as dependent on yang, which

123

International Relations Theory

effectively makes them two complementary halves of a whole. This notion of
inclusivity – that ‘each of a pair is inclusive of the other’ (Qin 2016, 40) – is
central to the concept of Zhongyong (‘the Middle Course’), which suggests
how opposites give rise to positive interactions, rendering harmony, not
conflict, as the state of nature. The theory of relationality is one that seeks to
explain how contradictions can coexist and also how their coexistence is
necessary to functioning relationships. Considering how world politics
operates on the basis of ambivalent relationships, where a state can be
perceived as an ally one moment and a threat the next, relationality becomes
a useful theory.
Take, for example, the relationship between China and the Philippines.
Political ties between these two countries, while longstanding, have been
frayed due to their competing territorial claims over a chain of islands and
atolls in the South China Sea, which are believed to hold valuable gas
deposits and strategic importance. As both countries have become ever
bolder in their attempts to assert ownership over the islands, tensions have
flared. In 2016, the Philippines won an arbitration case that concluded that
China has no legal basis to claim historic rights to the South China Sea. The
Chinese government strongly rejected the Permanent Court of Arbitration’s
ruling. Speculations soon emerged of a coming military conflict between the
two countries. Yet, no military conflict occurred. Despite animosity on both
sides over this issue, economic relations between China and the Philippines
continue to grow.
From the perspective of relationality, both political tension and economic
cooperation constitute the Sino-Philippine relationship. Applying the
Zhongyong concept, one can assume that conflict is not unavoidable within
this relationship. If anything, military conflict would constitute an aberration to
the status quo – something that is costly to both sides. Such a prospect could
thus serve to compel China and the Philippines to seek out new avenues for
conflict resolution and cooperation as a means to restore balance between
the oppositional forces within the relationship. Shortly after the arbitration
ruling, Philippine president Rodrigo Duterte articulated his desire to negotiate
directly with China on the South China Sea issue, even proposing joint
resource development in the contested waters and urging the Chinese
government to assist the Philippines with infrastructure development. A
Chinese white paper (2017) published after the ruling, while reaffirming
China’s claims in the South China Sea, reiterated Beijing’s commitment to
settling the dispute via negotiation and consultation.
Via a relationality perspective, we can expect that harmonious contradictions
will continue to characterise the Sino-Philippine relationship, as cooperation

Asian Perspectives

124

between the two countries persists despite tensions. This is an important
demonstration of the value of the Chinese school as it runs contrary to what
mainstream IR theorists, who ground their analyses of interstate interactions
in a conflictual state of international anarchy, would lead us to expect.
Conclusion
As International Relations is an increasingly popular subject, particularly in
Asia where IR courses have become a staple at many universities, there is a
need for it to become a truly global discipline that appreciates political and
cultural difference but also reflects a shared history and humanity. In light of
the uncertainties and anxieties accompanying the rise of non-Western powers
like China and India, IR scholarship must act not only as a lens for analysing
real-world phenomena but also as a useful and practical guide for how we
should act within a changing global environment. That said, ‘Asia’ is as much
a social construct as ‘the West’ and one that could potentially become as
monolithic and hegemonic. As such, we need to be wary of creating simplistic
categories that give rise to an unhelpful ‘self–other’ binary. For the sake of
initiating meaningful dialogue, it is vital that scholars continue to work towards
an inclusive outlook that reconciles East and West, capturing both the
diversity and unity of insights to be gained from mainstream as well as Asian
IR perspectives.

125

International Relations Theory

17
Global South Perspectives
LI NA B E N AB D A L L AH , C A R L OS M U R ILLO-ZA MOR A
& V IC TOR AD ET U L A

The Global South is generally understood to refer to less economically
developed countries. It is a broad term that comprises a variety of states with
diverse levels of economic, cultural, and political influence in the international
order. Although International Relations is an interdisciplinary field of study, it
has historically been studied from a very Eurocentric perspective that does
not always help us to understand developments occurring in the Global
South. Understanding Global South perspectives starts with a discussion of
the Western-centric focus of mainstream IR theories. It also recognises the
challenges facing scholars from the Global South that might help to explain
why Global South perspectives are largely absent from mainstream debates.
The ultimate goal is to broaden the field of view within IR theory to incorporate a more just and representative understanding of international relations.
The basics of Global South perspectives
The main weakness of mainstream Western IR theories is that they are not
universally experienced as mainstream. The concepts they are based on do
not unequivocally reflect or match the reality in many Global South states.
Furthermore, certain questions that are central to Global South perspectives
are absent or under-theorised in mainstream scholarship. Tickner (2016, 1)
for example points out that issues of race and empire have been missing from
mainstream theories despite the existence of solid scholarship in postcolonial
and poststructuralist studies. Curiously, she adds, colonial dominations
profoundly shaped the state of the current global order, yet they are not even
remotely central to mainstream IR. Today, there is a growing body of
scholarship that pays attention to the context of international relations
theories in Africa, Asia and Latin America and to the diverse interpretations
within these vast regions. Much of this scholarship has been produced under
the umbrella term of ‘global IR’.

Global South Perspectives

126

Mainstream IR also gets it wrong in its reading of history. When major global
events are told from a Western perspective, the voices of the colonised and
oppressed often go missing, which leads to a different basis for theorising.
For example, realist scholarship refers to the Cold War as a period of relative
stability given that no major war was fought between the two superpowers,
the United States and the Soviet Union. However, if one looks at the same
period through a Global South lens, one can see a world full of proxy wars
and human suffering where both superpowers intervened in conflicts to
support their interests or damage those of the other. A simple example like
this highlights two issues for mainstream scholarship. On the one hand, it is
important to incorporate non-Western actors and non-Western thinking in
order to explore the ways in which different actors challenge, support, and
shape global and regional orders. On the other hand, it is also important to
question the relevance of mainstream theories to the context of postcolonial
states and theorise the role of emerging economies and other Global South
states in shaping international institutions and global governance. So, the
prevailing questions are whether traditional IR theories are able to adapt to
Global South perspectives, and if not whether new theories and approaches
are needed in their place. In answering this question, scholars have taken a
wide range of different positions.
While many scholars are united around a call for justice and equality in the
way that IR narratives represent the world, it cannot be said that there is one
grand strategy for theorising Global South perspectives. This dilemma is
perhaps best illustrated by the question, ‘who are the Global South scholars?’
In many cases it would be inaccurate to refer to a single perspective that
could be seen to represent a region or even country, let alone the majority of
the world’s population. While they may share similar experiences of exploitation under colonisation, can such a term as ‘African’ be used to describe the
diverse experiences of states ranging from Malawi to Morocco? Scholars do
not even agree on a single definition of which states the ‘Latin American’
region comprises let alone what a Latin American perspective on international
relations might mean. Similarly, it has proved difficult to define a coherent
theoretical body that would constitute a ‘Chinese school’ of Intern-ational
Relations, given the array of different philosophers and interpretations of their
work that might encompass. Issues like these make it difficult for Global
South scholars to rally around a single theoretical perspective.
While one unifying goal might be to challenge the domination of the Global
North, then a further risk of fragmentation lies in the power asymmetries
between Global South states themselves. Inequalities are not exclusive to
North/South relations but also permeate relations between states of the
South. The emergence of strong economies and regional powers within the
Global South such as China, Brazil and India has raised new issues of

127

International Relations Theory

marginalisation and dominance among states already marginalised by the
North.
A further challenge comes in the historical dominance of Western means of
knowledge production and publication. If there is little talk of an African
theoretical perspective in IR, for example, this is perhaps more indicative of
the impact of Western imperialism on indigenous systems of knowledge
production in Africa than of a lack of African theorists. Indeed, the continent of
Africa is home to age-old experiences and practices in diplomacy and
intergovernmental relations that long predate the arrival of the Europeans in
the colonial era. Yet, during colonisation many states were subject to the
domination of Western forms of knowledge that consciously or inadvertently
imposed certain values on the colonies.
Even since independence, scholarly outputs have tended to reflect Western
concerns and experiences, even sometimes when being written from within
the Global South. An example of this can be seen in the development of IR
scholarship in Latin America. Ever since the Monroe Doctrine of 1823, which
stated the United States’ intent to keep European powers out of the Americas,
the United States has adopted a policy towards its nearest neighbours that
sees Latin America as its strategic backyard, and has regularly resulted in
interventionist actions. In spite of notable efforts, much teaching and research
about Latin America has been written in or for the United States. This is
exacerbated by the fact that to secure careers, scholars need to publish in
prestigious English-language publications, which are often based in the
United States.
By shining a spotlight on the forgotten past of the pre-colonial era, Global
South scholars can demonstrate the injustices of the present. For example,
when told from a Western perspective, accounts of African histories begin
with the arrival of the Europeans. Yet the accounts of early European
explorers themselves towards the end of the fourteenth century testify to the
political structures, institutions and organisations that were already in place in
many areas. Africa was the site of empires, kingdoms and other social
institutions that made it possible for trade, commerce and religion to thrive.
The records of early Arab travellers and traders across the Sahara Desert
make reference to the diplomatic activities of some early kingdoms and
empires in West Africa, notably the Ghana empire, the Mali empire, the
Songhai empire and Islamic missionaries who used the trans-Sahara trade
routes. In the course of their travels, colonial missionaries form Europe
reported that the networks of trade and commerce across the Sahara Desert
had successfully bridged North Africa with Europe. Clearly, trade, commerce,
diplomatic activities as well as learning and knowledge production were at

Global South Perspectives

128

various levels of development in Africa before the coming of the Europeans.
Yet, narratives that start with colonisation see African states as only being
independent and ‘sovereign’ since decolonisation in the mid-twentieth century. They are therefore seen to be ‘new states’, which only very recently
became part of the contemporary international system. This ‘newness’ is used
to defend international institutions that exclude African states from power
structures and decision-making systems – such as key bodies of the United
Nations like the Security Council – on the grounds that the rules for managing
inter-state relations were established long before the establishment of most
African states. However, if attention is paid to the histories the West ‘forgot’,
then this becomes more difficult to justify. As a result, many African countries
are at the forefront of the campaign for the restructuring of the United Nations
and the work of Global South scholars is helping to build their case.
Global South perspectives on international development
Many of the policies that shape international politics today are based on
assumptions that originate in Western modes of thinking. Take, for example,
‘development’ – a word that has the power to dictate national and international policies and attract or divert vast sums of money. This can be seen
through the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals and their
successors, the Sustainable Development Goals. These involve targets that
every country in the world agreed to strive towards and to fund. They are
based on an understanding of development that sees many countries in the
Global South as not having yet achieved the economic progress of the North.
Perhaps one of the greatest contributions of Latin American scholars to IR
theory is dependency theory, which challenges dominant understandings of
development as an organising principle in international politics. Dependency
theory asserts that underdevelopment and poverty are the result of political,
economic and cultural influences exerted on such countries from the outside.
It presents the relationship between the Global South and the Global North as
exploitative and unfair by underlining the ways in which states in the South
have been incorporated into the world economic system through capitalist
development, which has exploited human and material resources and disrupted indigenous modes of production. Dependency theory analyses the way
in which the underdevelopment of many states in the South might be a direct
result of the policies, interventions and unfair trading practices of states from
the North. From this perspective, the current (unfair) economic relations
between the Global North and South will not help the South to develop at all.
Rather, they will keep the South poorer than the North. Rather than the need
for states in the Global South to ‘develop’, dependency theory stresses that
nothing short of a restructuring of the entire international economic system

129

International Relations Theory

will deliver economic justice for the world’s poor.
Building on the likes of dependency theory, scholars have demonstrated that
the economic exploitation of many colonised nations did not stop with
decolonisation. In fact, in the final years of colonialism – at the time when
independence movements were becoming too strong to suppress – the
departing colonial powers instigated a number of policies and programmes
that paved the way for a new type of domination of Global South economies.
The legacy of such policies was an emphasis on the production of cash crops
for export, dependence on foreign financial interventions and the entrenchment of private capital (both domestic and foreign) as the engine of growth
and development. North–South trade agreements and the policies of
international organisations such as the World Trade Organization have further
served to protect the interests of established powers despite repeated calls
from the South for a fairer deal in global trade relations. They have served to
privilege ‘developed’ states in trade relationships and to disadvantage the
former ‘developing’ colonies. Viewed from the North, such policies are an
instrument for helping the South. However, viewed from the South, they are
tantamount to a new type of colonial domination – often referred to as ‘neocolonialism’ – in that they represent a continuation of unequal and exploitative
North–South relationships.
Mainstream IR theories emerging from Western societies largely seek rational
explanations for states’ interactions. However, some scholars have started to
explore the motivations behind interactions between states in the Global
South from a relational perspective. An example of this emphasis on
relationality can be seen in China’s interactions with various African states. In
2015 China became the African continent’s largest trading partner. Chinese
investments across Africa include natural resource extractions, infrastructure
construction, real estate and information technology. African and Chinese
economies are mutually interdependent in that China imports a lot of energy
sources from the continent and African states in return import consumer
goods, commodities, and technology from China. Most African states,
however, import far more than they export to China and suffer from unbalanced trade relations. China’s development model (the Beijing Consensus)
differs from the neoliberal model of development advocated by the International Monetary Fund and other Western-led organisations (the Washington
Consensus). The Washington Consensus’ emphasis on liberal-isation and
minimising the role of the state in the market has been denounced by many
African leaders as neocolonial and exploitative. By contrast, the Beijing
Consensus, with its emphasis on the principle of non-interference, has
presented an attractive alternative to some African countries.

Global South Perspectives

130

Furthermore, while China certainly benefits economically from its developmental role in African states, enhancing cultural dialogue and cultivating
networks through people-to-people exchanges also seem to be important
motivating factors behind its interventions. As well as funding Confucius
Institutes across the continent of Africa showcasing Chinese language and
culture, the Chinese government has sponsored 200,000 opportunities for
training professionals, academics, journalists and public servants from all
corners of Africa. It is part of constructing a shared identity based on future
aspirations and trajectories that will lift citizens out of poverty. Whether or not
China’s approach in Africa is in fact a genuinely new type of development
policy is subject to heated debate among scholars. But the point here is that
China is keen to be seen to adopt a more relational approach, as opposed to
the rational one of the North. Indeed, this concept is not exclusively Chinese
– it also extends to other societies within the Global South and offers an
alternative way of theorising South–South relations to the perspectives that
have emerged from the North.
Conclusion
In recent years a lot has been done to highlight the important contributions
that actors from the Global South make, and have always made, to
international relations. Indeed, IR as a discipline has come a long way in
incorporating aspects, actors and concepts that represent the world more
widely. Yet, as the dynamics of the international system continue to change
with the emergence of new economic powers such as India, China, Brazil,
Turkey as well as other rising economies, IR will need to do more to pay
attention to the perspectives of those in the South. Global South perspectives
not only challenge the dominant theoretical perspectives that have served to
create and perpetuate unjust relations between the Global North and South,
they also open up the possibility of different, fairer relations that represent the
interests of all concerned and challenge international institutions to have
more representative power structures and decision-making processes.

131

International Relations Theory

18
Indigenous Perspectives
J E F F C OR N TA SS EL & MA R C W OON S

Being Indigenous is about honouring and renewing complex relationships
between humans and also with the natural world. The United Nations offers a
multifaceted working definition of what it means to be a member of one of the
thousands of Indigenous nations living around the world. It includes factors
like self-identification, historical continuity and a place-based existence that
links to a particular territory. The definition also speaks to distinct governance
systems, languages, historical experiences, cultures and ways of knowing.
Importantly, it additionally describes communities that seek to maintain their
territories and assert themselves as distinct peoples – despite their existence
within a state (usually against their wishes). States, on the other hand are
constructed around different principles of territorial sovereignty and legally
recognised governmental systems and have historically sought to control,
coerce, and even eliminate Indigenous peoples from the landscape. The
existing, dominant framework of inter-state relations roots itself in state
sovereignty. From an Indigenous perspective this has been established
through violence, broken treaties and other unjust assertions of power over
Indigenous peoples and their lands. This undermines, downplays, excludes
and ultimately provokes Indigenous worldviews and counter-arguments that
seek to push the state-centric model beyond its narrow confines. By exploring
Indigenous perspectives and complex relationships we can more clearly see
the problems that come from the many assumptions at the heart of
International Relations and its family of theories.
The basics of Indigenous perspectives
The current dominant global political and legal order, invented in Europe, is
state-centric and has since spread everywhere to create the discrete borders
that mark the geopolitical world map most use today. Putting an end to
decades of brutal violence and endemic conflict throughout Europe, the 1648
Peace of Westphalia cemented the totalising and enduring notion of state

Indigenous Perspectives

132

sovereignty. Europe’s response to anarchy, conflict and disorder among
nations (or peoples) was thus the creation of a system of inter-state relations
bolstered by states mutually recognising one another’s sovereign authority.
Indigenous understandings of international relations differ from inter-state
approaches, particularly when it comes to the ways that Indigenous peoples
renew and act on their sacred commitments and interdependencies with the
natural world. Assertions of Indigenous resurgence, which entails reclaiming
and regenerating relationships with lands, cultures and communities, promote
positive, alternative visions of the international that challenge the dominant
inter-state model.
The concept of state sovereignty fuelled modern state-building strategies and,
almost without exception, led to the destruction of Indigenous nations. Each
state tries to build a vision of a common people sharing a culture, values,
history, language, currency (and so on) through education, military conquest
and other state-driven initiatives. This is often called a national identity, and is
associated with ideas like patriotism and nationalism. Indigenous encounters
with European empires saw them time and again face a stark choice (if the
choice was even put to them at all): assimilate to the new settler colonial
order being imposed over them and their lands or face dislocation – even
genocide. As George Manuel and Michael Posluns (1974, 60) point out,
the colonial system is always a way of gaining control over
another people for the sake of what the colonial power has
determined to be ‘the common good.’ People can only become
convinced of the common good when their own capacity to
imagine ways in which they can govern themselves has been
destroyed.
Speaking to Indigenous battles over state-building efforts that alienate
Indigenous peoples from their lands and resources, Manuela Picq (2015)
suggests that Indigenous perspectives offer three specific challenges to the
state-centric perspective. First, they challenge the state’s ultimate authority by
asserting their authority over their nations, lands/waters, and the natural
world. Second, they expose the colonial foundations of the state-centric
system by highlighting Indigenous views that both challenge and sit outside
the dominant system. In other words, states as we know them owe their
existence to processes of colonisation and settlement rooted in cultural
imperialism, violence, destruction, genocide and ultimately the eradication of
Indigenous identities and relationships to the land if not the eradication of the
peoples themselves. Third, Indigenous peoples’ worldviews and practices
challenge us to imagine what it might be like to share power within and think
beyond state borders and the prevailing global state system.

133

International Relations Theory

The principle of self-determination has provided stateless Indigenous nations
with ways to attempt to (re)assert and (re)claim their authority. Selfdetermination provides an avenue for Indigenous peoples to create political
entities that can be recognised by the international community. The process is
based on the idea that people should be free to form their own governments
and control their own affairs – something central to the ethics and legality
underpinning the United Nations. Indigenous claims of this nature have
gained significant traction over the past century, especially post-1945 when
decolonisation became a key international process. The sources of selfdetermining authority are admittedly a source of contention. For Indigenous
nations it emanates from complex relationships with their homelands, waters,
sacred living histories, animal nations, plant nations, ceremonies, languages
and the natural world. The sources of self-determining authority for states are
much different, originating from colonial policies. For instance, the Doctrine of
Discovery, dating back to the fifteenth century, espouses that land occupied
by non-Christians could be legally ‘discovered’ and claimed as territory owned
by the Crown. Other invented political and legal constructs have also become
embedded within state legal histories and practices, shaping international
practices that deny alternative Indigenous conceptions of relations between
nations.
One example of the tension between state sovereignty and Indigenous selfdetermination can be seen in the story of Cayuga chief Deskaheh’s European
visit, first to the United Kingdom in 1921 and then to the League of Nations in
1923. In his capacity as the Speaker of the Six Nations of the Haudenosaunee, he felt compelled to make the long trans-Atlantic journey as conflicts
between the Haudenosaunee and Canadian peoples had reached an
impasse. He felt it unjust that his people were being imprisoned for protesting
the Canadian state’s imposition of its self-declared sovereignty over their
lands, claiming it to be tantamount to an invasion and stating that ‘we are
determined to live the free people that we were born’ (League of Nations
1923, 3). The lands were, and still are, subject to treaties expressing an
alternative vision of shared authority over shared lands and mutual respect
between peoples as equal nations cooperatively governing the same territory
– an idea that is largely antithetical to the Westphalian vision of exclusive
territorial authority by one people. However, Chief Deskaheh’s appeals fell on
deaf ears in both London and Geneva as the states concerned refused to
interfere in the domestic affairs of one of their peers, namely Canada
(Corntassel 2008). He eventually left Europe empty-handed, dying soon after
in 1925 in New York state, exiled from his homeland that had by then been all
but overrun by the Canadian settler state.
Some progress has been made since Chief Deskaheh’s time and now
appears in prominent places. The UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous

Indigenous Perspectives

134

Peoples (UNDRIP) urges states to recognise that ‘Indigenous peoples have
the right to self-determination. By virtue of that right they freely determine
their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural
development’ (United Nations General Assembly 2007: 3). There is also
momentum within the United Nations to support what many consider the heart
of self-determination – namely, an Indigenous veto over all matters affecting
them, their communities and their territories. On the surface, the Declaration
seems to secure for Indigenous nations powers previously extended only to
states. As White Face (2013) points out, conspiring states refused to adopt it
until it included limiting language that eventually made its way into Article 46,
which states that ‘nothing in this declaration may be interpreted … or
construed as authorizing or encouraging any action which would dismember
or impair, totally or in part, the territorial integrity or political unity of sovereign
and independent states’ (United Nations General Assembly 2007: 14). Article
46 can be seen as perpetuating the above-mentioned Doctrine of Discovery
or at least its impacts despite its formal repudiation in 2012. Unfortunately, the
legal fictions of the Doctrine of Discovery via Article 46 of the UNDRIP as well
as other inter-state legal instruments continue to impact Indigenous nations in
profound and destructive ways that undermine their self-determining authority
(Miller et al. 2010; Special Rapporteur 2010).
Indigenous self-determination should not be confused with the selfdetermination efforts of non-state nations like Québec, Catalonia, Palestine or
Kurdistan. Hoping to achieve the successes of East Timor or South Sudan,
these national movements desire a state of their own so that they can be
included as fully-fledged members within the inter-state system as it currently
exists. Indigenous self-determination movements, on the other hand, mount a
more robust and fundamental challenge to the system itself. Even if most
Indigenous nations do not seek its wholesale elimination, they strive for ways
of being included on their own terms that tend to reject the Westphalian idea
of state sovereignty. Given that there are approximately 5,000 Indigenous
nations throughout the world, there are many ways of asserting selfdetermining authority. Many Indigenous alternatives even reject the very idea
that there should be a robust set of overarching principles that govern
relations between peoples, arguing that we should be tolerant of a plurality of
approaches to promoting peace among peoples and with the environments
that sustain us.
Indigenous perspectives and the Buffalo Treaty
There is an emerging scholarship on Indigenous international relations that
challenges state-centric expressions of sovereignty and self-determination.
As Anishinaabe scholar Hayden King (2015, 181) states, ‘in our political

135

International Relations Theory

worldviews the state and sovereignty melt away’. Indigenous nations have
expressed solidarity with one another through the establishment of new
confederacies, treaties and agreements that promote peace, friendship and
new strategic alliances. Indigenous international relations are enduring and
sacred, and making treaties with foreign countries has not prevented Indigenous nations from continuing their own diplomatic relations with one another.
For example, the Treaty of Peace, Respect, and Responsibility between the
Heiltsuk Nation and the Haida Nation (Crist 2014) was the first peace treaty
between these two nations since the 1850s and was premised on the
assumption that ‘there are greater troubles facing our lands and waters and
depletion of resources generated from forces outside of our nations’. The
Treaty was enacted between the two Indigenous nations through a potlatch
ceremony and sought to challenge a common threat posed by the statesanctioned commercial herring fishery in Heiltsuk waters.
In 2014, another historic treaty was initiated between Indigenous nations
living along the medicine line (the United States-Canada border). Iiniiwa,
which is the Blackfoot name for bison, have a deep, longstanding relationship
with the land, people and cultural practices of prairie ecosystems. When
discussing the role of the bison on their homelands, Blackfoot scholar Leroy
Little Bear (2014) pointed out that
[a]cting as a natural bio-engineer in prairie landscapes, they
shaped plant communities, transported and recycled nutrients,
created habitat variability that benefited grassland birds,
insects and small mammals, and provided abundant food
resources for grizzly bears, wolves and humans.
Unfortunately, the widespread slaughter of bison in the nineteenth century led
to the deterioration of the prairie ecosystems and with this the health and
wellbeing of Blackfeet people. The decimation of the bison also impacted the
cultural practices of the region’s Indigenous peoples, which has prompted the
need for community-led action to restore the iiniiwa to Indigenous homelands.
On 23 September 2014, eight Indigenous nations (the Blackfeet Nation, Blood
Tribe, Siksika Nation, Piikani Nation, the Assiniboine and Gros Ventre Tribes
of Fort Belknap Indian Reservation, the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of Fort
Peck Indian Reservation, the Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Confederated
Salish and Kootenai Indian Reservation, and the Tsuu T’ina Nation) gathered
in Blackfeet territory near Browning, Montana to sign the historic Buffalo
Treaty. It involved Indigenous nations on both sides of the medicine line and
called for the return of iiniiwa to the prairie ecosystems. Given that it was the
first cross-border Indigenous treaty signed in over 150 years, the Buffalo

Indigenous Perspectives

136

Treaty was also a way of renewing and regenerating old alliances. It outlined
several community-led goals, including engaging tribes and First Nations in
continuing dialogue on iiniiwa conservation; uniting the political power of the
tribes and First Nations of the Northern Great Plains; advancing an
international call for the restoration of the iiniiwa; engaging youth in the treaty
process and strengthening and renewing ancient cultural and spiritual
relationships with iiniiwa and grasslands in the Northern Great Plains.
As an example of Indigenous international relations, the above-mentioned
treaty provisions demonstrate the sacred nature of treaty-making as a way for
Indigenous nations ‘to extend their relationships of connection to all of the
different peoples of the world’ (Williams 1997, 50). In addition to having
Indigenous nations as signatories, the Buffalo Treaty also outlines a vision for
the involvement of federal, state and provincial governments, as well as
farmers, ranchers and conservation groups in the restoration of iiniiwa to
Indigenous homelands. As individual Indigenous nations, these communities
would have a limited ability to promote iiniiwa restoration. However, with a
unified vision, they collectively exerted their self-determining authority to
facilitate the return of iiniiwa to some 6.3 million acres of their homelands.
The Buffalo Treaty is also a living document that requires periodic renewal
and re-interpretation. Two years after the Treaty was signed, the number of
signatories had gone from eight to 21. In September 2016, signatories held a
pipe ceremony in Banff National Park to honour the planned reintroduction of
sixteen iiniiwa to the area. In addition to restoring the buffalo population,
signatories called on the Government of Alberta in Canada to change the
name of Tunnel Mountain in Banff to Sacred Buffalo Guardian Mountain. The
vision for the regeneration and perpetuation of iiniiwa also entails changing
the landscape to reflect the places where the iiniiwa live. New forms of
Indigenous treaty-making reflect the complex diplomacies and spiritual reawakenings that constitute Indigenous inter-national relations.
Conclusion
A power imbalance, and differences in worldviews, between states and
Indigenous nations remains in our international system. Developments and
critiques within the discipline of IR, and how it is theorised, highlight the
struggle of Indigenous peoples to maintain their place-based existence so
that their lands, cultures, communities and relationships will flourish for
generations to come. Indigenous understandings of international relations
come in many forms, whether through reinvigorating treaties with the natural
world, (re)establishing alliances between Indigenous peoples or Indigenous
advocacy in diplomatic activities within global forums. These efforts challenge

137

International Relations Theory

the dominant state-centric system to include their different ways of
understanding and structuring relations not just between peoples, but with the
natural world and the planet. More specifically, they challenge the Westphalian notion of ultimate state sovereignty and seek ways of restoring selfdetermining authority regarding their relationships to their homelands and
nations.

A Contemporary Perspective on Realism

138

19
A Contemporary Perspective on
Realism
FE L IX R ÖSC H & R IC H A R D N E D LE B OW

Since the end of the Cold War realism has returned to its roots. Realist
scholars show renewed interest in their foundational thinkers, their tragic
understanding of life and politics, their practical concern for ethics and their
understanding of theory as the starting point for explanatory narratives or
forward-looking forecasts that are highly context dependent. Despite their
different perspectives on world politics, the writings of Thucydides, Niccolò
Machiavelli, Edward Hallett Carr, Reinhold Niebuhr, Arnold Wolfers, John
Herz, Hans Morgenthau and Hannah Arendt demonstrate a remarkable unity
of thought as they were driven by similar concerns about ‘perennial problems’
(Morgenthau 1962, 19). One of these problems is the depoliticisation of
societies. Realists were concerned that, in modern societies, people could no
longer freely express their interests in public, losing the ability to collectively
contribute to their societies. Consequently, realism can be perceived as a
critique of and ‘corrective’ (Cozette 2008, 12) to this development. It may
seem strange at first, but one way to see how realism relates to today’s world
is to look back to its roots – via its earlier scholars – rather than dwell on
some of the later developments in realist theory, such as neorealism. For this
reason, this chapter will revisit realism to offer a contemporary perspective on
what is, most probably, the oldest theory of IR and, most certainly, IR’s most
significant theory family.
The basics of a contemporary perspective on realism
Mid-twentieth century realists, often called ‘classical’ realists, were a diverse
group of scholars. Although their geographical centre was in the United
States (with some exceptions), many of them were émigrés from Europe who
had been forced to leave due to the rise of fascism and communism in the

139

International Relations Theory

1930s. Although they shared a common humanistic worldview in the sense
that they had received similar extensive secondary schooling in liberal arts
and believed that people can only experience themselves as human beings
by engaging with others in the public sphere, their diversity is also evidenced
in their wide range of professions. Given that IR was only gradually
institutionalised in Europe when the first chair was set up in light of the
horrors of the First World War at the university in Aberystwyth in 1919, none
of them were trained as an IR scholar. Instead, they were historians,
sociologists, philosophers, lawyers and even theologians. Only retrospectively were many of them linked to IR. Even Morgenthau, arguably the bestknown realist, held a professorship for political science and history, not for
International Relations. Despite this diversity, however, mid-twentieth century
realists agreed on a tragic vision of life – a view they shared with many of
their predecessors (Lebow 2003; Williams 2005). This is because people,
and more so leaders, have to make decisions on the basis of incomplete
information, deal with unpredictability of their actions and cope with
irreconcilable value conflicts within and among societies. Above all, they
recognise that leaders must sometimes resort to unethical means (such as
violence) to achieve laudable ends – and without prior knowledge that these
means will accomplish the ends they seek.
This tragic outlook is understandable if we consider the contexts in which
these classical realists wrote. Thucydides lived during the times of the
Peloponnesian War in which Athens lost its pre-eminence in the ancient
Greek world. Machiavelli’s life was also influenced by repetitive conflicts in
which papal, French, Spanish and other forces aimed to seize control over
Northern Italy during the Renaissance Wars (1494–1559). Modern realists
finally experienced with the rise of ideologies the climax of a development
that had started almost two hundred years earlier. Since the Age of
Enlightenment culminating in the French Revolution, people were freed from
religious straightjackets. But simultaneously they had lost a sense of
community that ideologies such as nationalism, liberalism or Marxism could
only superficially restore – and often only at the cost of violent conflicts.
Realists shared public sentiments that losing this sense of community caused
a decline of commonly accepted values as exemplified in the German debate
on a cultural crisis during the early decades of the twentieth century. This
made them more susceptible to the temptations of ideologies. This is
because ideologies provide what Arendt (1961, 469) called ‘world
explanations’, enabling people to channel their human drives into them.
John Herz (1951) argued that the drive for self-preservation, which ensures
that people care about their survival in the world by seeking food and shelter,
provokes a security dilemma because people can never be certain to avoid
attacks from others. Morgenthau (1930), by contrast, was more concerned

A Contemporary Perspective on Realism

140

about the drive to prove oneself, achieved by making contributions to one’s
social-political life worlds. Success is difficult because people have incomplete knowledge about themselves and their life-worlds. Any political decision
must always be temporary and subject to revision if circumstances change or
knowledge is being advanced. In realising that their ambitions are in vain,
another tragic aspect of life comes to the fore. For Morgenthau, accepting this
tragic aspect is a first step toward transcending it; people can reflect critically
about their existence and come to understand that only through their own
efforts can life become meaningful. In modernity, however, having lost values
as a basis to make informed judgements, peoples’ lives are characterised by
what Steven Toulmin (1990, 35) called a ‘quest for certainty’, but very few
manage to deal with the hardships self-critical contemplation entails. Most, as
Nietzsche noted, content themselves with the illusions of being embedded in
some form of community. Therefore, on the level of nation-states tragedy
looms large because people live in political communities that are characterised by the same deficiencies that hamper the human condition.
Given that these drives affect people on every level, realists do not
distinguish between domestic and international politics. Rather, they focus on
political communities however they may be conceived because it is through
peoples’ relations that these human drives start to affect politics. In these
relations, power plays a decisive role. Due to the drive to prove oneself, a
balance of power evolves in interpersonal, intergroup and international
relations to counter ambitions of political actors to gain the ability to dominate
others. This balance of power is not stable but evolving because actors face a
security dilemma, meaning that, due to uncertainty, actors live in constant
fear. This compels them to amass further power, only causing the same
reaction in their potential adversaries. Hence, it is less physical or material
constraints that lead to a balance of power and more emotional insecurity.
Ironically, therefore, balance of power works best when needed least because
if people and communities share some form of common identity, they can
cooperate more easily and do not require a balance of power.
However, human drives have an even more dramatic effect on societies
beyond the evolvement of a balance of power, as they can depoliticise them.
This concern is central to the realist thought of Hans J. Morgenthau. He
opposed the more common friend enemy/distinction and defined the political
as a universal force that is inherent in every human and that necessarily
focuses on others, while at the same time it only comes into being in interpersonal relationships. The resulting discussions, in which people express
their interests, create an ‘arena of contestation’ (Galston 2010, 391).
Realising their individual capabilities and experiencing power through acting
together, people develop their identities, as they gain knowledge about
themselves and their life-worlds.

141

International Relations Theory

The tragedy of human imperfection, however, endangers the political, as it
fosters the development of ideologies. Given that most people cannot face
their imperfections, ideologies offer some form of ontological security. This
means that ideologies provide people with a sense of order and it helps them
to conceal the initial meaninglessness of life, as ideologies offer explanations
to historical and current socio-political events. Particularly fascism and communism occupied the minds of classical realists, as they were the most violent
ideologies during their lifetime, but they were also critical of the hubris of
American liberalism and nationalism in general.
For realists, ideologies aim to retain the socio-political status quo and any
human activity is geared towards sustaining this reification. The current sociopolitical reality is perceived as given and it cannot be fundamentally altered.
The development of the political as a realm in which people can voice their
interests freely and share their thoughts about the composition and purpose
of their political community endangers the socio-political status quo, as it
potentially encourages socio-political change. To cope with this depoliticisation, realists put forward what can be called an ‘ethics of responsibility’, to
use Max Weber’s term. Although realists were convinced that most people
would be unwilling or incapable of taking responsibility for their lives, they still
argued for an ethics in which decision-making is guided by ‘intellectual
honesty’ (Sigwart 2013, 429). Thoughts and beliefs have to be contextualised
in a self-critical process that demonstrates empathy towards the position of
others. The resulting ‘discourse ethic’, as Arendt called it, can only happen in
collectivity. American town hall meetings provided the perfect setting for
Arendt to illustrate this, as they allow all people who share a common interest
to congregate. As a consequence, however, people have to be prepared to
change their positions and be willing to take responsibility for the moral
dilemmas of (inter)national politics.
Contrary to common assumptions, realists are not apologists of the nationstate, but critical of it, aiming to avoid its dangers and transcend its
shortcomings by investigating the potential of a world-state (Scheuerman
2011). For a variety of reasons, classical realists considered states to be
‘blind and potent monster[s]’ (Morgenthau 1962, 61). They are blind because
globalisation and technological advancements not only hinder them from
fulfilling their role of providing security, but endanger life on earth altogether.
Particularly strong versions of this critique can be found in Aron, Herz and
Morgenthau. The latter provided a disenchanted view on the prospects of
humanity in one of his last public appearances, arguing that we are living in a
‘dream world’ because nation-states can no longer uphold the claim to have a
monopoly of power over a given territory due to the development of nuclear
weapons. Furthermore, the squandering of natural resources threatens the
environment, leading to a ‘society of waste’ (Morgenthau 1972, 23). However,

A Contemporary Perspective on Realism

142

nation-states are also potent because in gaining sovereignty over a specific
territory and a specific group of people, they exert violence on these people
and on others. Nation-states universalise their own standards and even try to
impose them onto others, as evidenced in the rise of fascism during the early
twentieth century in Europe. After seizing power in countries like Italy,
Germany, Spain and Croatia, fascist movements not only waged wars
internationally (ultimately leading to the Second World War) but also exerted
violence domestically by ostracising ethical, religious and socio-political
minorities. Furthermore, technological advancements complicate human lifeworlds, accelerating socio-political decision-making processes. This benefited
the development of scientific elites, who are unaccountable to the public, but
who in their attempt to socially plan the world affect people in their everyday
lives greatly.
Classical realist perspectives on the European migration crisis
Since 2011, millions of people have become displaced from Syria due to the
civil war there. This has been exacerbated by migration flows coming from
other states in Africa and the Middle East due to various political and
economic circumstances. By 2015 the issue had been declared a crisis in
Europe – the destination for many of the migrants. Focusing on this crisis
might not seem to be an obvious choice, but many realists were refugees or
migrants themselves. Indeed, Herz (1984, 9) characterised himself as a
‘traveller between all worlds’ and Morgenthau was even a ‘double exile’
(Frankfurter 1937) after his expulsion from Germany and later Spain before
arriving in the United States in 1937. Beyond this point, realism provides
useful insights into this crisis as we can investigate the conditions for a
peaceful coexistence of differences. This is important, as the refugee issue
has been identified as one of the reasons why the British public voted to
leave the European Union (EU) in the 2016 ‘Brexit’ referendum. It has also
been implicated in the rise of right-wing parties throughout Europe and the
victory of Donald Trump in the 2016 US presidential election. Refugees and
migrants are clearly being pictured in security discourses as a threat – and to
measurable effects.
Relating the work of mid-twentieth century ‘classical’ realists to this modern
development enables IR scholarship to understand that security is established in a discursive context, making it dependent on spatio-temporal
conditions. This means security has different meanings in different contexts
and therefore it is transformative (Behr 2013, 169). This puts realist thought
into affinity with the critical theories that ostensibly seem opposed to it. Given
that both groupings found stimulation in the same sources, one of which was
Karl Mannheim’s Ideology and Utopia (1929), this is unsurprising. One of the

143

International Relations Theory

key concepts in Mannheim’s book is the conditionality of knowledge. This
means that knowledge is always bound to the socio-political environment in
which it operates, stressing that universal knowledge is impossible. Applying
this notion to the current refugee crisis, we understand that perceiving
refugees as a threat to security is the result of human will and political
agency. For example, the refugee crisis was one of the dominant drivers of
British Brexit-discourses, although the UK received fewer than 40,000 asylum
seekers in 2015. By comparison, approximately 890,000 refugees chose
Germany as their destination the same year, making Germany the European
country that accepts most refugees in relation to the overall population.
This is not to say that this process always takes place consciously as we can
never be entirely sure how our writings or actions are perceived by others, but
classical realism can help us to understand that humans are not only the
objects of security but also its subjects. In public discourses, people have the
opportunity to redefine the substance of security, instead of leaving it to
international foreign policy elites. These discourses can evolve violently, as
they include the interests of all involved people. To avoid this looming danger,
realists stress the possibility of dialogical learning, as current scholarship
calls it, to increase the potential to morph these discourses into a common
good. This form of learning is based on continuous possibilities of exchange
between refugees, migrants and local people and it requires all groups to
demonstrate open-mindedness and empathy as well as the willingness to
challenge one’s own positions. As a result, security can be redefined and
what is perceived to be a crisis can be eventually understood as an
opportunity to create something ‘which did not exist before, which was not
given, not even as an object of cognition or imagination’ (Arendt 1961, 151).
Recall that classical realists were sceptical of the promises of modern nationstates and argued for the establishing of a world community, eventually
leading to a world state. Such a global community would help to transcend
the depolitisation in modern societies and even support ‘defenders of the
global state to stay sober’ (Scheuerman 2011, 150). Such sobriety would be
beneficial to add to the academic and political debate on migration. After all,
the root of the migration crisis in Europe was that certain states, and certain
influential groups within them, decided to enforce the metaphorical and
physical walls of their borders and limit (or block) migrants from entering due
to perceiving them as a security threat to their nation. By enabling people to
get together on different levels, political spheres can extrapolate beyond
national borders, allowing people to exchange their interests globally and
gradually develop an identity that goes beyond that of the state. It also allows
for different images of the migrant, or the refugee, to gain traction – to replace
the negative ones that became widespread in Europe by 2015.

A Contemporary Perspective on Realism

144

The flexibility found within the classical realist literature allows people to
accommodate diverse human interests. The resulting self-reflexivity and
open-mindedness helps life trajectories influenced by different historical,
cultural, socio-political or religious factors to be accepted. In political spheres,
people are acknowledged for their differences and, through discussion, a
common ground is established that is at least acceptable to citizens at a basic
level. If this can be done within each state, then it is possible that it can be
done at the global level. If such an end can be attained then there will be no
migration crises in the future as a global citizenry will exist. Classical realists
did not arrive at this conclusion straight away. Rather, scholars like
Morgenthau and Niebuhr were sceptical at first of international organisations
like the United Nations and the early forms of the European Union. However,
they soon realised that they provide the space (if used as they had hoped) for
the political to gradually evolve, as different actors can get together peacefully
and exchange their ideas at the international level.
Conclusion
In this chapter we have introduced a perspective on realism that is probably
unlike what may be found in other IR theory textbooks. It was our ambition to
introduce students to a more nuanced perspective on realism, to set it apart
from neorealism, and to demonstrate that realism can help us to develop a
more critical awareness of international politics. Realism, especially in its
classical form, is therefore far from being ready for the dustbin of the history
of IR theory – as some critics suggest. It can serve as a stepping stone to
question some of the common assumptions held in the discipline, propose
solutions to some of the contemporary problems in international relations and
show us how we can create more inclusive societies.

145

International Relations Theory

20
The ‘Isms’ Are Evil. All Hail the
‘Isms’!
AL E X P R IC H A R D

In this concluding chapter I want to explore some of the problems that come
with classifying IR theory in the way we do. I want to open up a problem. Why
is it we call theories of world politics theories and not ideologies? To answer
this question I will engage in a bit of metatheory – that is, theory about theory
– to expose some of the complexities and problems that emerge once we
think a little more deeply about how the ‘isms’ can and ought to be used. The
point of this chapter is to help you to think theoretically about how the
previous chapters in this book hang together. In other words, while you might
have already spotted shared characteristics of the various ‘isms’, in this
chapter I want to give you the tools to understand why those commonalities
exist at all.
In short, the argument is that IR theories should be understood not only as
theories but also as ideologies. The proximity and difference between
theories and ideologies will become clearer as we progress, but the key point
I want to make is that when we understand the ideological element in IR
theory, we are better able to think critically about the enterprise of dividing IR
up as a set of isms in the first place.
The chapter starts with a quick overview of the rise and fall of the isms in
political studies and IR theory. Funnily enough, for many people we live in a
post-ideological age, and the fact IR theorists talk about theories and not
ideologies is manifest evidence of that. I then discuss some reasons we
should reject the isms as a way of compartmentalising philosophical thinking
in IR, and show how concept analysis and ideology critique are good alternatives. But I close by arguing that we need ideologies and our isms not only
to help frame explanations of world politics but also as raw material for

The ‘Isms’ Are Evil. All Hail the ‘Isms’!

146

exposing the political and moral assumptions scholars work with. Hopefully,
this final chapter should encourage you to be both playful and experimental
with IR theory.
An ‘ism’ is a suffix that denotes a more or less systematic set of beliefs,
opinions, and/or values about the world. The suffix is added when something
moves from being quite specific to encompassing more expansive or general
views, beliefs and attitudes. For example, Philippines president Rodrigo
Duterte may have general views that are unique to him, but until he or anyone
else systematises them into a coherent worldview, we are unlikely to start
talking about Duterteism in the same way we would of Marxism for example.
The isms become even more expansive when more than one person
contributes to or develops the initial set of views. Contemporary Marxism
incorporates a vast array of ideas and theories, approaches, epistemologies
and ontologies. Indeed, other isms add a large measure of Marxism to their
own too, mainly to distinguish them from other sub-types. For example, there
can be both orthodox or heterodox Marxism or liberal feminism and Marxist
feminism, and so forth. In short, in political science the isms generally denote
ideologies and their refinements.
In IR, however, we think of the isms as theories, not ideologies, which is odd.
Why do we call Marxism a theory in IR, but an ideology in political science?
This is not just a semantic issue. In fact it goes to the core of what IR thought
of itself in the period in which it emerged as a stand-alone social science at
the turn of the twentieth century. The reason IR scholars spoke of theory
rather than ideology at this time was that it was generally held that
international relations were not amenable to the totalising visions of the good
life that we find elaborated in the architecture of the main ideologies (Wight
1966). Realists prided themselves on their ability to cut through the moral
haze of world politics to the perennial problems of world politics. Realism was
not an ideology, but increasingly came to be seen as a simple set of universal
truths about politics.
This tendency to distinguish IR theory from ideologies was cemented at the
end of the Cold War when almost everyone else also became postideological. This had a number of core features. The end of the Cold War
galvanised a widespread consensus that liberalism was no longer an
ideology, but was instead given in the structures of history, which, according
to Francis Fukuyama (1989), were now coming to fruition signifying an ‘end of
history’. The Soviet Union, the counter-hegemonic power that offered the only
existing alternative to Western liberalism, had fallen. For many, such as
Fukuyama, this meant that we were entering a post-ideological age, an age in

147

International Relations Theory

which the dominance of liberalism and the demise of its main challengers –
fascism and communism – meant there simply were no other ideologies
around, making liberalism the truth revealed at the end of history. Part of this
account of liberalism, however, involved a very particular conception of
human rationality, one in which maximising your self-interest was said to be
both rational and a universal feature of the human psyche.
Institutionalism, methodological individualism and rationalism are all theoretical concepts. These are concepts that just ‘do a job’, words that have little
invested in them politically, at least on the face of it. Those who deploy such
words usually pride themselves on their non-ideological approach to theory
development, proposing that concepts like these are scientific tools instead.
These tools cut through the fluff of ideology to see what really motivates
people. By these ‘rationalist’ accounts, it was not communism but self-interest
that motivated the Soviets. Furthermore, it was not a global genuflection
before this or that ideology that would bring order to the world, as the conflict
between the Communists and Capitalists suggested, but the rather more
mundane claim that ‘institutions matter’ (Keohane and Martin 1995) in helping
interests align (Jahn 2009).
One might think that the left would have persisted in its critique of the
covering up of the ideological content of liberal science, but oddly enough,
large parts of the left also adopted their own variation of post-ideological
thinking, around the same time. Poststructuralist theory took off at the end of
the Cold War. One of the most significant criticisms of ideologies developed
by poststructuralists cast them as visions of the world and history that were
more significant as modes of power than descriptively accurate statements
about the world and its history. Liberalism, and neoliberalism, were redescribed as modes of (self-)governance rather than explanations of how the
world worked. Once we accept assumptions about rationality we become the
self-interested person the theory was only supposed to describe. Ideologies
produce political subjects. In this way, ideologies came to be seen as
inherently regulative and dominating; they were not descriptions of the world,
but ways of making us act in it.
By the late 1990s these contesting philosophical and world historical changes
had broken ashore in International Relations. Here, ideologies were redescribed as ‘theories’, the details of which you can access in the preceding
pages of this book. Few if any of the contributors speak of their various
theories as ideological. To do so would be to invite all sorts of criticism. To
recap only the criticisms above, ideologies are seen to be unscientific,
dominating, moralising. In a word: finished. Theories, by contrast, are scientific, somewhat testable, at least nominally depoliticised, and lack the world

The ‘Isms’ Are Evil. All Hail the ‘Isms’!

148

historical and totalising visions of the good life we usually associate with
ideologies. But, in IR, each ism has developed a cottage industry of its own,
with its own specialist journals and degree programmes. In spite of this
(perhaps because of it, who knows), almost no one debates between the
theories any more. The great debates that were central to the discipline in the
past seem to have faded, though there is increasing evidence that they were
never really debates, let alone great (Wilson 1998)! Ironically, the isms we are
dealing with in this book have never been more entrenched in the field, but
nor have they been so little used as weapons by their various protagonists.
We have, according to one recent view, come to ‘the end of IR theory’
(Dunne, Hansen and Wight 2013).
If we are not talking about ideologies in IR theory, what are we talking about?
For David Lake (2011), we are talking about academic sects that have
developed around each of the isms. These sects demand advanced students
(usually those embarking on PhD studies) put themselves into a box, adopt
an ism for life and then continue to specialise in the rituals and codas of these
‘theologies’. Eventually, the ability of advanced scholars to think beyond or
across and between the isms simply falls away. In our attempt to update each
ism to meet the demands of the latest ‘real world’ event, the isms become all
the more narrowly defined, or stretched to become so broadly defined as to
make them practically ideologies. Either way, they become unhooked from
the historical, social and geopolitical context in which they emerged. We then
start repeating phrases like ‘institutions matter’ without understanding how
they mattered during the Cold War and might matter in different ways today.
This is known as ‘reification’.
However, Lake understood theory in a way that made a categorical distinction
between ideologies, theologies, philosophising and theory. For Lake, the isms
are far broader categories of thought than theories. Theories posit the relationship between variables and generate testable hypotheses, while traditions
are messier, unsystematic confluences of ideas that people need to straighten
out in order to pull out those hypotheses.
For example, both liberalism and realism come from wider, more longstanding ideological traditions, but to make them theories of IR some core
principles had to be identified. In this case, both traditions share the view that
anarchy and material interests are key features of world politics, but they add
additional variables to generate different theories. In pursuing this general
pattern of 1) elaborating general assumption, 2) positing the relations of
theoretical concepts, 3) generating testable hypotheses, there is no question
that what counts as theory, what counts as evidence and what counts as
viable IR subject matter narrows exponentially. Lake assumes that IR theories

149

International Relations Theory

aspire to be scientific in a very narrow sense of that word (Lake 2011, 470),
and then he says that those that don’t are not really appropriate for IR. Metatheoretical questions (again, theory about theory) – such as whether history
has an end point or whether history is shaped by material forces or by ideas –
are unscientific questions that are without final answers. Rather, we should
focus on what he calls ‘mid-level theory’ – that is, hypotheses that can be
tested against the empirical evidence: questions like, which institutions best
limit violence? This is how Lake thinks we will come to understand how the
world actually works, not through speculative philosophy.
This request for IR theory to ask what appear to be simpler questions is
somewhat problematic. Lake’s solution asks us to ignore the deeply
ideological nature of the concepts we use routinely in IR’s theories. Because
we can no longer ask speculative questions about the coherence of background assumptions and concepts, like what is capitalism, for example, we
end up treating the already existing stock of IR theory as the extent of the
material we might need from which to draw testable hypotheses. The fact that
there is little consensus on what the state is, let alone whether it is the best
institution to constrain violence, is hugely significant.
Paradoxically then, Lake’s criticisms make IR theories, particularly the more
esoteric ones, sound very much like ideologies, but the point is that all
theories are ideologies. What he is unwilling to countenance is that his
preferred approach is itself deeply infused with a standard notion of science
that is also itself ideological: positivism (another ism). By this account, true
knowledge is knowledge that is empirically verifiable, and only what we can
experience counts as true evidence. But we could not know this about Lake
unless we had a broad understanding of scientific ideologies too, like
positivism and empiricism, such that we would be tooled to expose his
underlying assumptions (Jackson 2011). Nothing is gained by exercising the
sleight of hand so common in contemporary Anglo-American IR of declaiming
everything but science to be ideological.
Before proposing a way out of this problem, let us quickly survey some of the
problems that emerge when students do not think clearly about what isms are
and what we are using the isms for. One might assume from the above that
IR is better off without its isms and in some respects that is probably right.
There is nothing to be gained for students or researchers by thinking that the
isms are self-contained hypothesis generators. Nor should we welcome
theories that purport to be able to explain everything, offering remedies to fix
the world as general conclusions. I think anyone would be rightly suspicious
of this. But there is a real problem with thinking about isms in this way in the
first place – and we don’t have to.

The ‘Isms’ Are Evil. All Hail the ‘Isms’!

150

What if we change what we think ideologies are? Would this help us rethink
the isms in IR too?
Ideologies are wondrous, porous, complex and evolving things that give us a
unique insight into the structure of collective thought. Two well-known approaches to ideologies should open up what I mean here.
For the first approach, let’s consider ideologies as a network of concepts, with
the core concepts acting as nodes to which peripheral ones attach and
disconnect as they evolve over time (Freeden 1996). So, for example, while
liberty might be central to liberalism, peripheral concepts like white
supremacy or democracy have receded and advanced in importance over
time (respectively). Likewise, we should probably understand that concepts
are used in particular historical contexts, which means they might have
different meanings to the way we use them now (Berenskoetter 2016).
Concepts like the state are themselves generative of isms, while particular
meanings of a given concept can only be understood in terms of that ism.
For example, could we really understand what liberalism is without an understanding of what contemporary liberals mean by liberty? And which comes
first, the ideology or the concept? This is not a frivolous argument, because
unless we can adequately grasp the historical specificity of the language we
use, we will be tempted to simply assume this is how our language has
always been used, leaving us ‘bewitched’ by the present (Skinner 1998).
Once we start to interrogate key concepts, their logic, coherence and their
relation to other concepts, we can map the relations of ideologies to one
another. For example, both realism and liberalism share core concepts like
anarchy, the state, material power and so on. But the relative importance of
each can only really be understood once we see how ‘peripheral’ and other
‘core’ concepts are deployed in relation to one another, like cooperation or
capitalism, institutions or hegemony. Have you ever wondered why you agree
with some aspects of an ideology but not with others and agonised about how
you can make sense of your split loyalty? This way of understanding the
structure of ideologies better shows us the interconnected tapestry of
ideologies, something we need to get used to – a worthwhile endeavour for
students of IR to do with all the theories presented in this book.
So, ideologies then, like theories, are tapestries of concepts. But, let’s take
another step back and engage in some ideology critique to explore the
second approach. What made it possible to dream up a theory like realism or
liberalism in the first place? With the exception of postcolonialism and
feminism, most IR theories were, broadly speaking, developed in the West by

151

International Relations Theory

white men, predominantly from the top 1–2% of income earners, or the upper
middle class. In fact, it took the emergence of feminist and postcolonial
theorists to point this out. To do this, these theorists had to develop complex
accounts of the world and how it hung together that took on the core concepts
and assumptions of the mainstream. Contrary to Lake, it was only because
feminists and postcolonial theorists (amongst others) probed the existential
concepts and categories that theoretical development was possible at all.
And, this involved exposing IR theories as ideological. This is how dialectical
thought operates. It explores the conditions of possibility of a given way of
thinking, whether that is conceptual coherence, historical specificity or whatever, and then pushes beyond it.
It is not important whether IR theories are true or not. What matters is
whether they help shape our thinking such that they can guide action,
scholarly, political or theological. It is because they guide action, shape it,
constrain it and make sense of it that ideologies and theories should be continually scrutinised. Ideologies are the background cognitive, moral structures
that shape societies and reflect their differences, and so understanding how
they operate will tell us a huge amount about the world we live in.
Let’s try something: turn on your television. Is there not a striking sameness
to the stuff that is broadcast in most countries – especially Western ones? It’s
not just that there are a lot of programmes on cooking and real estate, but
that the underlying assumptions behind the programmes have a certain
resonance. You don’t find presenters of real estate shows lamenting the
unjust structures of capitalism or proclaiming that property is theft! Rather,
there is a shared sense of the inevitability of the logic of property ownership
or that the objective is to secure the highest price possible. Think about the
way boys and girls are differently appealed to in the cartoons they watch, with
gendered roles almost routinely given rather than questioned.
As Steve Smith (2007, 8) has argued, ‘the option of non-theoretical accounts
of the world is simply not available’. As such, you need to familiarise yourself
with what theory is, how it works and how it shapes the way you see the
world. Ideology critique explores the ways in which communication in general
is constrained and circumscribed by taken-for-granted ideas, concepts,
attitudes and theories, or the way normal language is theory bound and
theory dependent. Theories, then, IR theories too, are themselves reflections
of ideology. They should be subjected to critique in the same way.
Conclusion
Think of the isms and a broad understanding of them in three ways:

The ‘Isms’ Are Evil. All Hail the ‘Isms’!

152

First, isms are ideologies and IR theories are ideologically saturated too. This
is not a bad thing per se. Once we know this we should be able to both
interrogate the internal coherence of the ideology and compare its virtues with
others.
Second, ideologies themselves shape the society we live in. So, we ought to
be able to understand our society and world politics better by exploring the
ways in which ideologies shape and structure the ways in which people live
and act. In many respects, then, IR theory reflects these ways of living and
acting too. Thus, we can think of IR theory as itself an ideological reflection of
the world around us. R. B. J. Walker (1993, 6) has made the contentious
suggestion that ‘theories of international relations are more interesting as
aspects of contemporary world politics that need to be explained than as
explanations of world politics.’ You might not want to go that far, but there is
no doubt that there is nothing politically or ideologically neutral about IR
theory – and locating IR theories in their historical and intellectual context
exposes this irreversibly.
Third, ideologies can be wrong, their values reprehensible or odious, their
core assumptions preposterous. This is because they are used by people
whose practices and politics we might disagree with. For Robert Cox (1981,
128), theory is not only always ‘for someone and for some purpose’, but it
also inevitably reflects class biases. We need to be aware of this and subject
theory to a range of critiques. Understanding Marxism would be the indispensable precondition of this. Doing this would be impossible if we were to
deny theory-as-ideologies exist, or if we overlook how deeply implicated in
ideological structures our modern way of living and thinking are.
Nothing is gained by rejecting the isms unless we at first understand the
complexity of what it is we are rejecting. The isms may be evil, but we must
pay due homage to them in order to develop the critical reflection we need to
move beyond them.

153

International Relations Theory

References
Acharya, Amitav. (2014). ‘Global IR and Regional Worlds: Beyond Sahibs and
Munshis – A New Agenda for International Studies’, Presidential Address to
the 55th Annual Convention of the International Studies Association, Toronto,
26–29 March.
Acharya, Amitav. (2016). ‘“Idea-shift”: How Ideas From the Rest are
Reshaping Global Order’, Third World Quarterly 37 (7): 1156–1170.
Acharya, Amitav and Barry Buzan. (2010). ‘Why is There No Non-Western
International Relations Theory? An Introduction’, in Non-Western International
Relations Theory Perspectives on and beyond Asia, edited by Amitav
Acharya and Barry Buzan, 1–25. Oxon and New York: Routledge.
Agnew, John. (1994). “The Territorial Trap: The Geographical Assumptions of
International Relations Theory’, Review of International Relations 1(1):
53–80.
Archibugi, Daniele. (2004). ‘Cosmopolitan Guidelines for Humanitarian
Intervention’. Alternatives 29 (1): 1–22.
Arendt, Hannah. (1961). Between Past and Future: Six Exercises in Political
Thought. London: Faber & Faber.
Ayoub, Phil and David Paternotte, eds. (2014). LGBT Activism and the
Making of Europe: A Rainbow Europe? Palgrave: New York.
Bairoch, Paul. (1993). Economics and World History: Myths and Paradoxes.
New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Behera, Navnita Chadha. (2010). ‘Re-Imagining IR in India’, in Non-Western
International Relations Theory Perspectives on and beyond Asia, edited by
Amitav Acharya and Barry Buzan, 92–116. Oxon and New York: Routledge.

References

154

Behr, Hartmut. (2013) ‘Security Politics and Public Discourse: A
Morgenthauian Approach’, in Interpreting Global Security, edited by M. Bevir,
O. Daddow, and I. Hall, London: Routledge.
Beitz, Charles. (1975). ‘Justice and International Relations’, Philosophy and
Public Affairs 4 (4): 360–389.
Berenskoetter, Felix, ed. (2016). Concepts in World Politics. London: Sage.
Biermann, Frank. (2001). ‘The Emerging Debate on the Need for a World
Environment Organization: A Commentary’, Global Environmental Politics 1
(1): 45–55.
Bigo, Didier, Philippe Bonditti and Christian Olsson. (2010). ‘Mapping the
European Field of Security Professionals’, in Europe’s 21st Century
Challenge: Delivering Liberty, edited by Didier Bigo, Sergio Carrera, Elspeth
Guild and R. B. J. Walker, 49–64. London: Routledge.
Biswas, Shampa (2014). Nuclear Desire: Power and the Postcolonial Nuclear
Order. Minneapolis/London: University of Minnesota Press.
Blake, Michael. (2001). ‘Distributive Justice, State Coercion, and Autonomy’,
Philosophy and Public Affairs 30 (3): 257–296.
Booth, Kenneth. (1991). ‘Security and Emancipation’, Review of International
Studies 17(4): 313–326.
Booth, Kenneth. (1997). ‘Security and Self: Reflections of a Fallen Realist’, in
Critical Security Studies, edited by K. Krause and J. C. Williams. London:
UCL Press.
Boswell, Thomas. (2001). ‘In Disbelief: A Suspension of American Innocence’,
Washington Post, 12 September: D01.
Boyd, Charles. G. (2001). ‘Vulnerable to Hate’, Washington Post, 12
September: A29.
Brock, Gillian. (2010). Global Justice: A Cosmopolitan Account. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

155

International Relations Theory

Brown, Garrett Wallace. (2012). ‘Distributing Who Gets What and Why: Four
Normative Approaches to Global Health’, Global Policy 3 (3): 292–302.
Bull, Hedley. (1977). The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World
Politics. London: Macmillan.
Butler, Judith. (2003). ‘Violence, Mourning, Politics’, Studies in Gender and
Sexuality 4(1): 9–37.
Butler, Judith. (1990). Gender Trouble. New York: Routledge.
Buzan, Barry, Ole Wæver, and Jaap de Wilde. (1998). Security: A New
Framework for Analysis. London: Lynne Rienner.
Caney, Simon. (2010). ‘Climate Change, Human Rights and Moral
Thresholds’, in Climate Ethics: Essential Readings, edited by Stephen
Gardiner, Simon Caney, Dale Jamieson and Henry Shue, 163–180. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Caney, Simon. (2006). Justice Beyond Borders. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Chowdhry, Geeta and Sheila Nair, eds. (2002) Power, Postcolonialism and
International Relations: Reading Race, Gender and Class. New York:
Routledge.
Chun, Chaesung. (2010). ‘Why is There No Non-Western International
Relations Theory? Reflections on and from Korea’, in Non-Western
International Relations Theory Perspectives on and beyond Asia, edited by
Amitav Acharya and Barry Buzan, 69–91. New York: Routledge.
Coomaraswamy, Radhika. (2015). Preventing Conflict, Transforming Justice,
Securing the Peace: A Global Study on the Implementation of United Nations
Security Council Resolution 1325. New York: UN Women.
Corntassel, Jeff. (2008). ‘Toward Sustainable Self-Determination: Rethinking
the Contemporary Indigenous-Rights Discourse’, Alternatives 33 (1): 105–
132.
Cox, Robert W. and Jacobson, Harold. K. (1977). ‘Decision Making’,
International Social Science Journal 29(1): 115–135.

References

156

Cox, Robert W. (1981). ‘Social Forces, States and World Orders: Beyond
International Relations Theory’, Millennium – Journal of International Studies
10 (2): 126–155.
Cozette, Murielle. (2008) ‘Reclaiming the Critical Dimension of Realism: Hans
J. Morgenthau and the Ethics of Scholarship’, Review of International Studies
34(1): 5–27.
Crist, Valine. (2014). ‘A Peace of Mind: Haida Heiltsuk Affirm Historic
Relationship’, Haida Laas: Newsletter of the Council of the Haida Nation. Pp.
8–10.
Deudney, Daniel and G. John Ikenberry. (1999). ‘The Nature and Sources of
Liberal International Order’. Review of International Studies 25 (2): 179–196.
Dunne, Tim, Lene Hansen and Colin Wight. (2013). ‘The End of International
Relations Theory?’, European Journal of International Relations 19(3):
405–425.
Dyer, Hugh. (2014). ‘Climate Anarchy: Creative Disorder in World Politics’,
International Political Sociology 8 (2): 182–200.
Edkins, Jenny. (2006). ‘The Local, the Global and the Troubling’, Critical
Review of International Social and Political Philosophy 9(4): 499–511.
Enloe, Cynthia. (1989). Bananas, Beaches and Bases: Making Feminist
Sense of International Politics. London: Pandora.
Fanon, Frantz. (1967). Black Skin, White Masks. New York: Grove Press.
Fierke, Karin M. (2015). Critical Approaches to International Security, 2nd ed.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Finnemore, Martha. and Kathryn Sikkink. (1998). ‘International Norm
Dynamics and Political Change’, International Organization 52(4): 887–917.
Foucault, Michel. (1976). History of Sexuality 1. New York: Penguin.
Foucault, Michel. (1984). ‘The Order of Discourse’, in M. Shapiro, Language
and Politics. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

157

International Relations Theory

Fraser, Nancy. (1995). ‘From Redistribution to Recognition? Dilemmas of
Justice in a “Post-Socialist” Age’, New Left Review 212: 68–93.
Frankfurter, Felix. (1937) ‘Letter to Nathan Greene’, 9 December. Container
22, Manuscript Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC.
Freeden, Michael. (1996). Ideologies and Political Theory: A Conceptual
Approach. Oxford: Clarendon.
Galston, William. A. (2010) ‘Realism in Political Theory’, European Journal of
Political Theory 9 (4): 385–411.
Goodin, Robert. (1992). Green Political Theory. Cambridge: Polity.
Gramsci, Antonio. (1998). Selections from the Prison Notebooks, London:
Lawrence & Wishart.
Harris, Paul. (2010). World Ethics and Climate Change: From International to
Global Justice. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Handrahan, Lori. (2004). ‘Conflict, Gender, Ethnicity and Post-Conflict
Reconstruction’, Security Dialogue 35 (4): 429–445.
Hardin, Garret. (1968). ‘The Tragedy of the Commons’. Science 162: 1243–
1248.
Harvey, David. (2001). Spaces of Capital: Towards a Critical Geography.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Harvey, David. (2006). Spaces of Global Capitalism: Towards a Theory of
Uneven Geographical Development. London and New York: Verso.
Harvey, David. (2009). Cosmopolitanism and the Geographies of Freedom.
New York: Columbia University Press.
Hayden, Patrick. (2010). ‘The Environment, Global Justice and World
Environmental Citizenship’ in The Cosmopolitanism Reader, edited by Garrett
W. Brown and David Held, 351–372. Cambridge: Polity Press.

References

158

Hayward, Tim. (2007). ‘Human Rights Versus Emission Rights: Climate
Justice and the Equitable Distribution of Ecological Space’, Ethics and
International Affairs 21 (4): 431–450.
Herbert, Bob. (1994) ‘In America; Terror in Toyland’. New York Times,
December 1. Available at www.nytimes.com/1994/12/21/opinion/in-americaterror-in-toyland.html
Herz, John. (1951) Political Realism and Political Idealism. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Herz, John. (1984) Vom Überleben: Wie ein Weltbild entstand. Düsseldorf:
Droste.
hooks, bell. (2000). Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center. Cambridge, MA:
South End Press.
Huntington, Henry P. (2013). ‘A Question of Scale: Local versus Pan-Arctic
Impacts from Sea-Ice Change’, in Media and the Politics of Arctic Climate
Change: When the Ice Breaks, edited by Miyase Christensen, Annika E.
Nilsson and Nina Wormbs, 114–127. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hutchings, Kimberly. (2001). ‘The Nature of Critique in Critical International
Relations Theory’, in Critical Theory and World Politics, edited by Richard
Wyn Jones, 79–90. Boulder and London: Lynne Rienner.
Inoguchi, Takashi. (2007). ‘Are There Any Theories of International Relations
in Japan?’, International Relations of the Asia-Pacific 7 (3): 369–390.
Jackson, Patrick Thaddeus. (2011). The Conduct of Inquiry in International
Relations: Philosophy of Science and its Implications for the Study of World
Politics. London: Routledge.
Jahn, Beate. (2009). ‘Liberal Internationalism: From Ideology to Empirical
Theory – and Back Again’, International Theory 1(3): 409–438.
Kaldor, Mary. (2010). ‘Humanitarian Intervention: Toward a Cosmopolitan
Approach’, in The Cosmopolitanism Reader, edited by Garrett W. Brown and
David Held, 334–350. Cambridge: Polity Press.

159

International Relations Theory

Katzenstein, Peter. J. (1996). The Culture of National Security: Norms and
Identity in World Politics. New York: Columbia University Press.
Keohane, Robert O. and Lisa L. Martin. (1995). ‘The Promise of Institutionalist
Theory’, International Security 20(1): 39–51.
King, Hayden. (2015). ‘The Problem with “Indigenous Peoples”: Reconsidering International Indigenous Rights Activism’, in More Will Sing Their
Way to Freedom: Indigenous Resistance and Resurgence, edited by Elaine
Coburn, 167–183. Halifax: Fernwood Publishing.
Krummel, John W. M. (2015). Nishida Kitarō’s Chiasmatic Chorology: Place of
Dialectic, Dialectic of Place. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Lake, David A. (2011). ‘Why “isms” Are Evil: Theory, Epistemology, and
Academic Sects as Impediments to Understanding and Progress’,
International Studies Quarterly 55(2): 465–480.
League of Nations. (1923). ‘Petition to the League of Nations from the Six
Nations of the Grand River’, communications by the Government of the
Netherlands, document C.500.1923.VII.
Lebow, Richard. N. (2003). The Tragic Vision of Politics: Ethics, Interests, and
Orders. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lebow, Richard. N. (2011) ‘German Jews and American Realism’,
Constellations 18(4): 545–566.
Lefebvre, Henri. (1991). The Production of Space, translated by Donald
Nicholson Smith. Oxford: Blackwell.
Link, Arthur S. (1956). Wilson: The New Freedom, vol. 2. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Little Bear, Leroy, Ervin Carlson, Angela Grier, Chief Earl Old Person and
Tommy Christian (2014). ‘Historic Treaty: Bring Buffalo Home, Heal the
Prairie’, LiveScience. Available at www.livescience.com/47998-tribal-treaty-torestore-territory-american-bison.html
Lu, Peng. (2014). ‘Pre-1949 Chinese IR: An Occluded History’, Australian
Journal of International Affairs 68 (2): 133–155.

References

160

Machiavelli, Nicollò. (1532). The Prince. The Harvard Classics, vol. XXXVI.
Available at www.bartleby.com/36/1/prince.pdf
MacKenzie, Megan. (2010). ‘Securitization and de-Securitization: Female
Soldiers and the Reconstruction of Women in Post-Conflict Sierra Leone’, in
Gender and International Security: Feminist Perspectives, edited by Laura
Sjoberg, 151–167. London: Routledge.
Mallavarapu, Siddharth. (2014). ‘Siddharth Mallavarapu on International
Asymmetries, Ethnocentrism, and a View on IR from India’, Theory Talks, 9
February. Available at www.theory-talks.org/2014/02/theory-talk-63.html
Mannheim, Karl. (1929, 1985) Ideology & Utopia: An Introduction to the
Sociology of Knowledge. San Diego: Harcourt.
Manuel, Chief George and Michael Posluns. (1974). The Fourth World: An
Indian Reality. New York: Collier Macmillan Canada.
March, James. and Johan Olsen. (1998). ‘The Institutional Dynamics of
International Political Orders’, International Organization 52 (4): 943–969.
McGinnis, Michael Vincent, ed. (1999). Bioregionalism. London: Routledge.
McGlinchey, Stephen. (2017). International Relations. Bristol: E-International
Relations.
Mearsheimer, John J. (2002). ‘Realism, the Real World and the Academy’, in
Realism and Institutionalism in International Studies, edited by Michael
Brecher and Frank P. Harvey. Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.
Meena, Krishnendra. (2013). ‘BRICS: An Explanation in Critical Geography’,
Contexto Internacional 35(2): 565–593.
Meiser, Jeffrey. (2015). Power and Restraint: The Rise of the United States,
1898–1941. Washington: Georgetown University Press.
Memmi, Albert. (1991). The Colonizer and the Colonized. Boston: Beacon
Press.
Miller, David. (2007). National Responsibilities and Global Justice. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

161

International Relations Theory

Miller, Robert J., Jacinta Ruru, Larissa Behrendt and Tracey Lindberg. (2010).
Discovering Indigenous Lands: The Doctrine of Discovery in the English
Colonies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Morgenthau, Hans. J. (1930) Über die Herkunft des Politischen aus dem
Wesen des Menschen. Container 151, Manuscript Division, Library of
Congress, Washington.
Morgenthau, Hans J. (1948). Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power
and Peace. 7th edition. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Morgenthau, Hans. J. (1962) Politics in the Twentieth Century, vol. I, The
Decline of Democratic Politics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Morgenthau, Hans. J. (1972) Science: Servant or Master?, New York: New
American Library.
Nagel, Thomas. (2005). ‘The Problem of Global Justice’. Philosophy and
Public Affairs 33 (3): 113–147.
Nash, Kate and Cath Browne. (2010). Queer Methods and Methodologies.
New York: Ashgate.
Ollman, Bertell. (2003). Dance of the Dialectic: Steps in Marx’s Method.
University of Illinois Press.
Onuf, Nicholas G. (1989). World of our Making. Rules and Rule in Social
Theory and International Relations. London: Routledge.
Pankhurst, Donna. (2008). ‘Introduction: Gendered War and Peace’, in
Gendered Peace: Women’s Struggles for Post-War Justice and
Reconciliation, edited by Donna Pankhurst, 1–30. New York: Routledge.
Picq, Manuela. (2015). ‘Self-Determination as Anti-Extractivism: How
Indigenous Resistance Challenges World Politics’, in Restoring Indigenous
Self-Determination: Theoretical and Practical Approaches, edited by M.
Woons. Bristol: E-International Relations.
Picq, Manuela and Markus Thiel. (2015). Sexualities in World Politics: How
LGBTQ Claims Shape International Relations. Routledge: New York.

References

162

Pogge, Thomas. (1989). Realizing Rawls. Cornell: Cornell University Press.
Pogge, Thomas. (2001). ‘Eradicating Systemic Poverty: Brief for a Global
Resources Dividend’, Journal of Human Development 2(1): 59–77.
Pogge, Thomas. (2010). ‘Cosmopolitanism and Sovereignty’, in The
Cosmopolitanism Reader, edited by Garrett W. Brown and David Held,
334–350. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Puchala, Donald. J. (1997). ‘Some Non-Western Perspectives on
International Relations’, Journal of Peace Research 34 (2): 129–134.
Qin, Yaqing. (2016). ‘A Relational Theory of World Politics’, International
Studies Review 18 (1): 33–47.
Rawls, John. (1971). A Theory of Justice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rich, Adrienne. (2002). Arts of the Possible: Essays and Conversations,
London and New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Risse, Mathias. (2008). ‘Who Should Shoulder the Burden? Global Climate
Change and Common Ownership of the Earth’, Faculty Research Working
Papers Series, John F. Kennedy School of Government, Harvard University.
Said, Edward W. (1978). Orientalism. New York: Random House.
Said, Edward W. (1997). Covering Islam: How the Media and the Experts
Determine How We See the Rest of the World. New York: Vintage Books.
Sarkar, Benoy Kumar. (1919). ‘Hindu Theory of International Relations’,
American Political Science Review 13 (3): 400–414.
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. (1990). Epistemology of the Closet. Los Angeles:
University of California Press.
Shue, Henry. (2014). Climate Justice: Vulnerability and Protection. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Sigwart, Hans-Jörg (2013) ‘The Logic of Legitimacy: Ethics in Political
Realism’, Review of Politics 75(3): 407–432.

163

International Relations Theory

Skinner, Quentin. (1998). Liberty before Liberalism. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Smith, Steve. (2007). ‘Introduction: Diversity and Disciplinarity’, in
International Relations Theories: Discipline and Diversity, edited by Tim
Dunne, Milja Kurki and Steve Smith. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Thucydides. (1972). History of the Peloponnesian War. Baltimore: Penguin
Books.
Tickner, Ann J. (2016). ‘Knowledge Is Power: Challenging IR’s Eurocentric
Narrative’, Presidential Special Issue International Studies Review 18 (1):
157–159.
Toulmin, Stephen (1990) Cosmopolis. The Hidden Agenda of Modernity.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Toynbee, Polly. (2001). ‘The Rule of Reason over Madness Died Along with
the Victims’, The Guardian, 12 September. Available at: https://www.
theguardian.com/politics/2001/sep/12/september11.britainand9113
True, Jacqui. (2012). The Political Economy of Violence against Women.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
United Nations General Assembly. (2007). United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous Peoples resolution, adopted by the General Assembly, 2
October 2007. UN. Doc. A/ RES/61/295.
United Nations Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues. (2006). Who are
Indigenous Peoples? Available at www.un.org/esa/socdev/unpfii/
documents/5session_factsheet1.pdf
Vivekanandan, Jayashree. (2014). ‘Strategy, Legitimacy and the Imperium:
Framing the Mughal Strategic Discourse’, in India’s Grand Strategy: History,
Theory, Cases, edited by Kanti Bajpai, Saira Basit and V. Krishnappa, 63–85.
New Delhi and Oxon: Routledge.
Walker, Rob B. J. (1993). Inside/Outside: International Relations as Political
Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

References

164

Wallerstein, Immanuel. (1974). The Modern World-System I: Capitalist
Agriculture and the Origins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth
Century. New York: Academic Press.
Waltz, Kenneth N. (1979). Theory of International Politics. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Wæver, Ole. (2000). ‘The EU as a Security Actor: Reflections from a
Pessimistic Constructivist on Postsovereign Security Orders’, in International
Relations Theory and the Politics of European Integration, edited by Morten
Kelstrup and Michael C. Williams, 250–294. London: Routledge.
Wæver, Ole. (2015). ‘The Theory Act: Responsibility and Exactitude as Seen
from Securitization’, International Relations 29(1): 121–127.
Wang, Yiwei and Xueqing Han. (2016). ‘Why is There No Chinese IR Theory?
A Cultural Perspective’, in Constructing a Chinese School of International
Relations: Ongoing Debates and Sociological Realities, edited by Yongjin
Zhang and Teng-chi Chang, 52–67. Oxon and New York: Routledge.
Weber, Cynthia. (2014). ‘Why is there no queer international theory?’,
European Journal of International Relations 21(1): 27–51.
Weber, Cynthia. (2016). Queer International Relations. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Wendt, Alexander. (1992) ‘Anarchy is What States Make of It: The Social
Construction of Power Politics’, International Organization 46(2): 391–425.
Wendt, Alexander. (1995) ‘Constructing International Politics’, International
Security 20(1): 71–81.
White Face, Charmaine. (2013). Indigenous Nations’ Rights in the Balance:
An Analysis of the Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. St. Paul,
Minnesota: Living Justice Press.
White paper by the State Council Information Office of the People’s Republic
of China. (2017). ‘China’s Policies on Asia-Pacific Security Cooperation’.
Available at
http://english.gov.cn/archive/white_paper/2017/01/11/
content_281475539078636.htm

165

International Relations Theory

Williams, Robert A., Jr. (1997). Linking Arms Together: American Indian
Treaty Visions of Law & Peace 1600–1800. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Young, Iris Marion. (2011). Justice and the Politics of Difference. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Yeophantong, Pichamon. (2013). ‘Governing the World: China’s Evolving
Conceptions of Responsibility’, Chinese Journal of International Politics 6 (4):
329–364.
Zellen, Barry Scott. (2009). On Thin Ice: The Inuit, the State and the
Challenge of Arctic Sovereignty. Lanham Maryland: Lexington Books.

Note on Indexing

166

Note on Indexing
E-IR’s publications do not feature indexes due to the prohibitive costs of
assembling them. If you are reading this book in paperback and want to find a
particular word or phrase you can do so by downloading a free PDF version
of this book from the E-IR website.
View the e-book in any standard PDF reader such as Adobe Acrobat Reader
(pc) or Preview (mac) and enter your search terms in the search box. You can
then navigate through the search results and find what you are looking for. In
practice, this method can prove much more targeted and effective than
consulting an index.
If you are using apps (or devices) such as iBooks or Kindle to read our
e-books, you should also find word search functionality in those.
You can find all of our e-books at: http://www.e-ir.info/publications

E-IR Foundations
Series Editor: Stephen McGlinchey
_________________________________________________________________
“This is a superb book. It offers a comprehensive listing that is imaginatively presented and
enormously accessible. Helpfully, too, it takes the form of a global conversation. IR theory
at its sparkling best.”
– Peter Vale, Professor of Humanities, University of Johannesburg; Professor of Public
Policy and Global Affairs, Nanyang Technological University and Nelson Mandela Professor
of Politics Emeritus, Rhodes University.
This book is designed as a foundational entry point to International Relations theory. As a
beginner’s guide, it has been structured to condense the most important information into
the smallest space and present that information in an accessible manner. Like other books
in the E-IR Foundations series, this takes the form of an engaging narrative, connecting the
reader directly to the issues at hand.
The first half of the book covers the theories that are most commonly taught in
undergraduate programmes. The book then expands to present emerging approaches and
offer wider perspectives. Each chapter sets out the basics of a theory whilst also applying
it to a real-world event or issue, creating a lively, readable and relevant guide that will help
students to see not only what theories are – but why they matter.
Editors
Stephen McGlinchey, Rosie Walters and Christian Scheinpflug.
Contributors
Victor Adetula, Amitav Acharya, Sandrina Antunes, Lina Benabdallah, Isabel Camisão,
Irena Leisbet Ceridwen Connon, Jeff Corntassel, Alix Dietzel, Hugh C. Dyer, Clara
Eroukhmanoff, Marcos Farias Ferreira, Dana Gold, Richard Ned Lebow, Aishling Mc
Morrow, Jeffrey W. Meiser, Carlos Murillo-Zamora, Sheila Nair, Maïa Pal, Alex Prichard,
Felix Rösch, Archie W. Simpson, Sarah Smith, Yannis A. Stivachtis, Sarina Theys, Markus
Thiel, Marc Woons and Pichamon Yeophantong.

www.E-IR.info

