Perspectives: An Open
Invitation to Cultural
Anthropology
Edited by Nina Brown, Laura Tubelle de González, and
Thomas McIlwraith

2017 American Anthropological Association
American Anthropological Association
2300 Clarendon Blvd, Suite 1301
Arlington, VA 22201
ISBN: 978-1-931303-55-2
http://www.perspectivesanthro.org
This book is a project of the Society for Anthropology in Community Colleges
(SACC) http://sacc.americananthro.org/ and our parent organization, the American
Anthropological Association (AAA). Please refer to the website for a complete table
of contents and more information about the book.

Preface to Perspectives:
An Open Invitation to Cultural
Anthropology
Welcome to Perspectives and open access anthropology!
We are delighted to bring to you this novel textbook, a collection of chapters on the essential topics
in cultural anthropology. Different from other introductory textbooks, this book is an edited volume with each chapter written by a different author. Each author has written from their experiences
working as an anthropologist and that personal touch makes for an accessible introduction to cultural
anthropology.
Our approach to cultural anthropology is holistic. We see the interconnectedness of cultural practices and, in all of the chapters, we emphasize the comparison of cultures and the ways of life of
different peoples. We start with Laura Nader’s observation that cultural differences need not be seen
as a problem. In our complicated world of increasing migration, nationalism, and climate challenges,
cultural diversity might actually be the source of conflict resolution and new approaches to ensuring
a healthier world. Indeed, as Katie Nelson reminds us, anthropology exposes the familiarity in the
ideas and practices of others that seem bizarre. Robert Borofsky advocates for anthropology’s ability
to empower people and facilitate good. Borofsky calls on anthropologists to engage with a wider
public to bring our incredible stories and important insights to helping resolve the most critical issues
we face in the world today. This book brings Nader, Nelson, Borofsky, and many others together to
demonstrate that our anthropological understandings can help all of us to improve the lives of people
the world over. We need you, as students, to see the possibilities. As instructors, we want to help you
share anthropological knowledge and understanding easily. We want all readers to be inspired by the
intensely personal writings of the anthropologists who contribute to this volume.

WHY THIS BOOK?
For students, we promise readable and interesting writing on topics that will be covered in your
first year anthropology course. The chapters contain links to support your use and enjoyment of the
book. They are designed to help learn the material. Use this book, even if it is not your course text,
and then ask your instructor tough questions! Use social media to ask us questions or to send us
comments—the details are below.
For instructors, we invite you to build your own book, the perfect book for your course. The
available chapters mirror the lecture topics in many first-year courses. The chapters form a whole
and they can also stand-alone. Choose the ones you need, assigning some of these chapters and not
others. We know that there is some overlap in the chapters. This is a consequence of multiple authors
writing about topics which, obviously and necessarily, do not exist without reference to other topics
in cultural anthropology. This overlap is teachable because it reinforces the holistic approach used by
cultural anthropologists to understand the people with whom we work.

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

In addition to the chapters, the Perspectives website (http://www.perspectivesanthro.org) provides
teaching resources, including a collection of video lectures as well as reflections on the importance of
anthropology from well-known members of our discipline. The interviews explain how these scholars
became anthropologists and what they see as the importance and relevance of anthropology today.
We hope you will use this textbook with your students, either as a stand alone text or in conjunction
with other textual and digital materials.

ABOUT THE SOCIETY FOR ANTHROPOLOGY IN COMMUNITY
COLLEGES
This book is produced by the Society for Anthropology in Community Colleges (SACC). SACCers, as we call ourselves, are teaching anthropologists who work in community colleges and universities across North America. We teach first year students – like you —many of whom have never
taken an anthropology course. We believe strongly in the importance of learning about cultural
diversity and we assert that the ideas and skills of anthropologists can inform work in any career.
SACC has been building this book since 2012. We have assembled a terrific writing team of authors
who teach in colleges and senior anthropologists who share our commitment to creating an open
and accessible textbook. SACC tweets @SACC_L and is on Facebook. We encourage you to tweet
at us or post on our Facebook page when you are using this book. SACC is an official section of the
American Anthropological Association.

WHY OPEN ACCESS?
This book was motivated by SACC’s long-standing interest in supporting a diversity of anthropology students, including first generation college learners and students with lower incomes. Frequently,
these are the students we teach. Further, SACCers have an interest in progressive social values and
believe in the power of education in anthropology to improve the living conditions and situations of
people abroad and at home. We want these messages to find their ways to as many people as possible,
even if students aren’t formally enrolled in an anthropology course.
This book is published under a creative commons license (CC-BY-NC) which grants permission
to instructors to copy, distribute, or remix the chapters to suit your educational needs as long as you
credit the original author and the original source of the material. The contents of this book may not
be used for commercial purposes, meaning it cannot be sold in any form.

THE COVER DESIGN
We put considerable thought into the cover of Perspectives. We wanted a cover that provokes discussion without stereotyping. We chose a design that prompts reflection and classroom engagement,
while remaining friendly and inviting. We invite instructors to use the cover as a teaching tool. Consider discussing that the cover is a story that may be told in many ways. Consider the possibilities of
this scene: Who are these people? Where are they in this snapshot and where are they off to? What
did they have for breakfast and who will they meet in the course of their day? Similarly, examine this
cover along with other recent and past covers of a range of Cultural Anthropology textbooks. What
are the messages being sent by the different types of images that represent Cultural Anthropology?

Preface to Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

3

We aren’t sure the cover is quite perfect yet, so please teach its strengths and its limitations for understanding what anthropology is – and then let us know what you decide in your class.
Please be in touch with us via social media or email if you have suggestions or questions. If you
would like to be involved with this project by writing a chapter or creating ancillary materials, please
contact us. The dynamic nature of an open access book means that there is always room to add new
chapters or other materials.
Thank you for adopting Perspectives.
Nina Brown
Thomas McIlwraith
Laura Tubelle de González

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This book would not have been possible without the generous contributions of many people. We
would like to thank the Executive Board of the Society for Anthropology in Community Colleges
for their support of this project starting in 2012 as well as SACC members who contributed their
time and expertise. Jeanne Thompson (Cypress College), and Philip L. Stein (Pierce College) served
on the editorial committee and played a central role in shaping the book from the beginning. We
also appreciate the assistance of Janine Chiappa McKenna, Director of Publishing for the American
Anthropological Association, who helped us develop this book as an open access publishing project.
We would like to express our gratitude to Robert Borofsky (Hawaii Pacific University and Center
for a Public Anthropology), who championed this project from its earliest stages and elevated our efforts through his outreach to authors and willingness to share resources. His commitment to a public
anthropology that seeks to address the central issues of our time while engaging broad audiences was
a central inspiration for our work.
In addition, we thank the following people for their expertise.

Peer Reviewers
Jessica Amato, Napa Valley College
Anthony Balzano, Sussex County Community College
Beverly Bennett, Wilbur Wright College, City Colleges of Chicago
Lin Bentley Keeling, El Paso Community College
Ronald Castanzo, University of Baltimore
Chuck Ellenbaum, College of DuPage
Carol Hayman, Austin Community College
Jeffrey Hoelle, University of California, Santa Barbara
Danielle James, Community College of Baltimore County
Angela Jenks, University of California, Irvine
Diane Levine, Pierce College
Brandon Lundy, Kennesaw State University
Bob Muckle, Capilano University

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Carol Mukhopadhyay, San Jose State University
Karen Muir, Columbus State Community College
Philip Naftaly, State University of New York, Adirondack
Christian Palmer, Windward Community College, University of Hawaii
Anastasia Panagakos, Cosumnes River College
Philip Stein, Pierce College
Tim Sullivan, Richland College
Jeanne Thompson, Cypress College
Andrew Walsh, University of Western Ontario

Book Design and Production
Stacy Dreyer, Natalie Karst, and Janet Keller, copyeditors
Stuart Williams, cover design
Grapevine Publishing Services, page design and typesetting

The Development of
Anthropological Ideas
Laura Nader, The University of California, Berkeley

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Identify the central concepts of
cultural anthropology and describe
how each of these concepts
contributed to the development of the
discipline.
• Describe the role anthropologists play
in examining cultural assumptions
and explain how the anthropological
perspective differs from both
ethnocentrism and American
exceptionalism.
• Explain the relationship between
early anthropology and colonialism
and assess the ways in which the
demise of colonialism changed the
practice of anthropology.
• Evaluate the topical or thematic
specializations that exist within
contemporary anthropology as
examples of the range of questions
and concerns anthropologists
address.

Anthropology is the study of humankind, otherwise
known as Homo sapiens, the wise primate. It is about our
history, our prehistory before written records, our biology,
our language, our distribution of peoples all over the planet, and the cultural and social aspects of our existence. The
methods we use on this journey are varied and eclectic—an
unusual discipline. What is perhaps unique about anthropology is its global quality, its comparative potential, and its
integrative possibilities, which result from its examination
of histories, biologies, languages, and socio-cultural variations. As a discipline, it is unusual because it is both soft
and hard, including science as well as the humanities, between nature and culture, the past and the present, searching for new ways to understand the human condition. We
are an academic discipline with porous boundaries that has
refused to specialize and as a result can claim to have made
enormous contributions to understanding what it means to
be human. Anthropology is a young discipline, in only its
fourth generation, one of the first of the new sciences along
with ecology.
In the nineteenth century, archaeology challenged short
chronologies of biblical origin with longer time depth,
while biological and cultural anthropology questioned stereotyped thinking about race and ethnicity. Socio-cultural
anthropology moved from armchair theorizing to first-hand
fieldwork and, with the concept of cultural relativism, challenged predominant theories of the day, including scientific
theories. We know that science is created by humans so it is
bound to have human limitations, human error, human ignorance. Such realizations made us think about how knowledge is created and challenge the idea that western ways of
thinking are the only source of truth. Early climate predictions were available in Peru before the arrival of European
colonizers.

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

CENTRAL CONCEPTS
Culture
A central concept in our discipline is the idea of culture, a concept that changed how we explain
human differences. Edward Burnett Tylor (1832–1917) was an English Quaker who, because of
religious prejudice, could not enroll in any English universities and so went to work in his father’s
business. However, in his mid-twenties he became ill, and his doctor recommended rest and travel.
Tylor traveled first to Cuba and then to Mexico for six months. While the idea of culture was not
new, Tylor used the concept to make sense of what he learned from his travels. In his 1871 book,
Primitive Culture, he defined the idea: “Culture or civilization, taken in its ethnographic sense, is
that complex whole which includes knowledge, beliefs, art, morals, law, custom, and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member of society.”1 We are all human, something that
Columbus was not so sure about in 1492 when he first encountered the Caribs or, more generally, the
Amerindians. Before Tylor, differences were explained as due to climate differences or even as God’s
choice, wrong-headed ideas about difference. Tylor’s cross-cultural approach opened new vistas in
nineteenth-century anthropology.
In North America, Lewis Henry Morgan (1818–1881), a lawyer who had grown up amid the Iroquois, wrote League of the Iroquois in 1851. He noticed that their terms for kinfolk were not classified
in the same way as English terms. Terminology for cousins was different depending on whether the
maternal or fraternal line was credited. As a lawyer for the New York Central Railroad, he had noticed
other differences among speakers of other languages as well. Morgan began to collect kinship terminologies from all over the world, and in 1871 he published his master work, Systems of Consanguinity
and Affinity, which would influence French anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss.
New questions arose. Could terminology be a key to understanding the social organization of
small societies? The Iroquois were matrilineal; membership in a clan was determined by female links
only, and one’s father and his sisters and brothers belonged to a different clan. Without going into
further detail, it should be clear that the invention of the concept of culture paved the way for explaining differences among peoples. Culture differentiates peoples, but in the process, we need to
remember we are all members of the same species. We might identify others according to their color,
but all peoples everywhere share the need to survive disease. Every society has primary groups, such
as families, whose primary function is to have and raise children.

Holism
Another important founding father of American anthropology was German-born Franz Boas
(1858–1942), a scholar originally trained in physics. He turned to anthropology after a year-long expedition to Baffin Island, land of the Inuit in the Canadian Arctic. He began to study their language.
He came to the United States, where he is recognized as the father of cultural anthropology. More
than anyone, Boas framed the discipline around the concept of holism: taking a broad view of the
historical and cultural foundations of behavior rather than attributing differences to biology dismantling the concept of race. Although he stressed cultural differences, he explained such differences in
terms of the historical development of each culture. In his book Race, Language, and Culture (1940),

The Development of Anthropological Ideas

3

he stressed the idea that there is no necessary correlation between race, language, and culture, that one’s
physical appearance does not determine one’s culture or ability to learn any language.
Boas is also noted for his development of the concepts of cultural relativism and cultural determinism—that all behavioral differences among peoples result from cultural, not racial or genetic
causes. It was Boas who grounded the discipline in four fields and founded the American Anthropological Association. The four fields—archeological, cultural, linguistic, and physical anthropology—defined most departments in the United States until more recently when four became five with
medical anthropology. Throughout the development of anthropology in the United States, there was
a fear of fragmentation for holistic thinkers. As Boas noted in 1905, “there are indications of [anthropology] breaking up. The biologic, linguistic, and ethnologic-archeological methods are so distinct.”2
It must be noted that Boas trained many women anthropologists such as Margaret Mead and Ruth
Benedict, knowing that diversifying fieldworkers by including people of all genders was important
to successful fieldwork.

Plasticity
Talking about biologically superior and inferior races was common to colonialists who carried the
notion of the “white man’s burden,” in which it was their mission to civilize the savages or, among
some groups, to classify groups according to their perceived slots, as for example, the idea that some
“races” were thought to be biologically intended to be solely servants! The scientific study of race has
often floundered in confusion and misunderstanding over the past 200 years even though anthropologists have repeatedly stressed the observation that people can be equally endowed without being
alike. In spite of our efforts, race bigots are alive and well. It is apparently comforting to believe that
“we” are the best, a belief that is not restricted to Euro-Americans. After all, Navajo means people and
many groups think they are superior to others. Thus, Boas’ assessment was that all healthy individuals
of the Homo sapiens species had the capacity to learn any language or culture, that plasticity is part
of our species.
In the contemporary world, difference is treated as if it were a problem. Why? Some say it is due
to the movement of cheap labor, debates over racism and tolerance in the midst of refugee crises,
the power of the Islamic “scarf.” In other words, to colonialist language in modern garb, state management of diversity and far-right politics, institutionalized racism, and the primacy of difference,
especially in the context of Europe and the United States. In early 2001, a volume by historian
Elisabeth Lasch-Quinn was published. Race Experts, Etiquette, Sensitivity Training, and New Age Therapy Hijacked the Civil Rights Revolution examined the racial-problem industry and racial-solution
industry that have flourished and have had difficulty acknowledging that any differences between
people may be superficial compared with what they have in common. The concept of race also avoids
discussion of class and inequality associated with poverty. Such social-engineering is deeply interested in difference as a problem. The pursuit of homogeneity by state structures is something that has
been observed all over Europe and the western worlds, especially at the contemporary moment when
refugees are pouring into western countries from North Africa and the Middle East.

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Participant Observation
With European colonization of peoples around the globe, more anthropological research around
the planet began to happen. Better data collection came to be referred to as participant observation
meaning that the ethnographers participated in the daily lives of the people they studied, learned
their languages, and became immersed in the ordinary workings of others’ societies. A Polish anthropologist, Bronislaw Malinowski (1884–1942), is often credited with setting the standard for
ethnography with wide-angled vision. Malinowski had studied in London, and during World War I,
he found himself in the Trobriand Islands, then a British dependency. Although he was a Pole, he was
allowed to remain in the Trobriands. He had to learn the language—had to because the local people
were his only companions. He moved among native people, speaking to them in their language. He
studied their gardens, magic, science, law—all with the tools of participant observing. Malinowski
wrote a number of ethnographies based on his work there: Argonauts of the Western Pacific (1922) on
trade and the economy involving multiple sites, The Sexual Life of the Savages (1929) about kinship
and sexuality, Coral Gardens and their Magic (1935) on gardens and farming, and Crime and Custom
in a Savage Society (1926) dealt with problems of law and social order. Malinowski set a very high
standard for participatory ethnographic fieldwork that stands to this day, a standard in which ethnography was theory, not mere description. The ethnography itself, as well as its explanatory uses, is
a theoretical endeavor, a combination of loose and strict thinking.3
The invention of new technologies facilitates new frontiers of ethnography. In linguistic anthropology, the appearance of the cassette tape recorder and “shotgun” microphones in the early 1970s,
of video cameras in the early 1980s, and of the internet and other electronic inventions in the past
25 years has allowed people to seek connections hitherto unnoticed. Similarly, geographic information systems, so important to archeologists and ecological anthropologists, are also used to locate the
people we study. In the process, fieldworkers have lost the possibility of immersion in other cultures
with little contact from home sites. Technological innovations connect us all, for better or for worse.

Area Studies and Beyond
By the mid-twentieth century, the major concepts were in place for the discipline—culture, comparison, and ethnography as participation fieldwork. The organizing concept is area studies. Anthropology departments commonly organize their curriculums around area studies courses taught about
Africa, the Middle East, East Asia, China, Latin America, Europe, and so forth. Students learn about
the geography and history and delve into specific topics such as religion, kinship, minorities, and
language—subjects that equip them for a general understanding of a particular geographic area. Area
specialties are useful for gaining funding, job searching, and hires especially in large departments.
In more recent times, critical research has investigated the origins of area studies in museums and
in association with the military. It was American imperialist, Alfred Thayer Mahan, who first called
the area between Europe and India the Middle East. Area studies are useful, but they can cause intellectual blindness that limits the anthropological analysis and imagination. At times, those who go
beyond the boundaries of a region have been censored, raising the question: Can we be both area
scholars and comparativists searching for similarities and differences between cultures, or even diffusionists who study the spread of cultural ideas from one area to another. The study of the colonized
and not the colonizers still haunts our work. In 1989, Sir Edmund Leach had to reiterate that social
systems are open, not bounded. We live in a globalized world, and, as Sidney Mintz reminded us in

The Development of Anthropological Ideas

5

his 1996 distinguished lecture to the American Anthropological Association, we have been globalized
for a very long time.4
The subject matter of anthropological research was expanding from isolated locales to the urban
ethnography of cities such as S. F. Nadel’s ethnography of urban Nigeria in A Black Byzantium (1942)
and Cora Du Bois’ investigation of the link between culture and personality and Euro-American
colonialism in The People of Alor (1944). In 1949, Clyde Kluckhohn published Mirror for Man—The
Relation of Anthropology to Modern Life. It was time to use the study of others to examine their own
cultures and to test assumptions that might be ethnocentric. Margaret Mead had already published
Coming of Age in Samoa (1928) in which she examined the adolescence problem as originating in culture, not as a physical and inevitable result of hormones as commonly thought in the United States
at the time. Thus, through the comparative method we may learn that while human populations
face some common problems, such as growing up, each addresses those problems in different ways.
Mead’s findings were considered controversial by some; thus, it is not surprising that some years
later John and Beatrice Whiting carried out a controlled comparison of Six Cultures: Studies of Child
Rearing (1963) one of which was in New England.
Gradually, anthropology was no longer the study of “savages” or “primitives;” it became the study
of all human cultures. As Ruth Benedict pointed out in her bestselling Patterns of Culture (1934),
people of different cultures interpret life differently. Her observation implied that one cannot judge
one culture as superior to another. Both Boas and Malinowski elaborated on cultural relativism. Boas
in particular pushed hard against the common tendency to judge others by one’s own culture rather
than by the basic assumptions of the culture being studied. He was fighting the phenomenon called
ethnocentrism, seeing the world through one’s own glasses. Ethnocentrism allowed people to see or
categorize others as somehow less than or inferior, as “primitive” and in need of aid or development.5

Examining Cultural Assumptions
The fight against ethnocentrism—what in the United States today is sometimes called exceptionalism (we are always better)—is what motivates anthropologists to examine assumptions commonly used by Americans for example, or even embedded in the work of anthropologists themselves.
Indeed, as fieldworkers, anthropologists must understand themselves, understand the eyes doing
the recording of others. Does an anthropologist’s gender influence what he or she “sees”? Does an
aversion to conflict affect the record, the choice of research interests? Do the bilingual or bicultural
characteristics of anthropologists increase sensitivity in the field? The ethnographies that we produce
are, in the final analysis, the theory of what we do and why, and what the people we study do and
why: a Mirror for Man.
A frequently cited example of analyzing the underlying premises is E. E. Evans-Pritchard (1902–
1973), a British anthropologist who published Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic among the Azande
(1937), a work of ethnography as theory. His study of the Azande of the southern Sudan was meant
to indicate why and how Azande beliefs in magic and witchcraft made perfect sense according to
Azande premises (and to many peoples everywhere who wanted to understand human ills such as disease and death). He avoided ethnocentric notions like “they are ignorant primitives.” His point was
that their beliefs made sense given their premises, and that they were as logical as any other people.
The main reason the Azande work is so much cited is that the main discovery is that we are all caught
in our premises, our unchallenged assumptions. This idea applies to any thought including western
science, as for example, the “nuclear religion”—the belief that President Eisenhower’s atoms for peace

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

made up for dropping nuclear bombs on Japan during World War II, in spite of scientists’ inability
to deal with nuclear waste and other associated problems. In Evans-Pritchard’s case, he was writing
not merely about the Azande or, later, about the Nuer herdsmen; he was also writing about how a
particular ethnography is theoretically comparative, raising issues about our ingrained premises.
By mid-century, ethnographies had begun to include power as with The Political Systems of Highland Burma by Sir Edmund Leach (1954). Although there was general agreement in anthropology,
scholars in academia were hesitant to deal with the phenomenon of power in anything but abstract
terms. Also around the same time, Gregory Bateson’s Naven was re-issued (1958) and ethnographers
began to understand the many different lenses useful for interpreting the lives and rituals of people
under study. By the 1960s, the unease in American academia began to be affected by the Civil Rights
Movement, the war in Vietnam, the American Indian Movement, and sexual and gender liberations.
Dell Hymes edited a book (1972) called Reinventing Anthropology which called anthropologists
to a revised or reinvented anthropology, one that took into consideration race, newly independent
states, and what might be called the vertical slice. Laura Nader wrote “Up the Anthropologist: Perspectives Gained from Studying Up,” a thought piece about the need to study up, down, and sideways as a way to liberate anthropologists from narrow concerns and exclusions. For example, she
argued for studying the colonizers as well as the colonized, for understanding poverty and ghettos
in connection with bank’s redlining practices, which were essentially illegal, for understanding the
enormous role corporations play in raising our children through the foods they prepare or the technologies required of children as part of their normal schooling. Today, some anthropologists study up
while others study up, down, and sideways simultaneously.6
Moving into the twenty-first century, anthropologists had major intellectual interests in political
economy, gender, representation, the Cold War, the Native American Grave Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA), the anthropology of science, colonialism, tourism and more. The story of
how the study of humankind advanced over a century does not move in steady progression. Science
is prickly and contentious, and anthropology, more than most disciplines, is not only contentious but
also self-reflexive. Indeed, the self-critical tradition has helped us adapt to the incoherent conditions
of accelerated history and the new technologies that have come with it. So one might conclude that
what changed least was what scholars in 1929 called “the anthropological attitude,” which values
both detachment and involvement as a mode of rethinking assumptions, while the changed relationship between those who study and those being studied forced anthropologists to reconsider the conditions under which their knowledge had been acquired. In addition, anthropology has increasingly
become a worldwide discipline.

THE FALL OF COLONIALISM AND THE RISE OF NEWLY
INDEPENDENT STATES
About 500 years ago, the first major colonization movements by western Europeans were a result
of Portugal, Spain, and England looking for new resources. Colonies were implanted in Africa, Asia,
and the New World. A second major colonial movement arose after the Industrial Revolution, motivated in part by a search for cheap labor and resources. By the end of the nineteenth century, Britain,
France, Belgium, and Germany had divided up Africa, and Britain, France, and the United States
were acquiring territories in the Pacific. Especially in Britain and France, ethnographic research was
encouraged as a function of colonialism. Thus, well into the 1950s, anthropologists were employed
by colonial offices. The demise of colonialism and emergence of new independent states gave rise to

The Development of Anthropological Ideas

7

issues such as plundering of resources, and the new nations produced their own ethnographers whose
approaches to anthropology were different from the approaches used by the Euro-American colonial
powers. Anthropologists from Mexico, Brazil, and the Indian subcontinent primarily studied their
own people. Only the travelers from these former colonial countries thought about the colonialists as
their “other.” In part, these post-colonial anthropologists set about correcting previously set anthropological agendas. More or less quiet debates are now occurring as to what a “global anthropology”
should entail.
Colleagues outside of the Anglo-American world have criticized our biases and ethnocentrisms.
Their polite admonishments underscored the need for self-awareness and the calibration of the instrument—in this instance, the anthropologist. Anthropologists in France, the Middle East, India,
Pakistan, and elsewhere are pointing to Anglo-Americans’ difficulty in coming to terms with power.
The French fieldwork tradition sees research as inherently fraught with power relations. Our foreign colleagues are raising questions about scientific validity. The small social groups that classical
anthropologists examined as stable or static units are now recognized as part of larger worlds that
reconstitute them and are reconstituted in turn: The World Bank, the International Monetary Fund,
and trade deals such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and trade deals with
Europe and the Asian-Pacific.
Akbar Ahmed, an anthropologist from Pakistan who trained in Britain, indicates what new dimensions can be gleaned by non-Anglo-American anthropologists in The Thistle and the Drone: How
American’s War on Terror Became a Global War on Islam (2013). Ahmed’s work, the third in a trilogy,
combines ethnographic analysis with history and comparison and uses his wide-ranging experience,
which includes work as a Pakistani government agent and later as ambassador to Waziristan. Ahmed
is also a poet, a playwright, a film producer, and an inexhaustible public speaker. He is presently the
Ibn Khaldun chair for Islamic Studies at the American University of Washington, D.C. He is what
some call a public anthropologist—someone whose work is accessible to anthropologists as well as
to the public in general.
In his book, Ahmed includes the tribal peoples, the state, the American empire, and technology
to understand the problems that began with European colonization and continued through the
post-colonial period of nation-building, when the periphery became attached or connected to a
state that gave them few rights. Ahmed’s book reflects a paradigm shift in the twenty-first century—
contemporary analyses of states and empires as well as the tribes, which were the traditional subject
for ethnography. Thus, he includes not only the tribes, but also Osama bin Laden, the president of
Pakistan, the president of the American empire, and the agonies of the anthropologist who discovers
the horrors and hurts. Ahmed is a humanist anthropologist arguing for mutual respect and co-existence. Perhaps he can be thought of as an Islamic anthropologist in contrast to a Christian or Jewish
anthropologist: he is objective and subjective and includes “us” and “them.” The book discusses 40
examples of peripheral Islamic groups and their relations with state authorities to illustrate the relationship between center and periphery from Waziristan to Yemen Somalia and across North Africa to
Indonesia and the Philippines. Ahmed concludes that drone strikes and cruel invasions by the central
government will not work towards peace and mutual respect given that brutal revenge attacks from
the periphery will continue in reaction to state and empire aggressions. Experts on terrorism ignore
both culture and historical context. When anthropologists have dealt with the periphery, we have too
often supported state assimilation, maneuvered the creation of reservations, and sometimes closed
our eyes to mass killings.

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

The new dimensions mentioned above must not detract from the solid contributions of anthropologists of the British functionalist schools to our understanding of political and social processes
in Africa, New Guinea, Burma, and elsewhere. In Africa, they were the first to address problems of
order in societies of tens of thousands of people with no government, no police, and no constabulary—places where social control was achieved by means of social relationships. The concept of
cross-linkage was used to understand African modes of maintaining peace through feuding, another
piece of the picture of order in stateless societies that might be useful to the United Nations. The
British focus was more on the concept of social organization than culture, on the colonized rather
than the colonizers.

SPECIALIZATION—A WIDE RANGE
In the mid-twentieth century, Norwegian anthropologist Fredrik Barth (1928–2016) challenged
the British school’s work on Africa and their position that social systems transcended individual actors. On the contrary, Barth argued that political systems were generated by individual actors seeking
to maximize their positions. In his ethnography on the Swat Pathans in northern Pakistan, Barth
(1959) was moving away from the functionalist equilibrium analysis toward examinations of processes of change. Others followed suit in their arguments. According to Talal Asad, the notion that
individuals strategize to maximize power is a distortion of history. In Anthropology and the Colonial
Encounter (1973), Asad notes that Barth’s conclusions were accelerated by British colonial practices
in India and the northern frontier. Asad’s critique made a critical point: the political system must be
seen as part of a wider system that is based on a historical perspective that also includes class as an
important variable but does not nullify individual choices. Control is both political and economic.
The conversations about Barth’s work were to continue later in the work of Pakistani anthropologist
Akbar Ahmed. Anthropology can now be said to be a cosmopolitan dialogue.
As the number of anthropologists expanded so did the number of specialties, especially in large
departments. Indeed the small departments are most likely to teach anthropology from a generalist
point of view. While kinship and religion were the major specialties more than half a century ago,
we now find professors specialized in fields like tourism, political economics, law, gender, folklore,
as well as areas such as the Middle East, for example, or southern Africa, or Mexico (previously
Mesoamerica), and so forth. In addition, there are many kinds of anthropology, such as applied and
practicing. These specializations are found in dedicated journals for cognitive anthropology, law and
politics, and musicology while general reports may be found in the British journal Anthropology Today
or in Anthropology News in the United States, and in journals such as American Anthropologist or JRAI,
the journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute. The following examples give some insight into the
general range of questions being addressed.

Political Economy
A political economy approach contextualizes the world as an open system, as process not statis. To
understand how power works in the world today requires comparison, paying attention to the intersection of power and culture. One example of this approach is found in the work of Ashraf Ghani,
whose research focused on the history of power, particularly in Afghanistan, and who later became
president of Afghanistan.7 To understand how power works requires attention to disintegration as
well as integration, on a local and global levels, which are then compared in terms of process, not

The Development of Anthropological Ideas

9

essentialized societies. Work in this area has brought radical changes to traditional ethnography. An
economic system such as corporate capitalism is treated as a type of economy that may change in
particular context, such as contemporary China, in direct contrast to world system theorists who
track the distribution of a system across the globe. There are many kinds of capitalism—penny capitalism, regional capitalism, and corporate capitalism. In Worked Over: The Corporate Sabotage of an
American Community, for example, Dimitra Doukas (2003) covered dramatic changes in northern
New York mill towns in the Mohawk River Valley with the move from regional to corporate or
global capitalism. She documented the impact of hit-and-run corporate capitalism on the American
workers on whose back American industry was built. Over 100 years, these vibrant industrial centers
had become impoverished deindustrialized communities. Earlier still, Anthony F. C. Wallace, in his
underappreciated book Rockdale (1978) wrote the story of Rockdale: “An account of the coming of
the machines, the making of a new way of life in the mill hamlets, the triumph of evangelical capitalists over socialists and infidels, and the transformation of the workers into Christian soldiers in a
cotton-manufacturing district in Pennsylvania in the years before and during the Civil War.”

Power and Politics
Continuing examination of power centered on control as the dynamic of power. Laura Nader’s
early study, “Controlling Processes” (1997), focused on means of exercising power, a catalyst for
analyzing the role of free will in power relations in American society. Examples were taken from
the alternative dispute-resolution movement in U.S. law, which diminished the civil justice system
in the United States and then went global, the standardization of definitions of beauty, which has
spread globally, or the content of museum exhibits, or examining how marketing firms influence
teenagers’ perceptions of parental authority. The study of controlling processes enabled readers to
understand control as indirect means to power and to recognize the fragility of both culture and its
human carriers. In Buddha is Hiding – Refugees, Citizenship, The New America, Aihwa Ong (2003)
followed the everyday lives of Cambodian refugees in California as they dealt with American values
that contradicted Cambodian values in a story of Cambodian Americans experiencing American
citizenship, a bottom up study about the impact of U.S. medical, social welfare, judicial, religious,
and economic institutions of citizen making. This ethnography is about Cambodian Americans and
about the types of controls operating across American institutions seeking to mold a certain type of
citizen and the book is a tour-de-force examination of the reconfiguring of citizenship in a world of
wars and movements.
World events are critical to academic pursuits, and anthropology had successes in World War II
because of previous anthropological work in areas that became war zones. The Cold War following World War II also wrought critical changes. The number of anthropologists expanded, as did
funding, and access to military technology revolutionized our methodologies in all fields, although
differently. For socio-cultural anthropologists, the Cold War raised issues of race, war, genocide,
counterinsurgency, and natural resources. We realized that anthropology was not an autonomous
pursuit; instead, all of academia was embedded in politics. Anthropologists such as Hugh Gusterson
(1996) and Joseph Masco (2006) began to write about nuclear laboratory cultures.8
During a decade in which nuclear and alternative energy systems have played critical roles in
world events, a wide-angled anthropology was a requirement. Anthropology has integrated holism,
appreciation of history and the depth of time, and the consequences arising from how language
frames thought. The discourse of energy specialists, for example, was rooted in models of growth that

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

assumed an unlimited supply of natural resources and undervalued ecosystems. The idea that energy
experts might be part of the problem was novel, as was the idea that energy problems have human
dimensions, a theme explored in works such as The Energy Reader (Nader 2010), Cultures of Energy:
Power, Practices, and Technologies (Strauss, Rupp and Love 2013), and “Energopolitics and the Anthropology of Energy” (Boyer 2011). All of us were influenced by campus struggles in the 1960 and
1970s over militarism, multi-national capitalism, scientific racism, and the politics of gender. But a
larger question remains: What makes people human?

Subdividing and Specializing
Expanded funding in the four basic fields and in medical anthropology led to specializations
and topical expertise. In socio-cultural anthropology, these include specializations in the law, politics, the economy, religion, ecology, medical issues, art, and education. Anthropologist Eric Wolf
(1923–1999) was critical of the tendency to specialize: “We subdivide and subdivide and call it
anthropology.”9 The history of anthropology now goes far beyond disciplinary boundaries to include
the impact of national policies, militarism, and priorities in funding. Credit goes to David Price, who
singlehandedly examined the history of anthropology in its widest context in his book Anthropological Intelligence: The Deployment and Neglect of American Anthropology in the Second World War (2008).
After all, our nationalities are reflected in the work we do. However, as anthropologists specialized,
the concept of culture spread beyond the discipline to sociology, psychology, business schools, law
schools, and beyond. Culture as a concept was loose on the streets! We now have cultural sociology,
cultural psychology, cultural geography, cultural law. Changes in the field, which included fascination with French philosophers such as Michel Foucault and Jacques Derrida and French anthropologist Pierre Bourdieu, stimulated vigorous critiques. Others used the changes to enrich ethnography.
People built on June Nash’s ethnography of a Bolivian tin mine, We Eat the Mines and the Mines Eat
Us (1979), which followed industrial mining that came with Spanish conquest, still causing internal
problems today since controls continue to operate on Bolivia from beyond its borders. Some call this
global development theory.
Because of all of this intellectual ferment, we now realize that anthropology has much to say about
our own lives. Our ethnographies are written about the Shanghai stock market and the invention
of derivatives on Wall Street.10 Examinations of law and finance have moved from the earlier intersections of anthropology and law primarily associated with resolution of disputes in small locales
to connecting legal knowledge (that is, state-level knowledge) to global financial markets and their
legal and regulatory practices in which traders deal with probabilities and legal fictions.11 Also in the
vein of banking is the interest in Islamic banking. Though Islam forbids collecting interest, Islamic
financial concerns operate in some 70 countries and have assets in the range of $200 billion.12 Studies
of the alternative currencies of Islamic banks are part and parcel of law, economics, and finance and
the anthropologist’s subject goes beyond the tribe, village, state, and even geographic region. The
anthropology of policy worlds is an emerging field that covers the politics of financialization, the rise
of audit cultures and their impacts on culture and society, and the spread of diseases such as cholera
epidemics.13 In Global Assemblages, Technology, Politics, and Ethics as Anthropological Problems (2005),
Aihwa Ong and Stephen Collier integrate issues that are globalizing, including concern with ethics.
Anthropologists are asking, for example, why some informants waste time with anthropologists and
what exactly the collaborative engagement of anthropologists and subjects is in terms of ethics.

The Development of Anthropological Ideas

11

New concerns with dichotomies of nature and culture led to studies of mythologies of menopause
in Japan and North America and the pharmaceutical business. Can menopause really be a disease if
it happens to all women? Similar questions are asked of aging in India.14 The examination of energy
use in culture and society is rapidly expanding along with studies of emerging industrial businesses that use bio-power for commercial and regulatory purposes.15 Thus, anthropologists like Nancy
Scheper-Hughes and Loïc Wacquant, are are studying the buying, selling, and theft of human body
parts, the significance of the concept of “brain dead,” and who owns the body in books like Commodifying Bodies (2002). Building on ethics and human rights issues are decades of research by Nancy
Scheper-Hughes. In Death without Weeping (1992), she addressed violence in everyday life and how
violence and even death become normal and routine. She has made her work public by sharing with
journalists wherever possible, testifying in court regarding crimes against humanity, and working
hand in hand with Israeli colleagues. The work is multi-sited, sometimes conducting research undercover while examining criminal networks and transplant tourism. Though power need not be the
central theme for all anthropology, it is critical for understanding central dogmas.

Audiences for Anthropology
Our audiences are unpredictable. Anthropologists who speak to a public wider than members
of the discipline often have a greater immediate impact outside the discipline than in it. When I
began writing and speaking about coercive harmony, interest among anthropologists was slow to
develop (for reasons I examine elsewhere) while those who had felt the sting of being coercively
harmonized—our public—quickly recognized its power in the workplace with quality circles, with
“facilitators” in environmental movements at loggerheads with Clinton-style negotiation, and on
Native American reservations when dealing with negotiations over nuclear waste. Grade schools
regularly taught harmony ideology dispute-resolution and in global arenas lawyers were up against
new international negotiators selling psychology rather than the rule of law.16 And in the 2016 presidential election, the Republican candidate used language that would be considered uncivil under the
harmony model but received positive responses from voters.
If we remain ignorant of debates outside of academia, we will increasingly find ourselves talking
mainly to each other, trapped in a diminished space and working in cramped quarters.17 It took an
anthropologist, David Graeber, to notice that debt was on the mind of many, especially economically
insecure Americans and the young who were in heavy debt for their costs in higher education.18 Graeber’s book Debt: The First 5000 Years (2011) was an instant bestseller worldwide. Debt is a problem
that affects all societies that employ money. His analysis helps us understand the present economic
situation by means of a long-term perspective. In similar critical efforts, Graeber has moved to other
issues on people’s minds. In 2001, he published Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value (2001)
and more recently he explored political ideologies and exotic practices by self-destructive tribes in The
Utopia of Rules: On Technology, Stupidity, and the Secret Joys of Bureaucracy (2015). Though Graeber
is thought of as a specialist in studies of the Occupy Wall Street movement, his initial fieldwork was
conducted in Madagascar.
Some of the most distinguished anthropologists in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries were
effective spokespeople for the demarcation of science from other forms of knowledge such as magic
and religion. As represented by Boas and Malinowski, who were trained in physics and mathematics,
anthropological work in the late twentieth century was grounded in the ethnographic study of the
practice of science, which did not always privilege western science. Modern scientists are crossing

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

paths with indigenous peoples; biologists are side by side with indigenous peoples whose ecological knowledge they covet. Rapid globalization makes considerations of intermingling of knowledge
systems inevitable. There is power in juxtaposing how traditional knowledge is produced in very
different cultures, such as comparing our own culture with that of the Inuit or with peoples of the
Amazon. We study not only Amazonians’ indigenous plants and Pacific marine biology (and their
appropriation of that knowledge) but physics and biotechnology laboratories and immunologists as
well. Malinowski wrote about magic, science, and religion among the Trobrianders; we (following
Leach’s advice) examine magic, science, and religion in national laboratories.

Science
Emerging ethnographies of science are having as powerful an effect on contemporary anthropology as earlier studies of political economy and colonialism. Comparison of American high-energy
physicists with Japanese high-energy physicists or Japanese and American primatologists show that
science is not free of culture but, rather, is full of it.19 Meanwhile, anthropologists working in African
agriculture have noted the devastating effects of a cultural preference for universal explanations that
override ecological particularism and site-specific knowledge.20 It sounds counterintuitive, but “based
on measures of energy expended per calorie of food produced, industrial agriculture is the most inefficient form of food production in the history and prehistory of humankind.”21 The principles of a
physical model may not be true at all times or in all places since, even in Europe, there are many scientific traditions. When western approaches and technologies are transferred elsewhere, there can be
downsides. In Naked Science – Anthropological Inquiry into Boundaries, Power, and Knowledge (1996),
Laura Nader discusses the power of western science over other sciences around the world, revealing a
cultural framework for understanding “what science is really like.” Ethno-science and techno-science
are examined comparatively rather than hierarchically.
Even the science of race has changed dramatically in the past 50 years. During the post-Civil
Rights movement, many scholars and scientists thought of race as nothing more than a social construction. By the twenty-first century, race as a social, legal, and medical category had been explored
as a result of the Human Genome Project. Degrees of variation came to be debated. One example is
Ian Whitmarsh and David Jones’What’s the Use of Race – Modern Governance and the Biology of Difference (2010), which examines the uses of race in the courtroom, law enforcement, and scientific views
in attempts to address human diversity in relation to inequities in health and disease without using
race as a basis for discrimination. Matters of race are not settled yet. Forensics, ancestry, testing, and
medicine are hopefully innovating pathways to better medical treatments and health outcomes—and
simultaneously advancing our conversations about “race” as a useful category.
Anthropological contributions to science debates can be critical in relocating and rethinking the
future of western science traditions for variations exist there as well. The issues relate to the function
of western science, its cultural ascendancy, its ethnocentricity, and its universality as they pertain
to the charting of more-productive science paradigms.22 As previously mentioned, anthropologists
working in African agriculture have observed the devastating effects of a scientific preference for
universal explanations that override ecological particularisms and site-specific subsistence knowledge. The assumption that western science functions autonomously is contradicted by findings in
archaeology and ethnology, such as the observation that science does not develop independent of
the influence of non-scientists. Is the anthropology of science a scientific effort or a humanistic one?
Does it matter since “humanistic” and “scientific” are adjectives of convenience that are not mutu-

The Development of Anthropological Ideas

13

ally exclusive? The notion that people in a particular political context could consciously construct a
cultural tradition should be important to the structurally minded, along with conscious linguistic
code-switching for those interested in the consequences of differences in school settings.

Violence and War
The search for explanations for violence—especially the kind of intercommunal violence seen in
places like Rwanda, Northern Ireland, Israel, Sri Lanka, and the former Yugoslavia and now seen
throughout the Islamic world in the Middle East—involves the understanding of a holistic ethnography. Does it relate to competition for scarce resources, such as oil in the 2003 U.S. war on Iraq,
or to dislocation of colonial legacies as seen in Waziristan in northern Pakistan? How do such forces
translate into violence? Some scholars have invoked identity politics as a prerequisite to intercommunal violence, the implication being that it depends on identity formation that contrasts with another
group. An alternative approach might be to examine the role of the international arms industry and
of regimes that encourage hostilities. What kept Iraq together under Saddam Hussein? In a word,
nationalism. When Saddam Hussein was at war with Iran, all Iraqi citizens—Shia, Sunni, Kurdish,
and Christian fought together as one Iraqi people. After the U.S. invasion of Iraq in 2003, American
forces used the old colonial technique of divide and conquer by pitting Shia against Sunni. A decade
later, we have seen the rise of an Islamic Caliphate (ISIS) waging war on Iraq and Syria. Gillian Tett
refers to the peril of expertise as The Silo Effect (2015)—an inability to “connect the dots” as one
consequence of the 2003 American invasion of Iraq.
Certainly, no agreement has been reached among anthropologists on issues of violence and aggression, especially between those who stress biological origins of aggressive behavior and those who note
that humans are not uniformly aggressive and warlike. Human populations can be peaceful or almost
continuously engaged in aggressive encounters. The violence between East and West Germany, for
example, is explained not by old antagonisms but by new phenomena—the ideologies associated
with the Cold War and the Soviet Union. A nation can change from warlike to peaceful in a remarkably short period. Consider Sweden, which, particularly under Gustavus Adolphus, was the scourge
of Europe but now has been largely peaceful for many decades. France under Napoleon was the
most feared country in Europe, but a century later, the aggressive position had shifted to Germany.
On the other hand, however, humans can also learn to be aggressive, as the record of feuds, raids,
tortures, and wars amply testifies. There is no empirical evidence that individuals in warlike nations
are genetically more aggressive than individuals in peaceful nations, and the complex institutions of
war, which depend on uniquely human organizations, cannot be understood in terms of individual
aggression (although conflicts in animal societies can be so understood). Only human animals make
war, and only human animals kill themselves.
The current violence in the Middle East cannot be explained without implicating states and history. Afghanistan was invaded first by the British Empire, then by the Soviets, and by the Americans
in 2001. All three stated that they wanted to bring development to the Afghans, a better life. What
followed instead was violence continuing to this day in the case of American invasion. Thousands
have died and sectarian violence has erupted. The word jihad is commonly used in reference to
the Islamic state and is sometimes translated as holy war. Perhaps all of the contemporary wars in
the Middle East from Afghanistan to Somalia are holy wars—Islamic, Christian, and Jewish—all
monotheistic religions emanating from the Middle East. What we may be experiencing in the early

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

twenty-first century are religious wars posing as secular for Christians and Jews and as jihad holy wars
for Muslims.
It behooves anthropologists to unveil the contemporary scene that has been appropriated by politicians and pundits because the consequences of failing to do so are so great in terms of mass killings
and destruction. For some Arabs, Israel is a western beachhead in the Middle East; for some Israelis, it
is a return and compensation for the Nazi killings of Jews in World War II. In 2001, President George
W. Bush referred to a “crusade” against terrorism. Terrorism is a general word, not specific, but used
in carrying out American drone strikes in Waziristan, Somalia, Yemen, and Palestinian Gaza. Explanations such as resource wars have been generally avoided, except in joking that if Iraq grew broccoli
instead of having oil we would not have invaded. As comparatists, anthropologists are well-equipped
to contribute to the public’s understanding of these issues by connecting the dots.23

Law
In the 1960s, anthropological research on law and anthropology involved ethnographies of particular peoples such as the Barotse, Tiv, and Arusha in Africa, the Cheyenne in the United States, the
Trobrianders in Melanesia, and the Ifugao in the Philippines. The first generation of scholars—Bronislaw Malinowski, Max Gluckman, Paul Bohannan, Philip Gulliver, Karl Llewellyn, and E. Adamson
Hoebel—had a local world view. They examined the functions of law, its presence or absence, processes of negotiation, mediation, adjudication, or retaliation. The generation that followed wanted to
increase the number of quality ethnographies and local ethnographies such as those on the Zapotec
of Oaxaca, Mexico, or the Zinacantan of Chiapas, Mexico, and new locales from Africa to New
Guinea and Hawaii.24 Variation was examined within these places but, when teaching anthropology
of law in the early years, the central core was ethnography in place.25
However, as peoples who had been colonized by European powers gained independence, the number of new states worldwide increased rapidly, and those states were incorporating the local people
into state law. Attention turned to globalization, the diffusion of legal ideologies such as the rule of
law to new states and law and modernization. Research and teaching changed and by the latter part
of the twentieth century and particularly after the end of the Cold War, students were eager to learn
about the new states, legal imperialism, military law, and legal rights. The war on terror was also on
their minds after the U.S. invasions of Afghanistan and Iraq in terms of due process, fairness, and
imposition of foreign laws. Thus, teaching law and anthropology in 2016 bore little resemblance to
such teachings in the 1960s although documentary films such as Little Injustices (1981) and Losing
Knowledge (2012), give students a sense of how much has changed with the loss of local sovereignty.
Assigned readings have also changed. One of the favorites is Leach’s Custom, Law, and Terrorist Violence (1977).
One anthropologist who has tried to analyze the fantasy sources of terror wars is Joseba Zulaika,
a Basque anthropologist, author of many books on terrorism. His most recent is Terrorism – the
Self-Fulfilling Prophecy (2009). Well into his argument about counter-terrorism producing terrorism,
Zulaika refers to a medieval component of U.S. policy. He invokes the fear of witches prevalent
historically in Europe to understand current counter-terrorism behavior and a premodern type of
thinking that denies contrary evidence and sees all as either black or white, as good or evil. Zulaika
refers to Evans-Pritchard’s Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic among the Azande (1937) to help us understand the belief in the mystical power of some individuals to harm others. Finally, he notes that what
was normal and unquestionable in medieval Europe gave way to skepticism.

The Development of Anthropological Ideas

15

Wherever anthropologists have studied witchcraft and witch-hunting, fear is present—fear of
sickness, fear of violence.26 In contemporary Africa, according to Elizabeth Colson, witchcraft accusations have increased along with apparently unexplainable HIV deaths.27 Questions of “Why me?
Why us?” must be answered. In explaining the fear of “terrorism” in the United States, some have
argued that connecting those dots may be a new challenge for anthropologists working in the West.
Witch-hunting in more-complex settings require broader contexts than that of pre-literate societies
in which witchcraft may be taken for granted. In complex societies such as the United States, beliefs
based on irrational or illogical thinking are not accepted as part of being modern, or so it is said.

Urban Anthropology
The interest in violence and war might be connected to the growing interest in urban spaces. The
proportion of the world’s population living in urban areas has been increasing over the past 200
years, starting, some would say, with the Industrial Revolution. In 1800, only about 3 percent of all
humans lived in cities. By 1900, 13 percent lived in urban areas. A mere 80 years later, the proportion had risen to 40 percent, and today it stands at more than 50 percent. The percentages of urban
dwellers are highest in highly developed societies. One source suggests that in 1900 the world had
only 16 cities with more than a million inhabitants, while by 2015, the number had grown to over
300 such cities and still increasing. New cities are being built as in Brasília.28 Thus, it is not surprising
that there has been comparable growth in urban anthropology. A stunning find in urban archaeology
is that of Cahokia, a city of 83 hectares at the convergence of the Missouri, Mississippi, and Illinois
rivers, a city once occupied by some 20,000 people, larger in the eleventh and twelfth centuries than
London and Paris.29
Urban anthropology has both theoretical and applied dimensions and the topics range from immigration, poverty, class, ethnicity, drugs, and urban violence and investigates societies in Canada,
the United States, Africa, Brazil and other locales. The work is comparative as well as deeply ethnographic and documents the bringing of rural customs to cities and urban traits to rural areas. For
instance, Erik Harms’ Saigon’s Edge—On the Margins of Ho Chi Min City (2011) shows how people
live in zones of urban-rural divides in the wasteland of urban industrial expansion, between worlds
and transformations linked to global markets. Los Angeles has the largest Samoan immigrant population anywhere outside of the Pacific region. Different customs influence questions of law, such as
individuals who commit crimes when In Search of Respect, the title of an ethnography of crack dealers
in Harlem, New York, by Philippe Bourgois (1995). Gangs and gang violence make headlines and
inspire applied anthropologists, as do new interests in drug and sex trafficking and widespread stress
caused by debt and inequalities.

Health and Medicine
As the reader can see, all behaviors, institutions, and ideas related to human populations are of
interest. For example, all societies construct beliefs about the causes of illnesses and systems for
preserving health. The sub-specialty of medical anthropology includes anthropologists from all sub
fields. In many areas of the world colonialism, warfare, diseases, and changes in diet contribute to
health problems. Hunter-gatherer societies have been relatively isolated from other groups and have
not suffered from the epidemics of infectious diseases that have affected agrarian and urban societies,
especially in this age of widespread travel. The spread of malaria, for example, has been linked to

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

population growth and changes associated with food production. Obesity and diabetes have spread
with economic development and globalization, and diseases such as HIV infections appear more in
Africa than in other parts of the world.30 Cultural factors enter as HIV spreads more often among
men who are circumcised than those who are not. Then there are emotional diseases such as susto, an
illness caused by anxiety or fright, or widespread stress caused by debt and inequalities. Underlying
explanations of human behavior are based on unstated assumptions.

CONCLUSION
What is anthropology? The question can be answered in many ways depending on the particular anthropologist-author. A linguistic anthropologist might start with a reference to Boas’ student,
Edward Sapir, whose work on Language (1921) is as good today as it was when he wrote it. Sapir’s
work spanned the subjects of Amerindian languages and their connections and distributions as they
pertain to anthropology, the interdisciplinary nature of the study of language from earliest times to
the contemporary use of speech. Language and culture studies encompass both technical aspects of
language and socio-linguistics—the study of language in context.31 The founding of the Summer
Institute of Linguistics in the 1930s also played an important role in educating anthropologists of all
stripes in the techniques of linguistic study whether we were specialists or not. Such broad education
would include folklorists for whom language is key. Forever forward-thinking, Alan Dundes demonstrated the important but disputed point that folklore is not necessarily transmitted and expressed
orally, particularly folklore of the electronic age.32
For all of anthropologists’ divergences and disagreements, we share the “anthropological attitude,”
which values both detachment and involvement as modes of rethinking existing assumptions. Such
shared values have not changed much since the nineteenth century, nor have the social prejudices
that anthropologists have challenged: ethnocentrism, racism, sexism, and inadequate measures of
human worth. What has changed is the world around us, a world that affects who we are, what we
study, and what consequences result, forcing us to question why we take the stands we do. Factors
external to the profession that have been a critical part of doing anthropology in the United States are
still with us and merit remembering. Anthropology, more than any other discipline, has the capacity
to generate the kind of introspection that can influence the future role of human beings on earth—to
impart the lessons of history, the experience of Homo sapiens on the planet.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Laura Nader explains that examining cultural assumptions is the main motivation for
anthropologists. Why is this kind of examination important? What does she mean when she
says that anthropologists should study “up, down, and sideways”?
2. This chapter describes several specializations, or areas of expertise, that have developed in
anthropology, including investigations of both science and law. In what ways can science and
law be analyzed as products of culture?
3. In the conclusion, Laura Nader writes that anthropology “values both detachment and
engagement.” Why is this particularly challenging in a profession that relies on participant
observation research?

The Development of Anthropological Ideas

17

GLOSSARY
Area studies: a way of organizing research and academic programs around world regions such as
Africa, the Middle East, East Asia, China, Latin America, and Europe.
Coercive harmony: an approach to dispute resolution that emphasizes compromise and consensus
rather than confrontation and results in the marginalization of dissent (harmony ideology) and the
repression of demands for justice.
Cultural determinism: the idea that behavioral differences are a result of cultural, not racial or genetic causes.
Cultural relativism: the idea that we should seek to understand another person’s beliefs and behaviors from the perspective of their own culture and not our own.
Ethnocentrism: the tendency to view one’s own culture as most important and correct and as the
stick by which to measure all other cultures.
Functionalist: an approach developed in British anthropology that emphasized the ways that the
parts of a society work together to support the functioning of the whole.
Holism: taking a broad view of the historical, environmental, and cultural foundations of behavior.
Participant observation: a type of observation in which the anthropologist observes while participating in the same activities in which her informants are engaged.
Plasticity: refers to the human capacity to learn any language or culture.
World Systems Theory: an approach to social science and history that involves examination of the
development and functioning of the world economic system.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Laura Nader is a Professor of sociocultural anthropology at the University of California, Berkeley.
Nader’s current work focuses on how central dogmas are made and how they work in law, energy
science, and anthropology. She has published several books on conflict resolution and the law including Harmony Ideology: Justice and Control in a Mountain Zapotec Village (1990) and The Life of the
Law: Anthropological Projects (2002). She has also conducted research in the anthropology of science,
with a particular focus on energy. Her books Naked Science: Anthropological Inquiry into Boundaries,
Power, and Knowledge (1996) and The Energy Reader (2010) are two examples of her work on these
topics. She has also produced ethnographic films, including the 2012 film Losing Knowledge: 50
Years of Change, which explores the ways in which indigenous knowledge is vanishing. Dr. Nader is
a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and has received numerous awards and
honors including the CoGEA Award from the American Anthropological Association and the Harry
J. Kalven, Jr. award from the Law and Society Association.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ahmed, Akbar. The Thistle and The Drone: How America’s War on Terror Became a Global War on Tribal
Islam. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 2013.
Asad, Talal. Anthropology and the Colonial Encounter. London: Ithaca Press, 1973.

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Asquith, Pamela. “Japanese Science and Western Hegemonies: Primatology and the Limits Set to
Questions.” In Naked Science: Anthropological Inquiry into Boundaries, Power and Knowledge, edited by
Laura Nader, 239–258. New York: Routledge, 1996.
Auge, Marc. A Sense for the Other: The Timeliness and Relevance of Anthropology, Translated by A. Jacob.
Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998.
Barth, Fredrik. Political Leadership Among Swat Pathans. London: The Athlone Press, 1995.
Bateson, Gregory. Naven: A Survey of the Problems Suggested by a Composite Picture of the Culture of a New
Guinea Tribe Drawn from Three Points of View. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1958.
Benedict, Ruth. Patterns of Culture. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1934.
Boas, Franz. “The History of Anthropology.” In Congress of Arts and Science, Universal Exposition St. Louis,
Vol. 5, edited by H.J. Rogers, 468–482. New York: Houghton Mifflin, and Company, 1905.
———. Race, Language, and Culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1940.
Bourgois, Philippe. In Search of Respect: Selling Crack in El Barrio. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1996.
Boyer, Dominic. “Energopolitics and the Anthropology of Energy.” Anthropology News 52, no. 5 (2011): 5–7.
Briggs, Charles and Clara Mantini-Briggs. Stories in Time of Cholera: Racial Profiling During a Medical
Nightmare. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003.
Coco, Linda. “Mortgaging Human Potential: Student Indebtedness and the Practices of the Neoliberal
State.” Southwestern Law Review 42, no. 3 (2013).
Cohen, Lawrence. No Aging in India: Alzheimer’s, the Bad Family, and Other Modern Things. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1998.
Collier, Jane F. Courtship and Marriage in Zinacantan, Chiapas, Mexico. New Orleans: Middle American
Research Institute, 1968.
Colson, Elizabeth. “The Social History of an Epidemic: HIV/AIDS in Gwembe Valley, Zambia.” In
Morality, Hope and Grief: Anthropologies of AIDS in Africa, edited by Hansjorg Dilger and Ute Luig,
127–147. New York, NY: Berghahn Books, 2010.
Du Bois, Cora. The People of Alor: A Social-Psychological Study of an East Indian Island. Minneapolis: The
University of Minnesota Press, 1944.
Doukas, Dimitra. Worked Over: The Corporate Sabotage of an American Community. Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 2003.
Evans-Pritchard, E.E. Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic among the Azande. Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1937.
Gonzalez, Roberto and Laura Nader. Losing Knowledge: 50 Years of Change. Film. Produced and Directed by
Roberto Gonzalez and Laura Nader. Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Media, 2012.
Graeber, David. Debt: The First 5,000 Years. New York: Melville House, 2011.
———. Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value: The False Coin of our Own Dreams. New York: Palgrave,
2001.
———. The Utopia of Rules: On Technology, Stupidity, and the Secret Joys of Bureaucracy. Brooklyn, NY:
Melville House, 2015.
Harms, Erik. Saigon’s Edge: On the Margins of Ho Chi Min City. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press, 2011.
Hertz, Ellen. The Trading Crowd: An Ethnography of the Shanghai Stock Market. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998.
Holston, James. The Modernist City: An Anthropological Critique of Brasilia. Chicago: Chicago University
Press, 1989.
Hymes, Dell, ed. Reinventing Anthropology. New York: Pantheon Books, 1972.
Kehoe, Alice B. The Land of Prehistory: A Critical History of American Archeology. New York: Routledge,
1998.
Kluckhohn, Clyde. Mirror for Man: The Relation of Anthropology to Modern Life. New York: Whittlesey
House, 1949.
Lasch-Quin, Elisabeth. Race Experts: How Racial Etiquette, Sensitivity Training and New Age Therapy
Hijacked the Civil Rights Revolution. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2001.
Leach, Edmund. The Political Systems of Highland Burma: A Study of Kachin Social Structure. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1954.

The Development of Anthropological Ideas

19

Lock, Margaret. Encounters with Aging: Mythologies of Menopause in Japan and North America. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1993.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. Argonauts of the Western Pacific. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., 1922.
———. Coral Gardens and Their Magic. New York: American Book Co., 1935.
———. Crime and Custom in a Savage Society. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1926.
———. The Sexual Life of the Savages in Northwestern Melanesia. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World,
1929.
Masco, Joseph. The Nuclear Borderlands: The Manhattan Project in Post-Cold War New Mexico. New Jersey:
Princeton University Press, 2006.
Maurer, Bill. Mutual Life, Limited: Islamic Banking, Alternative Currencies, Lateral Reason. Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2005.
Mead, Margaret. Coming of Age in Samoa. New York: Blue Ribbon Books, 1928.
Merry, Sally. Colonizing Hawaii’: The Cultural Power of Law. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2002.
Mintz, Sidney. “‘Sows’ Ears and Silver Linings:’ The 1996 AAA Distinguished Lecture,” Current
Anthropology 41, no. 2 (2000): 169–89.
Morgan, Lewis Henry. League of the Ho-dé-no-sau-nee, or Iroquois. New York: Sage & Brother, 1851.
———. Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian
Institution, 1871.
Nadel, S.F. A Black Byzantium: Kingdom of Nupe in Nigeria. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1942.
Nader, Laura. “The ADR Explosion: The Implications of Rhetoric in Legal Reform,” in Windsor Yearbook of
Access to Justice, 269–291. Ontario: University of Windsor, 1989.
———. “Civilization and Its Negotiators.” In Understanding Disputes: The Politics of Law, edited by Pat
Kaplan. Oxford: Berg Publishers, 1995.
———. “Controlling Processes: Tracing the Dynamic Components of Power and Knowledge.” Current
Anthropology 38, no. 5 (1997): 711–737.
———. Culture and Dignity. New York: Wiley-Blackwell Publishers, 2013.
———. The Energy Reader. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell Publishers, 2010.
———. Harmony Ideology: Justice and Control in a Zapotec Mountain Village. Stanford: Stanford University
Press, 1990.
———. The Life of the Law: Anthropological Projects. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2002.
———. Naked Science: Anthropological Inquiry into Boundaries, Power and Knowledge. New York:
Routledge, 1996.
———. “Up the Anthropologist: Perspectives Gained from Studying Up.” In Reinventing Anthropology,
edited by Dell H. Hymes, 284–311. New York: Pantheon Books, 1972.
———. What the Rest Think of the West: Since 600 A.D. Oakland: University of California Press, 2015.
Nash, June. We Eat the Mines and the Mines Eat Us: Dependency and Exploitation in Bolivian Tin Mines. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1979.
Ong, Aihwa. Buddha Is Hiding: Refugees, Citizenship, the New America. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 2003.
Ong, Aihwa and Stephen J. Collier, eds. Global Assemblages: Technology, Politics, and Ethics as
Anthropological Problems. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2005.
Ou, Jay. “Native Americans and the Monitored Retrievable Storage Plan for Nuclear Wastes: Hate
capitalism, Negotiation, and Controlling Processes.” In Essays on Controlling Processes, edited by Laura
Nader. Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers, No. 80, 1996.
Pauketat, Timothy R. Cahokia: Ancient America’s Great City on the Mississippi. New York: Viking-Penguin,
2009.
Price, David. Anthropological Intelligence: The Deployment and Neglect of American Anthropology in the Second
World War. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2008.
Richards, Paul. Indigenous Agricultural Revolution: Ecology and Food Crops in West Africa. London: Westview
Press, 1985.
Riles, Annelise. Collateral Knowledge: Legal Reasoning in the Global Financial Markets. Chicago: Chicago
University Press, 2011.

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Sapir, Edward. Language: An Introduction to the Study of Speech. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company,
1921.
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy. Death Without Weeping: The Violence of Everyday Life in Brazil. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press, 1992.
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy and Loïc Wacquant, eds. Commodifying Bodies. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications
Inc., 2002.
Shore, Chris and Susan Wright, eds. Anthropology of Policy: Critical Perspectives on Governance and Power.
New York: Routledge, 1997.
Strauss, Sarah, Stephanie Rupp and Thomas Love, eds. Cultures of Energy: Power, Practices, and Technologies.
Walnut Creek: Left Coast Press, 2013.
Stryker, Rachel and Roberto Gonzales. Up, Down and Sideways: Anthropologists Trace the Pathways of Power.
New York: Berghahn Books, 2014.
Tambiah, Stanley. Magic, Science, Religion and the Scope of Rationality. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1990.
Tett, Gillian. Fool’s Gold: The Inside Story of J.P. Morgan and How Wall Street Greed Corrupted Its Bold
Dream and Created a Financial Catastrophe. New York: Free Press, 2010.
———. The Silo Effect: The Peril of Expertise and the Promise of Break Down Barriers. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 2015.
Thu, Kendall and E. Paul Durrenberger, eds. Pigs, Profits, and Rural Communities. Albany: State University
of New York, 1998.
Traweek, Sharon. Beamtimes and Lifetimes: The World of High Energy Physicists. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1988.
Tylor, Edward. Primitive Culture. London: John Murray, 1871.
Wallace, Anthony F.C. Rockdale: The Growth of an American Village in the Early Industrial Revolution. New
York: Knopf, 1978.
Warde, Ibrahim. Islamic Banking in the Global Economy. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2000.
Whitehead, Neil and Sverker Finnstrom, eds. Virtual War and Magical Death: Technologies and Imaginaries
for Terror and Killing. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2013.
Whiting, Beatrice B. and John W.M. Whiting. Six Cultures: Studied of Child Rearing. New York: Wiley,
1963.
Whitmarsh, Ian and David Jones, eds. What’s the Use of Race? Modern Governance and the Biology of
Difference. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010.
Wolf, Eric R. “They Divide and Subdivide, and Call It Anthropology,” The New York Times, November 30,
1980, E9.
Zulaika, Joseba. Terrorism: The Self-fulfilling Prophecy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2009.

NOTES
1. Edward Burnett Tylor, Primitive Culture (London: John Murray, 1871), 1.
2. Franz Boas, “The History of Anthropology,” in Congress of Arts and Science, Universal Exposition St. Louis, Vol. 5 (New York:
Houghton, Mifflin and Company, 1905), 451.
3. Laura Nader, Culture and Dignity (New York: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013), 51.
4. Sidney Mintz, “‘Sows’ Ears and Silver Linings:’ The 1996 AAA Distinguished Lecture,” Current Anthropology 41 (2):
169–89.
5. Antonio De Lauri, The Politics of Humanitarianism: Power, Ideology and Aid (London: Tauris, 2015).
6. See for example Rachel Stryker and Roberto Gonzales, Up, Down and Sideways: Anthropologists Trace the Pathways of Power
(New York: Berghahn Books, 2014).
7. See for example Ashraf Ghani, “Writing a History of Power: An Examination of Eric R. Wolf ’s Anthropological Quest” in
Articulating Hidden Histories: Exploring the Influence of Eric R. Wolf, ed. Jane Schneider and Rayna Rapp (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1995).
8. See for example Hugh Gusterson, Nuclear Rites: A Weapons Laboratory at the End of the Cold War (Berkeley, CA: University
of California Press, 1996) and Joseph Masco, The Nuclear Borderlands: The Manhattan Project in Post-Cold War New Mexico
(New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 2006).
9. Eric R. Wolf, “They Divide and Subdivide, and Call It Anthropology,” The New York Times, November 30, 1980, E9.

The Development of Anthropological Ideas

21

10. See for example Ellen Hertz, The Trading Crowd: An Ethnography of the Shanghai Stock Market (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998) and Gillian Tett, Fool’s Gold: The Inside Story of J.P. Morgan and How Wall Street Greed Corrupted Its
Bold Dream and Created a Financial Catastrophe (New York: Free Press, 2010).
11. Annelise Riles, Collateral Knowledge: Legal Reasoning in the Global Financial Markets (Chicago: Chicago University Press,
2011).
12. See for example Bill Maurer, Mutual Life, Limited: Islamic Banking, Alternative Currencies, Lateral Reason (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2005) and Ibrahim Warde, Islamic Banking in the Global Economy. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2000).
13. Charles Brigg and Clara Mantini-Briggs. Stories in the Time of Cholera: Racial Profiling during a Medical Nightmare (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003) and Chris Shore and Susan Wright, eds., Anthropology of Policy: Critical Perspectives
on Governance and Power (New York: Routledge, 1997).
14. Margaret Lock, Encounters with Aging: Mythologies of Menopause in Japan and North America (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993) and Lawrence Cohen, No Aging in India: Alzheimer’s, the Bad Family, and Other Modern Things (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1998).
15. Laura Nader, The Energy Reader (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell Publishers, 2010).
16. The examples here come from several publications by Laura Nader. See Laura Nader, “The ADR Explosion: The Implications of Rhetoric in Legal Reform,” in Windsor Yearbook of Access to Justice (Ontario: University of Windsor, 1989),
269–291; Harmony Ideology: Justice and Control in a Zapotec Mountain Village (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1990);
“Civilization and Its Negotiators” in Understanding Disputes: The Politics of Law, ed. Pat Kaplan (Oxford: Berg Publishers,
1995); “Controlling Processes: Tracing the Dynamic Components of Power and Knowledge” Current Anthropology 38 (1997):
711–737. For further discussion of Native American negotiations with the government over nuclear waste, see Jay Ou, “Native
Americans and the Monitored Retrievable Storage Plan for Nuclear Wastes: Hate Capitalism, Negotiation, and Controlling
Processes,” in Essays on Controlling Processes, ed. Laura Nader. (Kroeber Anthropological Society Papers, No. 80, 1996).
17. Marc Auge, A Sense for the Other: The Timeliness and Relevance of Anthropology, A. Jacob, trans. (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1998).
18. Linda Coco, “Mortgaging Human Potential: Student Indebtedness and the Practices of the Neoliberal State,” Southwestern
Law Review, 42 (3) 2013.
19. The two examples cited here are Sharon Traweek, Beamtimes and Lifetimes: The World of High Energy Physicists (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1988) and Pamela Asquith, “Japanese Science and Western Hegemonies: Primatology and the
Limits Set to Questions,” in Naked Science: Anthropological Inquiry into Boundaries, Power and Knowledge, ed. Laura Nader
(New York: Routledge, 1996).
20. Paul Richards, Indigenous Agricultural Revolution: Ecology and Food Crops in West Africa (London: Westview Press, 1985).
21. Kendall Thu and E. Paul Durrenberger, eds. Pigs, Profits, and Rural Communities (Albany: State University of New York
Press, 1998), 2.
22. Stanley Tambiah, Magic, Science, Religion and the Scope of Rationality (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
23. Laura Nader, What the Rest Think of the West: Since 600 A.D. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2015).
24. Discussion of Oaxaca, Mexico is found in Laura Nader, Harmony Ideology: Justice and Control in a Zapotec Mountain Village (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1990). The Chiapas, Mexico example is from Jane F. Collier, Courtship and Marriage
in Zinacantan, Chiapas, Mexico (New Orleans: Middle American Research Institute, 1968). Analysis of these dynamics in
Hawaii is found in Sally Merry, Colonizing Hawaii’: The Cultural Power of Law (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000).
25. Laura Nader, The Life of the Law: Anthropological Projects (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002).
26. Neil Whitehead and Sverker Finnstrom, eds. Virtual War and Magical Death: Technologies and Imaginaries for Terror and
Killing (Durham: Duke University Press, 2013).
27. See for example Elizabeth Colson, “The Social History of an Epidemic: HIV/AIDS in Gwembe Valley, Zambia,” in
Morality, Hope and Grief: Anthropologies of AIDS in Africa, ed. Hansjorg Dilger and Ute Luig, 127–147 (New York: Bergahn
Books, 2010). Additional perspectives on Colson’s work can be found in Elizabeth Colson, “Anthropology and a Lifetime of
Observation,” an oral history conducted in 2000–2001 by Suzanne Reiss. Regional Oral History Office (The Bancroft Library:
University of California, Berkeley, 2002).
28. James Holston, The Modernist City: An Anthropological Critique of Brasilia (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1989).
29. For more information about Cahokia, see Alice Kehoe, The Land of Prehistory: A Critical History of American Archeology
(New York: Routledge, 1998) and Timothy R. Pauketat, Cahokia: Ancient America’s Great City on the Mississippi (New York:
Viking-Penguin, 2009).
30. Paul Farmer, Aids and Accusation: Haiti and the Geography of Blame (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992).
31. See for example Dell Hymes, ed., Reinventing Anthropology.
32. See for example Alan Dundes, The Study of Folklore (Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1965) and International Folkloristics:
Classical Contributions by the Founders of Folklore (Lanham MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1999).

The Culture Concept
Emily Cowall, McMaster University
cowallee@mcmaster.ca

Priscilla Medeiros, McMaster University
medeirp@mcmaster.ca

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

THOUGHTS ON CULTURE OVER A CUP
OF COFFEE

• Describe the role that early
anthropologists Sir James Frazer and
Sir E. B. Tylor played in defining the
concept of culture in anthropology.

Do you think culture can be studied in a coffee shop?
Have you ever gone to a coffee shop, sat down with a book
or laptop, and listened to conversations around you? If you
just answered yes, in a way, you were acting as an anthropologist. Anthropologists like to become a part of their surroundings, observing and participating with people doing
day-to-day things. As two anthropologists writing a chapter
about the culture concept, we wanted to know what other
people thought about culture. What better place to meet
than at our community coffee shop?
Our small coffee shop was filled with the aroma of coffee
beans, and the voices of people competed with the sound
of the coffee grinder. At the counter a chalkboard listed the
daily specials of sandwiches and desserts. Coffee shops have
their own language, with vocabulary such as macchiato and
latte. It can feel like entering a foreign culture. We found
a quiet corner that would allow us to observe other people, and hopefully identify a few to engage with, without
disturbing them too much with our conversation. We understand the way that anthropologists think about culture,
but we were also wondering what the people sitting around
us might have to say. Would having a definition of culture
really mean something to the average coffee-shop patron? Is
a definition important? Do people care? We were very lucky
that morning because sitting next to us was a man working
on his laptop, a service dog lying at his feet.

• Compare and contrast the ideas of
ethnocentrism and cultural relativism.

• Identify the differences between
armchair anthropology and
participant-observer fieldwork and
explain how Bronislaw Malinowski
contributed to the development of
anthropological fieldwork techniques.
• Identify the contributions Franz
Boas and his students made to the
development of new theories about
culture.
• Assess some of the ethical issues
that can arise from anthropological
research.

Meeting Bob at the Coffee Shop
Having an animal in a food-service business is not usually allowed, but in our community people can have their
service dogs with them. This young golden retriever wore
a harness that displayed a sign stating the owner was diabetic. This dog was very friendly; in fact, she wanted to be
touched and would not leave us alone, wagging her tail and
pushing her nose against our hands. This is very unusual

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

because many service dogs, like seeing eye dogs, are not to be touched. Her owner, Bob, let us know
that his dog must be friendly and not afraid to approach people: if Bob needs help in an emergency,
such as a diabetic coma, the dog must go to someone else for help.
We enjoyed meeting Bob and his dog, and asked if he would like to answer our question: what is
culture? Bob was happy to share his thoughts and ideas.
Bob feels that language is very important to cultural identity. He believes that if one loses language,
one also loses important information about wildlife, indigenous plants, and ways of being. As a member of a First Nations tribe, Bob believes that words have deep cultural meaning. Most importantly,
he views English as the language of commerce. Bob is concerned with the influence of Western consumerism and how it changes cultural identity.
Bob is not an anthropologist. He was just a person willing to share his ideas. Without knowing
it though, Bob had described some of the elements of anthropology. He had focused on the importance of language and the loss of tradition when it is no longer spoken, and he had recognized that
language is a part of cultural identity. He was worried about globalization and consumerism changing
cultural values.
With Bob’s opinions in mind, we started thinking about how we, two cultural anthropologists,
would answer the same question about culture. Our training shapes our understandings of the question, yet we know there is more to culture concepts than a simple definition. Why is asking the
culture concept question important to anthropologists? Does it matter? Is culture something that we
can understand without studying it formally?
In this chapter, we will illustrate how anthropology developed the culture concept. Our journey
will explore the importance of storytelling and the way that anthropology became a social science.
This will include learning about the work of important scholars, how anthropology emerged in
North America, and an overview of the importance of ethics.

STORIES AS A REFLECTION ON CULTURE
Stories are told in every culture and often teach a moral lesson to young children. Fables are
similar, but often set an example for people to live by or describe what to do when in a dangerous
situation. They can also be a part of traditions, help to preserve ways of life, or explain mysteries.
Storytelling takes many different forms such as tall tales and folktales. These are for entertainment
or to discuss problems encountered in life. Both are also a form of cultural preservation, a way to
communicate morals or values to the next generation. Stories can also be a form of social control over
certain activities or customs that are not allowed in a society.
A fable becomes a tradition by being retold and accepted by others in the community. Different
cultures have very similar stories sharing common themes. One of the most common themes is the
battle between good and evil. Another is the story of the quest. The quest often takes the character
to distant lands, filled with real-life situations, opportunities, hardships, and heartaches. In both of
these types of stories, the reader is introduced to the anthropological concept known as the Other.
What exactly is the Other? The Other is a term that has been used to describe people whose customs,
beliefs, or behaviors are different from one’s own.
Can a story explain the concept of the Other? Jonathan Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels is about four
different voyages that Gulliver undertakes. His first adventure is the most well-known; in the story,
Lemuel Gulliver is a surgeon who plans a sea voyage when his business fails. During a storm at sea,
he is shipwrecked, and he awakens to find himself bound and secured by a group of captors, the
Lilliputians, who are six inches tall. Gulliver, having what Europeans consider a normal body height,

The Culture Concept

3

suddenly becomes a giant. During this adventure, Gulliver is seen as an outsider, a stranger with
different features and language. Gulliver becomes the Other.
What lessons about culture can we learn from Gulliver’s Travels? Swift’s story offers lessons about
cultural differences, conflicts occurring in human society, and the balance of power. It also provides
an important example of the Other. The Other is a matter of perspective in this story: Gulliver thinks
the Lilliputians are strange and unusual. To Gulliver, the Lilliputians are the Other, but the Lilliputians equally see Gulliver as the Other—he is a their captive and is a rare species of man because of
his size.
The themes in Gulliver’s Travels describe different cultures and aspects of storytelling. The story
uses language, customary behaviors, and the conflict between different groups to explore ideas of the
exotic and strange. The story is framed as an adventure, but is really about how similar cultures can
be. In the end, Gulliver becomes a member of another cultural group, learning new norms, attitudes,
and behaviors. At the same time, he wants to colonize them, a reflection of his former cultural self.
Stories are an important part of culture, and when used to pass on traditions or cultural values,
they can connect people to the past. Stories are also a way to validate religious, social, political, and
economic practices from one generation to another. Stories are important because they are used in
some societies to apply social pressure, to keep people in line, and are part of shaping the way that
people think and behave.

Anthropologists as Storytellers
People throughout recorded history have relied on storytelling as a way to share cultural details.
When early anthropologists studied people from other civilizations, they relied on the written ac-

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

counts and opinions of others; they presented facts and developed their stories, about other cultures
based solely on information gathered by others. These scholars did not have any direct contact with
the people they were studying. This approach has come to be known as armchair anthropology.
Simply put, if a culture is viewed from a distance (as from an armchair), the anthropologist tends to
measure that culture from his or her own vantage point and to draw comparisons that place the anthropologist’s culture as superior to the one being studied. This point of view is also called ethnocentrism. Ethnocentrism is an attitude based on the idea that one’s own group or culture is better than
any other.
Early anthropological studies often presented a biased ethnocentric interpretation of the human
condition. For example, ideas about racial superiority emerged as a result of studying the cultures
that were encountered during the colonial era. During the colonial era from the sixteenth century
to the mid–twentieth century, European countries (Britain, France, Germany, Belgium, Dutch Republic, Spain, Portugal) asserted control over land (Asia, Africa, the Americas) and people. European
ideas of wrong and right were used as a measuring stick to judge the way that people in different
cultures lived. These other cultures were considered primitive, which was an ethnocentric term
for people who were non-European. It is also a
negative term suggesting that indigenous cultures had a lack of technological advancement.
Colonizers thought that they were superior to
the Other in every way.
Armchair anthropologists were unlikely to be
aware of their ethnocentric ideas because they
did not visit the cultures they studied. Scottish
social anthropologist Sir James Frazer is wellknown for his 1890 work The Golden Bough: A
Study of Comparative Religions. Its title was later
changed to A Study in Magic and Religion, and it
was one of the first books to describe and record
magical and religious beliefs of different culture
groups around the world. Yet, this book was
not the outcome of extensive study in the field.
Instead, Frazer relied on the accounts of others
who had traveled, such as scholars, missionaries,
and government officials, to formulate his study.
Another example of anthropological writing without the use of fieldwork is Sir E. B. Tylor’s 1871
work Primitive Culture. Tylor, who went on to become the first professor of anthropology at Oxford
University in 1896, was an important influence in the development of sociocultural anthropology
as a separate discipline. Tylor defined culture as “that complex whole which includes knowledge,
belief, art, law, morals, custom, and any other capabilities and habits acquired by man as a member
of society.”1 His definition of culture is still used frequently today and remains the foundation of the
culture concept in anthropology.
Tylor’s definition of culture was influenced by the popular theories and philosophies of his time,
including the work of Charles Darwin. Darwin formulated the theory of evolution by natural selection in his 1859 book On the Origin of Species. Scholars of the time period, including Tylor, believed

The Culture Concept

5

that cultures were subject to evolution just like
plants and animals and thought that cultures
developed over time from simple to complex.
Many nineteenth century anthropologists believed that cultures evolved through distinct
stages. They labeled these stages with terms such
as savagery, barbarism, and civilization.2 These
theories of cultural evolutionism would later be
successfully refuted, but conflicting views about
cultural evolutionism in the nineteenth century highlight an ongoing nature versus nurture
debate about whether biology shapes behavior
more than culture.
Both Frazer and Tylor contributed important
and foundational studies even though they never
went into the field to gather their information.
Armchair anthropologists were important in the
development of anthropology as a discipline in
the late nineteenth century because although
these early scholars were not directly experiencing the cultures they were studying, their work
did ask important questions that could ultimately only be answered by going into the field.

Anthropologists as Cultural Participants
The armchair approach as a way to study culture changed when scholars such as Bronislaw Malinowski, Alfred Radcliffe-Brown, Franz Boas, and Margaret Mead took to the field and studied by
being participants and observers. As they did, fieldwork became the most important tool anthropologists used to understand the “complex whole” of culture.
Bronislaw Malinowski, a Polish anthropologist, was greatly influenced by the work of Frazer.
However, unlike the armchair anthropology approach Frazer used in writing The Golden Bough,
Malinowski used more innovative ethnographic techniques, and his fieldwork took him off the veranda to study different cultures. The off the veranda approach is different from armchair anthropology because it includes active participant-observation: traveling to a location, living among people,
and observing their day-to-day lives.
What happened when Malinowski came off the veranda? The Argonauts of the Western Pacific
(1922) was considered the first modern ethnography and redefined the approach to fieldwork. This
book is part of Malinowski’s trilogy on the Trobriand Islanders. Malinowski lived with them and
observed life in their villages. By living among the islanders, Malinowski was able to learn about their
social life, food and shelter, sexual behaviors, community economics, patterns of kinship, and family.3
Malinowski went “native” to some extent during his fieldwork with the Trobriand Islanders. Going native means to become fully integrated into a cultural group: taking leadership positions and
assuming key roles in society; entering into a marriage or spousal contract; exploring sexuality or
fully participating in rituals. When an anthropologist goes native, the anthropologist is personally

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

involved with locals. In The Argonauts of the Western Pacific, Malinowski suggested that other anthropologists should “grasp the native’s point of view, his relations to life, to realize his vision of his
world.”4 However, as we will see later in this chapter, Malinowski’s practice of going native presented
problems from an ethical point of view. Participant-observation is a method to gather ethnographic
data, but going native places both the anthropologist and the culture group at risk by blurring the
lines on both sides of the relationship.

THE DEVELOPMENT OF THEORIES OF CULTURE
Anthropology in Europe
The discipline of cultural anthropology developed somewhat differently in Europe and North
America, in particular in the United States, during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries with
each region contributing new dimensions to the concept of culture. Many European anthropologists
were particularly interested in questions about how societies were structured and how they remained
stable over time. This highlighted emerging recognition that culture and society are not the same.
Culture had been defined by Tylor as knowledge, beliefs, and customs, but a society is more than just
shared ideas or habits. In every society, people are linked to one another through social institutions
such as families, political organizations, and businesses. Anthropologists across Europe often focused
their research on understanding the form and function of these social institutions.
European anthropologists developed theories of functionalism to explain how social institutions
contribute to the organization of society and the maintenance of social order. Bronislaw Malinowski
believed that cultural traditions were developed as a response to specific human needs such as food,
comfort, safety, knowledge, reproduction, and economic livelihood. One function of educational
institutions like schools, for instance, is to provide knowledge that prepares people to obtain jobs and
make contributions to society. Although he preferred the term structural-functionalism, the British

The Culture Concept

7

anthropologist A.R. Radcliffe-Brown was also interested in the way that social structures functioned
to maintain social stability in a society over time.5 He suggested that in many societies it was the
family that served as the most important social structure because family relationships determined
much about an individual’s social, political, and economic relationships and these patterns were repeated from one generation to the next. In a family unit in which the father is the breadwinner and
the mother stays home to raise the children, the social and economic roles of both the husband and
the wife will be largely defined by their specific responsibilities within the family. If their children
grow up to follow the same arrangement, these social roles will be continued in the next generation.
In the twentieth century, functionalist approaches also became popular in North American anthropology, but eventually fell out of favor. One of the biggest critiques of functionalism is that it
views cultures as stable and orderly and ignores or cannot explain social change. Functionalism also
struggles to explain why a society develops one particular kind of social institution instead of another.
Functionalist perspectives did contribute to the development of more sophisticated concepts of culture by establishing the importance of social institutions in holding societies together. While defining
the division between what is cultural and what is social continues to be complex, functionalist theory
helped to develop the concept of culture by demonstrating that culture is not just a set of ideas or
beliefs, but consists of specific practices and social institutions that give structure to daily life and
allow human communities to function.

Anthropology in the United States
During the development of anthropology in North America (Canada, United States, and Mexico),
the significant contribution made by the American School of Anthropology in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries was the concept of cultural relativism, which is the idea that cultures cannot
be objectively understood since all humans see
the world through the lens of their own culture.
Cultural relativism is different than ethnocentrism because it emphasizes understanding culture from an insider’s view. The focus on culture,
along with the idea of cultural relativism, distinguished cultural anthropology in the United
States from social anthropology in Europe.
The participant-observation method of fieldwork was a revolutionary change to the practice
of anthropology, but at the same time it presented problems that needed to be overcome. The
challenge was to move away from ethnocentrism,
race stereotypes, and colonial attitudes, and to
move forward by encouraging anthropologists to
maintain high ethical standards and open minds.
Franz Boas, an American anthropologist, is
acknowledged for redirecting American anthropologists away from cultural evolutionism and
toward cultural relativism. Boas first studied
physical science at the University of Kiel in Ger-

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

many. Because he was a trained scientist, he was familiar with using empirical methods as a way to
study a subject. Empirical methods are based on evidence that can be tested using observation and
experiment.
In 1883, Franz Boas went on a geographical expedition to Baffin Island in the Canadian Arctic.
The Central Eskimo (1888) details his time spent on Baffin Island studying the culture and language
of the central Eskimo (Inuit) people. He studied every aspect of their culture such as tools, clothing,
and shelters. This study was Boas’ first major contribution to the American school of anthropology
and convinced him that cultures could only be understood through extensive field research. As he
observed on Baffin Island, cultural ideas and practices are shaped through interactions with the
natural environment. The cultural traditions of the Inuit were suited for the environment in which
they lived. This work led him to promote cultural relativism: the principle that a culture must be
understood on its own terms rather than compared to an outsider’s standard. This was an important
turning point in correcting the challenge of ethnocentrism in ethnographic fieldwork.6
Boas is often considered the originator of American anthropology because he trained the first
generation of American anthropologists including Ruth Benedict, Margaret Mead, and Alfred Kroeber. Using a commitment to cultural relativism as a starting point, these students continued to refine
the concept of culture. Ruth Benedict, one of Boas’ first female students, used cultural relativism as
a starting point for investigating the cultures of the American northwest and southwest. Her best-selling book Patterns of Culture (1934) emphasized that culture gives people coherent patterns for thinking and behaving. She argued that culture affects individuals psychologically, shaping individual
personality traits and leading the members of a culture to exhibit similar traits such as a tendency
toward aggression, or calmness.
Benedict was a professor at Columbia University and in turn greatly influenced her student Margaret Mead, who went on to become one of the most well-known female American cultural anthropologists. Mead was a pioneer in conducting ethnographic research at a time when the discipline
was predominately male. Her 1925 research on adolescent girls on the island of Ta‘ū in the Samoan Islands, published as Coming of Age in Samoa
(1928), revealed that teenagers in Samoa did not
experience the same stress and emotional difficulties as those in the United States. The book was an
important contribution to the nature versus nurture debate, providing an argument that learned
cultural roles were more important than biology.
The book also reinforced the idea that individual emotions and personality traits are products of
culture.
Alfred Louis Kroeber, another student of Boas,
also shared the commitment to field research and
cultural relativism, but Kroeber was particularly
interested in how cultures change over time and
influence one another. Through publications like
The Nature of Culture (1952), Kroeber examined
the historical processes that led cultures to emerge
as distinct configurations as well as the way cultures could become more similar through the

The Culture Concept

9

spread or diffusion of cultural traits. Kroeber was also interested in language and the role it plays in
transmitting culture. He devoted much of his career to studying Native American languages in an
attempt to document these languages before they disappeared.
Anthropologists in the United States have used cultural relativism to add depth to the concept
of culture in several ways. Tylor had defined culture as including knowledge, belief, art, law, morals, custom, capabilities and habits. Boas and his students added to this definition by emphasizing
the importance of enculturation, the process of learning culture, in the lives of individuals. Benedict, Mead, and others established that through enculturation culture shapes individual identity,
self-awareness, and emotions in fundamental ways. They also emphasized the need for holism, approaches to research that considered the entire context of a society including its history.
Kroeber and others also established the importance of language as an element of culture and documented the ways in which language was used to communicate complex ideas. By the late twentieth
century, new approaches to symbolic anthropology put language at the center of analysis. Later on,
Clifford Geertz, the founding member of postmodernist anthropology, noted in his book The Interpretation of Cultures (1973) that culture should not be seen as something that was “locked inside
people’s heads.” Instead, culture was publically communicated through speech and other behaviors.
Culture, he concluded, is “an historically transmitted pattern of meanings embodied in symbols, a
system of inherited conceptions expressed in symbolic forms by means of which men communicate,
perpetuate, and develop their knowledge about and their attitudes toward life.”7 This definition,
which continues to be influential today, reflects the influence of many earlier efforts to refine the
concept of culture in American anthropology.

ETHICAL ISSUES IN TRUTH TELLING
As anthropologists developed more sophisticated concepts of culture, they also gained a greater
understanding of the ethical challenges associated with anthropological research. Because participantobservation fieldwork brings anthropologists into close relationships with the people they study, many
complicated issues can arise. Cultural relativism is a perspective that encourages anthropologists to
show respect to members of other cultures, but it was not until after World War II that the profession
of anthropology recognized a need to develop formal standards of professional conduct.
The Nuremberg trials, which began in 1946 Nuremberg, Germany, were conducted under the
direction of France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom, and the United States, prosecuted
members of the Nazi regime for war crimes. In addition to military and political figures, physicians
and scientists were also prosecuted for unethical human experimentation and mass murder. The
trials demonstrated that physicians and other scientists could be dangerous if they used their skills
for abusive or exploitative goals. The Nuremberg Code that emerged from the trials is considered a
landmark document in medical and research ethics. It established principles for the ethical treatment
of the human subjects involved in any medical or scientific research.
Because of events such as the Nuremberg trials, many universities embraced research ethical
guidelines for the treatment of human subjects. Anthropologists and students who work in universities
where these guidelines exist are obliged to follow these rules. The American Anthropological
Association (AAA), along with many anthropology organizations in other countries, developed
codes of ethics describing specific expectations for anthropologists engaged in research in a variety of
settings. The principles in the AAA code of ethics include: do no harm; be open and honest regarding
your work; obtain informed consent and necessary permissions; ensure the vulnerable populations in

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

every study are protected from competing ethical obligations; make your results accessible; protect
and preserve your records; and maintain respectful and ethical professional relationships. These
principles sound simple, but can be complicated in practice.

Bronislaw Malinowski
The career of Bronislaw Malinowski provides an example of how investigations of culture can lead
anthropologists into difficult ethical areas. As discussed above, Malinowski is widely regarded as a
leading figure in the history of anthropology. He initiated the practice of participant-observation
fieldwork and published several highly regarded books including The Argonauts of the Western
Pacific. Following his death, the private diary he kept while conducting fieldwork was discovered
and published as A Diary in the Strictest Sense of the Term (1967). The diary described Malinowski’s
feelings of loneliness and isolation, but also included a great deal of information about his sexual
fantasies as well his some insensitive and contemptuous opinions about the Trobriand Islanders.
The diary provided valuable insight into the mind of an important ethnographer, but also raised
questions about the extent to which his personal feelings, including bias and racism, were reflected
in his official conclusions.
Most anthropologists keep diaries or daily notes as a means of keeping track of the research project,
but these records are almost never made public. Because Malinowski’s diary was published after his
death, he could not explain why he wrote what he did, or assess the extent to which he was able to
separate the personal from the professional. Which of these books best reflects the truth about
Malinowski’s interaction with the Trobriand Islanders? This rare insight into the private life of a field
researcher demonstrates that even when anthropologists are acting within the boundaries of
professional ethics, they still struggle to set aside their own ethnocentric attitudes and prejudices.

Napoleon Chagnon
A more serious and complicated incident concerned research conducted among the Yanomami,
an indigenous group living in the Amazon rainforest in Brazil and Venezuela. Starting in the 1960s,
the anthropologist Napoleon Chagnon and James
Neel, a geneticist, carried out research among the
Yanomami. Neel was interested in studying the
effects of radiation released by nuclear explosions
on people living in remote areas. Chagnon was
investigating theories about the role of violence in
Yanomami society. In 2000, an American journalist,
Patrick Tierney, published a book about Chagnon
and Neel’s research: Darkness in El Dorado: How
Scientists and Journalists Devastated the Amazon. The
book contained numerous stunning allegations,
including a claim that the pair had deliberately
infected the Yanomami with measles, starting an
epidemic that killed thousands of people. The book
also claimed that Neel had conducted medical
experiments without the consent of the Yanomami

The Culture Concept

11

and that Chagnon had deliberately created conflicts between Yanomami groups so he could study
the resulting violence.
These allegations were brought to the attention of the American Anthropological Association,
and a number of inquiries were eventually conducted. James Neel was deceased, but Napoleon
Chagnon steadfastly denied the allegations. In 2002, the AAA issued their report; Chagnon was
judged to have misrepresented the violent nature of Yanomami culture in ways that caused them
harm and to have failed to obtain proper consent for his research. However, Chagnon continued to
reject these conclusions and complained that the process used to evaluate the evidence was unfair.
In 2005, the AAA rescinded its own conclusion, citing problems with the investigation process. The
results of several years of inquiry into the situation satisfied few people. Chagnon was not definitively
pronounced guilty, nor was he exonerated. Years later, debate over this episode continues.8 The
controversy demonstrates the extent to which truth can be elusive in anthropological inquiry.
Although anthropologists should not be storytellers in the sense that they deliberately create fictions,
differences in perspective and theoretical orientation create unavoidable differences in the way
anthropologists interpret the same situation. Anthropologists must try to use their toolkit of theory
and methods to ensure that the stories they tell are truthful and represent the voice of the people
being studied using an ethical approach.

BACK IN THE COFFEE SHOP
This chapter has looked at some historic turning points in the way anthropologists have defined
culture. There is not one true, absolute definition of culture. Anthropologists respect traditions such
as language; the development of self, especially from infancy to adulthood; kinship; and the structure
of the social unit, or the strata of a person within their class structure; marriage, families, and rites of
passage; systems of belief; and ritual. However, anthropologists also look at change and the impact it
has on those traditions.
With globalization moving at a dramatic pace, and change unfolding daily, how will emerging
trends redefine the culture concept? For example, social media and the Internet connect the world
and have created new languages, relationships, and an online culture without borders. This leads to
the question: is digital, or cyber anthropology the future? Is the study of online cultures, which are
encountered largely through reading text, considered armchair or off the veranda research? Is the
cyber world a real or virtual culture? In some ways, addressing online cultures takes anthropology
back to its roots as anthropologists can explore new worlds without leaving home. At the same time,
cyberspaces and new technologies allow people to see, hear, and communicate with others around
the world in real time.
Back in the coffee shop, where we spent time with Bob, we discovered that he hoped to keep familiar aspects of his own culture, traditions such as language, social structure, and unique expressions
of values, alive. The question, what is culture, caused us to reflect on our own understandings of the
cultural self and the cultural Other, and on the importance of self and cultural awareness.

Emily
My cultural self has evolved from the first customary traditions of my childhood, yet my life with
the Inuit caused me to consider that I have similar values and community traits as my friends in the
North. My childhood was focused on caring, acceptance, and working together to achieve the neces-

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

sities of life. Life on the land with the Inuit was no different, and throughout the years, I have seen
how much we are the same, just living in different locations and circumstances. My anthropological
training has enriched my life experiences by teaching me to enjoy the world and its peoples. I have
also experienced being the cultural Other when working in the field, and this has always reminded me
that the cultural self and the cultural Other will always be in conflict with each other on both sides of
the experience.

Priscilla
Living with different indigenous tribes in Kenya gave me a chance to learn how communities
maintain their traditional culture and ways of living. I come from a Portuguese- Canadian family that
has kept strong ties to the culture and religion of our ancestors. Portuguese people believe storytelling
is a way to keep one’s traditions, cultural identity, indigenous knowledge, and language alive. When I
lived in Nairobi Province, Kenya, I discovered that people there had the same point of view. I found
it odd that people still define their identities by their cultural history. What I have learned by conducting cultural fieldwork is that the meanings of culture not only vary from one group to another,
but that all human societies define themselves through culture.

Our Final Reflection
Bob took us on a journey to understand what is at the heart of the culture concept. Clearly, the
culture concept does not follow a straight line. Scholars, storytellers, and the people one meets in
everyday life have something to say about the components of culture. The story that emerges from
different voices brings insight into what it is to be human. Defining the culture concept is like putting together a puzzle with many pieces. The puzzle of culture concepts is almost complete, but it is
not finished…yet.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. How did the armchair anthropology and the off the veranda approaches differ as methods to
study culture? What can be learned about a culture by experiencing it in person that cannot be
learned from reading about it?
2. Why is the concept of culture difficult to define? What do you think are the most important
elements of culture?
3. Why is it difficult to separate the “social” from the “cultural”? Do you think this is an important
distinction?
4. In the twenty-first century, people have much greater contact with members of other cultures
than they did in the past. Which topics or concerns should be priorities for future studies of
culture?

GLOSSARY
Armchair anthropology: an early and discredited method of anthropological research that did not
involve direct contact with the people studied.

The Culture Concept

13

Cultural determinism: the idea that behavioral differences are a result of cultural not racial or genetic causes.
Cultural evolutionism: a theory popular in nineteenth century anthropology suggesting that societies evolved through stages from simple to advanced. This theory was later shown to be incorrect.
Cultural relativism: the idea that we should seek to understand another person’s beliefs and behaviors from the perspective of their own culture and not our own.
Enculturation: the process of learning the characteristics and expectations of a culture or group
Ethnocentrism: the tendency to view one’s own culture as most important and correct and as the
stick by which to measure all other cultures.
Functionalism: an approach to anthropology developed in British anthropology that emphasized
the way that parts of a society work together to support the functioning of the whole.
Going native: becoming fully integrated into a cultural group through acts such as taking a leadership position, assuming key roles in society, entering into marriage, or other behaviors that incorporate an anthropologist into the society he or she is studying.
Holism: taking a broad view of the historical, environmental, and cultural foundations of behavior.
Kinship: blood ties, common ancestry, and social relationships that form families within human
groups.
Participant observation: a type of observation in which the anthropologist observes while participating in the same activities in which her informants are engaged.
Salvage anthropology: activities such as gathering artifacts, or recording cultural rituals with the
belief that a culture is about to disappear.
Structuralism: an approach to anthropology that focuses on the ways in which the customs or social
institutions in a culture contribute to the organization of society and the maintenance of social order.
The Other: a term that has been used to describe people whose customs, beliefs, or behaviors are
“different” from one’s own

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Dr. Emily Cowall is a cultural anthropologist and instructor in the department of Anthropology at
McMaster University, Canada; Medical Historian; and former regulated health practitioner in Ontario. Her primary academic research interests are focused on the cultural ethno-history of the Canadian Arctic. Emily moved to the Eastern Arctic in the 1980s, where she became integrated into community
life. Returning for community-based research projects from 2003 to
2011, her previous community relationships enabled the completion
of a landmark study examining the human geography and cultural impact of tuberculosis from 1930 to 1972. From 2008 to 2015, her work
in cultural resource management took her to the Canadian High Arctic
archipelago to create a museum dedicated to the Defense Research Science Era at Parks Canada, Quttinirpaaq National Park on Ellesmere
Island. When she is not jumping into Twin Otter aircraft for remote

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

field camps, she is exploring cultural aspects of environmental health and religious pilgrimage
throughout Mexico.
Priscilla Medeiros is a PhD candidate and instructor at McMaster University, Canada, and is defending her thesis in fall 2017. Her primary research interests center on the anthropology of health.
This involves studying the biocultural dimensions of medicine, with a particular emphasis on the
history and development of public health in developed countries, sickness and inequalities, and
gender relationships. Priscilla began her community-based work in prevention, care, and support of
people living with HIV and AIDS seven years ago in Nairobi Province,
Kenya, as part of her master’s degree. Her current research focuses on
the absence of gender-specific and culturally appropriate HIV prevention initiatives and programs for women in the Maritime Provinces,
Canada, and is funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
When she is not working in rural areas or teaching in the classroom,
Priscilla is traveling to exotic destinations to learn to prepare local cuisine, speak foreign languages, and explore the wonders of the world. In
fact, she is the real-life Indiana Jane of anthropology when it comes to
adventures in the field and has many great stories to share.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Benedict, Ruth. Patterns of Culture. Boston: Houghton and Mifflin Company, 1934.
Boas, Franz. Race, Language, and Culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1940.
Darwin, Charles. On the Origin of Species. London: John Murray, Albemarle Street, 1859.
Kroeber, Alfred. The Nature of Culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1952.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. Argonauts of the Western Pacific. London: Routledge and Sons, 1922.
Mead, Margaret. Coming of Age in Samoa: A Psychological Study of Primitive Youth for Western Civilization. New
York: William Morrow and Company, 1928.
Swift, Jonathan. Gulliver’s Travels into Several Remote Nations of the World. London: Benjamin Motte, 1726.
Tylor, Edward B. Primitive Culture: Researches into the Development of Mythology, Philosophy, Religion, Language,
Art, and Customs. London: Cambridge University Press. 1871.

NOTES
1. Edward B. Tylor, Primitive Culture: Researches into the Development of Mythology, Philosophy, Religion, Language, Art, and
Customs (London: Cambridge University Press, 1871), preface.
2. Lewis Henry Morgan was one anthropologist who proposed an evolutionary framework based on these terms in his book
Ancient Society (New York: Henry Holt, 1877).
3. The film Bronislaw Malinowski: Off the Veranda, (Films Media Group, 1986) further describes Malinowski’s research practices.
4. Bronislaw Malinowski. Argonauts of the Western Pacific (London: Routledge & Keegan Paul, 1922), 290.
5. For more on this topic see Adam Kuper, Anthropology and Anthropologists: The Modern British School (New York: Routledge,
1983) and Alfred Radcliffe-Brown, Structure and Function in Primitive Society (London: Cohen and West, 1952).
6. Boas’ attitudes about cultural relativism were influenced by his experiences in the Canadian Arctic as he struggled to survive
in a natural environment foreign to his own prior experience. His private diary and letters record the evolution of his thinking
about what it means to be “civilized.” In a letter to his fiancé, he wrote: “I often ask myself what advantages our ‘good society’
possesses over that of the ‘savages’ and find, the more I see of their customs, that we have no right to look down upon them
... We have no right to blame them for their forms and superstitions which may seem ridiculous to us. We ‘highly educated
people’ are much worse, relatively speaking.” The entire letter can be read in George Stocking, ed. Observers Observed: Essays
on Ethnographic Fieldwork (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 1983), 33.
7. Clifford Geertz, The Interpretation of Culture (New York: Basic Books, Geertz 1973), 89.

The Culture Concept

15

8. For more information about the controversy, see Thomas Gregor and Daniel Gross, “Guilt by Association: The Culture of
Accusation and the American Anthropological Associations Investigation of Darkness in El Dorado.” American Anthropologist
106 no. 4 (2004):687-698 and Robert Borofsky, Yanomami: The Fierce Controversy and What We Can Learn From It (Berkley:
University California Press, 2005). Napoleon Chagnon has written his rebuttal in Noble Savages: My Life Among Two Dangerous Tribes—The Yanomamo and the Anthropologists (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2013).

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in
Cultural Anthropology
Katie Nelson, Inver Hills Community College
ktanelson@gmail.com
knelson@inverhills.mnscu.edu
http://kanelson.com/

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Discuss what is unique about
ethnographic fieldwork and how
it emerged as a key strategy in
anthropology.

• Explain how traditional approaches to
ethnographic fieldwork contrast with
contemporary approaches.
• Identify some of the contemporary
ethnographic fieldwork techniques
and perspectives.
• Discuss some of the ethical
considerations in doing
anthropological fieldwork.
• Summarize how anthropologists
transform their fieldwork data into a
story that communicates meaning.

FINDING THE FIELD
My first experience with fieldwork as a student anthropologist took place in a small indigenous community in
northeastern Brazil studying the Jenipapo-Kanindé of Lagoa Encantada (Enchanted Lake). I had planned to conduct
an independent research project on land tenure among
members of the indigenous tribe and had gotten permission to spend several months with the community. My
Brazilian host family arranged for a relative to drive me to
the rural community on the back of his motorcycle. After
several hours navigating a series of bumpy roads in blazing equatorial heat, I was relieved to arrive at the edge of
the reservation. He cut the motor and I removed my heavy
backpack from my tired, sweaty back. Upon hearing us arrive, first children and then adults slowly and shyly began
to approach us. I greeted the curious onlookers and briefly
explained who I was. As a group of children ran to fetch the
cacique (the chief/political leader), I began to explain my
research agenda to several of the men who had gathered. I
mentioned that I was interested in learning about how the
tribe negotiated land use rights without any private land
ownership. After hearing me use the colloquial term “índio”
(Indian), a man who turned out to be the cacique’s cousin
came forward and said to me, “Well, your work is going to
be difficult because there are no Indians here; we are only
Brazilians.” Then, abruptly, another man angrily replied to
him, stating firmly that, in fact, they were Indians because
the community was on an Indian reservation and the Brazilian government had recognized them as an indigenous
tribe. A few women then entered the rapid-fire discussion.
I took a step back, surprised by the intensity of my first interaction in the community. The debate subsided once the
cacique arrived, but it left a strong impression in my mind.
Eventually, I discarded my original research plan to focus
instead on this disagreement within the community about

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

who they were and were not. In anthropology, this type of
conflict in beliefs is known as contested identity.
I soon learned that many among the Jenipapo-Kanindé
did not embrace the Indian identity label. The tribe members
were all monolingual Portuguese-speakers who long ago had
lost their original language and many of their traditions. Beginning in the 1980s, several local researchers had conducted
studies in the community and had concluded that the community had indigenous origins. Those researchers lobbied on
the community’s behalf for official state and federal status as
an indigenous reservation, and in 1997 the Funai (Fundação
Nacional do Índio or National Foundation for the Indian) visited the community and agreed to officially demarcate the
land as an indigenous reservation. More than 20 years later,
the community is still waiting for that demarcation. Some in
the community embraced indigenous status because it came
with a number of benefits. The state (Ceará), using partial
funding from Funai, built a new road to improve access to the
community. The government also constructed an elementary
school and a common well and installed new electric lines.
Despite those gains, some members of the community did not embrace indigenous status because
being considered Indian had a pejorative connotation in Brazil. Many felt that the label stigmatized
them by associating them with a poor and marginalized class of Brazilians. Others resisted the label
because of long-standing family and inter-personal conflicts in the community.
Fieldwork is the most important method by which cultural anthropologists gather data to answer
their research questions. While interacting on a daily basis with a group of people, cultural anthropologists document their observations and perceptions and adjust the focus of their research as
needed. They typically spend a few months to a few years living among the people they are studying.

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology

3

The “field” can be anywhere the people are—a village in highland Papua New Guinea or a supermarket in downtown Minneapolis. Just as marine biologists spend time in the ocean to learn about
the behavior of marine animals and geologists travel to a mountain range to observe rock formations,
anthropologists go to places where people are.
Doing Anthropology:
In this short film, Stefan Helmreich, Erica James, and Heather Paxson, three members
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Anthropology Department, talk about their
current work and the process of doing fieldwork.

Making the Strange Familiar and the Familiar Strange
The cultural anthropologist’s goal during fieldwork is to describe a group of people to others in
a way that makes strange or unusual features of the culture seem familiar and familiar traits seem
extraordinary. The point is to help people think in new ways about aspects of their own culture by
comparing them with other cultures. The research anthropologist Margaret Mead describes in her
monograph Coming of Age in Samoa (1928) is a famous example of this. In 1925, Mead went to
American Samoa, where she conducted ethnographic research on adolescent girls and their experiences with sexuality and growing up. Mead’s mentor, anthropologist Franz Boas, was a strong proponent of cultural determinism, the idea that one’s cultural upbringing and social environment, rather
than one’s biology, primarily determine behavior. Boas encouraged Mead to travel to Samoa to study
adolescent behavior there and to compare their culture and behavior with that of adolescents in the
United States to lend support to his hypothesis. In the foreword of Coming of Age in Samoa, Boas
described what he saw as the key insight of her research: “The results of her painstaking investigation
confirm the suspicion long held by anthropologists that much of what we ascribe to human nature is
no more than a reaction to the restraints put upon us by our civilization.”1
Mead studied 25 young women in three villages in Samoa and found that the stress, anxiety, and
turmoil of American adolescence were not found among Samoan youth. Rather, young women in
Samoa experienced a smooth transition to adulthood with relatively little stress or difficulty. She
documented instances of socially accepted sexual experimentation, lack of sexual jealousy and rape,
and a general sense of casualness that marked Samoan adolescence. Coming of Age in Samoa quickly
became popular, launching Mead’s career as one of the most well-known anthropologists in the
United States and perhaps the world. The book encouraged American readers to reconsider their
own cultural assumptions about what adolescence in the United States should be like, particularly
in terms of the sexual repression and turmoil that seemed to characterize the teenage experience in
mid-twentieth century America. Through her analysis of the differences between Samoan and American society, Mead also persuasively called for changes in education and parenting for U.S. children
and adolescents.
Another classic example of a style of anthropological writing that attempted to make the familiar
strange and encouraged readers to consider their own cultures in a different way is Horace Miner’s
Body Ritual among the Nacirema (1956). The essay described oral hygiene practices of the Nacirema
(“American” spelled backward) in a way that, to cultural insiders, sounded extreme, exaggerated, and
out of context. He presented the Nacirema as if they were a little-known cultural group with strange,

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

exotic practices. Miner wrote the essay during an era in which anthropologists were just beginning to
expand their focus beyond small-scale traditional societies far from home to large-scale post-industrial societies such as the United States. He wrote the essay primarily as a satire of how anthropologists often wrote about “the Other” in ways that made other cultures seem exotic and glossed over
features that the Other had in common with the anthropologist’s culture. The essay also challenged
U.S. readers in general and anthropologists in particular to think differently about their own cultures
and re-examine their cultural assumptions about what is “normal.”

Emic and Etic Perspectives
When anthropologists conduct fieldwork, they gather data. An important tool for gathering anthropological data is ethnography—the in-depth study of everyday practices and lives of a people.
Ethnography produces a detailed description of the studied group at a particular time and location,
also known as a “thick description,” a term coined by anthropologist Clifford Geertz in his 1973
book The Interpretation of Cultures to describe this type of research and writing. A thick description
explains not only the behavior or cultural event in question but also the context in which it occurs
and anthropological interpretations of it. Such descriptions help readers better understand the internal logic of why people in a culture behave as they do and why the behaviors are meaningful to them.
This is important because understanding the attitudes, perspectives, and motivations of cultural insiders is at the heart of anthropology.
Ethnographers gather data from many different sources. One source is the anthropologist’s own
observations and thoughts. Ethnographers keep field notebooks that document their ideas and reflections as well as what they do and observe when participating in activities with the people they are
studying, a research technique known as participant observation. Other sources of data include informal conversations and more-formal interviews that are recorded and transcribed. They also collect
documents such as letters, photographs, artifacts, public records, books, and reports.
Different types of data produce different kinds of ethnographic descriptions, which also vary in
terms of perspective—from the perspective of the studied culture (emic) or from the perspective of
the observer (etic). Emic perspectives refer to descriptions of behaviors and beliefs in terms that are
meaningful to people who belong to a specific culture, e.g., how people perceive and categorize their
culture and experiences, why people believe they do what they do, how they imagine and explain
things. To uncover emic perspectives, ethnographers talk to people, observe what they do, and participate in their daily activities with them. Emic perspectives are essential for anthropologists’ efforts
to obtain a detailed understanding of a culture and to avoid interpreting others through their own
cultural beliefs.
Etic perspectives refer to explanations for behavior made by an outside observer in ways that are
meaningful to the observer. For an anthropologist, etic descriptions typically arise from conversations
between the ethnographer and the anthropological community. These explanations tend to be based
in science and are informed by historical, political, and economic studies and other types of research.
The etic approach acknowledges that members of a culture are unlikely to view the things they do
as noteworthy or unusual. They cannot easily stand back and view their own behavior objectively
or from another perspective. For example, you may have never thought twice about the way you
brush your teeth and the practice of going to the dentist or how you experienced your teenage years.
For you, these parts of your culture are so normal and “natural” you probably would never consider

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology

5

questioning them. An emic lens gives us an alternative perspective that is essential when constructing
a comprehensive view of a people.
Most often, ethnographers include both emic and etic perspectives in their research and writing.
They first uncover a studied people’s understanding of what they do and why and then develop additional explanations for the behavior based on anthropological theory and analysis. Both perspectives
are important, and it can be challenging to move back and forth between the two. Nevertheless, that
is exactly what good ethnographers must do.

TRADITIONAL ETHNOGRAPHIC APPROACHES
Early Armchair Anthropology
Before ethnography was a fully developed research method, anthropologists in the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries used techniques that were much less reliable to gather data about people
throughout the world. From the comfort of their homes and library armchairs, early scholars collected others’ travel accounts and used them to come to conclusions about far-flung cultures and
peoples. The reports typically came from missionaries, colonists, adventurers, and business travelers
and were often incomplete, inaccurate, and/or misleading, exaggerated or omitted important information, and romanticized the culture.
Early scholars such as Wilhelm Schmidt and Sir E. B. Tylor sifted through artifacts and stories
brought back by travelers or missionaries and selected the ones that best fit their frequently pre-conceived ideas about the peoples involved. By relying on this flawed data, they often drew inaccurate or
even racist conclusions. They had no way of knowing how accurate the information was and no way
to understand the full context in which it was gathered.
The work of Sir James Frazer (1854–1941) provides a good example of the problems associated
with such anthropological endeavors. Frazer was a Scottish social anthropologist who was interested
in myths and religions around the world. He read historical documents and religious texts found in
libraries and book collections. He also sent questionnaires to missionaries and colonists in various
parts of the world asking them about the people with whom they were in contact. He then used the
information to draw sweeping conclusions about human belief systems. In his most famous book,
The Golden Bough, he described similarities and differences in magical and religious practices around
the world and concluded that human beliefs progressed through three stages: from primitive magic
to religion and from religion to science. This theory implied that some people were less evolved and
more primitive than others. Of course, contemporary anthropologists do not view any people as less
evolved than another. Instead, anthropologists today seek to uncover the historical, political, and
cultural reasons behind peoples’ behaviors rather than assuming that one culture or society is more
advanced than another.
The main problem with Frazer’s conclusion can be traced back to the fact that he did not do any
research himself and none of the information he relied on was collected by an anthropologist. He
never spent time with the people he was researching. He never observed the religious ceremonies he
wrote about and certainly never participated in them. Had he done so, he might have been able to
appreciate that all human groups at the time (and now) were equally pragmatic, thoughtful, intelligent, logical, and “evolved.” He might also have appreciated the fact that how and why information
is gathered affects the quality of the information. For instance, if a colonial administrator offered to
pay people for their stories, some of the storytellers might have exaggerated or even made up stories

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

for financial gain. If a Christian missionary asked recently converted parishioners to describe their
religious practices, they likely would have omitted non-Christian practices and beliefs to avoid disapproval and maintain their positions in the church. A male traveler who attempted to document riteof-passage traditions in a culture that prohibited men from asking such questions of women would
generate data that could erroneously suggest that women did not participate in such activities. All of
these examples illustrate the pitfalls of armchair anthropology.

Off the Veranda
Fortunately, the reign of armchair anthropology was brief. Around the turn of the twentieth century, anthropologists trained in the natural sciences began to reimagine what a science of humanity
should look like and how social scientists ought to go about studying cultural groups. Some of those
anthropologists insisted that one should at least spend significant time actually observing and talking
to the people studied. Early ethnographers such as Franz Boas and Alfred Cort Haddon typically
traveled to the remote locations where the people in question lived and spent a few weeks to a few
months there. They sought out a local Western host who was familiar with the people and the area
(such as a colonial official, missionary, or businessman) and found accommodations through them.
Although they did at times venture into the community without a guide, they generally did not
spend significant time with the local people. Thus, their observations were primarily conducted from
the relative comfort and safety of a porch—from their verandas.
Polish anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski’s (1884–1942) pioneering method of participant
observation fundamentally changed the relationship between ethnographers and the people under
study. In 1914, he travelled to the Trobriand Islands and ended up spending nearly four years conducting fieldwork among the people there. In the process, he developed a rigorous set of detailed ethnographic techniques he viewed as best-suited to gathering accurate and comprehensive ethnographic
data. One of the hallmarks of his method was that it required the researcher to get off the veranda to
interact with and even live among the natives. In a well-known book about his research, Argonauts
of the Western Pacific (1922), Malinowski described his research techniques and the role they played
in his analysis of the Kula ceremony, an exchange of coral armbands and trinkets among members
of the social elite. He concluded that the ceremonies were at the center of Trobriand life and represented the culmination of an elaborate multi-year venture called the Kula Ring that involved dangerous expeditions and careful
planning. Ultimately, the key to
his discovering the importance
of the ceremony was that he not
only observed the Kula Ring but
also participated in it. This technique of participant observation
is central to anthropological research today. Malinowski did
more than just observe people
from afar; he actively interacted
with them and participated in
their daily activities. And unlike early anthropologists who

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology

7

worked through translators, Malinowski learned the native language, which allowed him to immerse
himself in the culture. He carefully documented all of his observations and thoughts. Malinowski’s
techniques are now central components of ethnographic fieldwork.

Salvage Ethnography
Despite Malinowski’s tremendous contributions to ethnography and anthropology generally, he
was nevertheless a man of his time. A common view in the first half of the twentieth century was
that many “primitive” cultures were quickly disappearing and features of those cultures needed to
be preserved (salvaged) before they were lost. Anthropologists such as Malinowski, Franz Boas, and
many of their students sought to document, photograph, and otherwise preserve cultural traditions
in “dying” cultures among groups such as Native Americans and other traditional societies experiencing rapid change due to modernization, dislocation, and contact with outside groups. They also
collected cultural artifacts, removing property from the communities and placing it in museums and
private collections.
Others who were not formally trained in the sciences or in anthropology also participated in
salvage activities. For instance, in his “documentary” film Nanook of the North (1922), Robery Flaherty filmed the life of an Inuit man named Nanook and his family in the Canadian Arctic. In an
effort to preserve on film what many believed was a traditional way of life soon to be lost, Flaherty
took considerable artistic license to represent the culture as he imagined it was in the past, including staging certain scenes and asking the Inuit men to use spears instead of rifles to make the film
seem more “authentic.”
Photographers and artists have likewise attempted to capture and preserve traditional indigenous
life in paintings and photographs. Renowned painter George Catlin (1796–1872), for example,
is known to have embellished scenes or painted them in ways that glossed over the difficult reality
that native people in the nineteenth century were actively persecuted by the government, displaced
from their lands, and forced into unsustainable lifestyles that led to starvation and warfare. Photographer Edward S. Curtis (1868–1952) has been criticized for reinforcing romanticized images
of “authentic” native scenes. In particular, he is accused of having perpetuated the problematic idea
of the noble savage and, in the process, distracted attention from the serious social, political, and
economic problems faced by native people.2
Today, anthropologists recognize that human cultures constantly change as people respond to social, political, economic, and other external and internal influences—that there is no moment when
a culture is more authentic or more primitive. They acknowledge that culture is fluid and cannot be
treated as isolated in time and space. Just as we should not portray people as primitive vestiges of an
earlier stage of human development, we also should not romanticize a culture or idealize another’s
suffering as more authentic or natural.

Holism
In the throes of salvage ethnography, anthropologists in the first half of the twentieth century actively documented anything and everything they could about the cultures they viewed as endangered.
They collected artifacts, excavated ancient sites, wrote dictionaries of non-written languages, and
documented cultural traditions, stories, and beliefs. In the United States, those efforts developed into
what is known today as the four-field approach or simply as general anthropology. This approach in-

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

tegrates multiple scientific and humanistic perspectives into a single comprehensive discipline composed of cultural, archaeological, biological/physical, and linguistic anthropology.
A hallmark of the four-field approach is its holistic perspective: anthropologists are interested in
studying everything that makes us human. Thus, they use multiple approaches to understanding
humans throughout time and throughout the world. They also acknowledge that to understand
people fully one cannot look solely at biology, culture, history, or language; rather, all of those things
must be considered. The interrelationships between the four subfields of anthropology are important
for many anthropologists today.
Linguistic anthropologists Edward Sapir and Benjamin Whorf, for instance, examined interrelationships between culture, language, and cognition. They argued that the language one speaks plays
a critical role in determining how one thinks, particularly in terms of understanding time, space,
and matter. They proposed that people who speak different languages view the world differently as a
result. In a well-known example, Whorf contrasted the Hopi and English languages. Because verbs
in Hopi contained no future or
past tenses, Whorf argued that
Hopi-speakers understand time
in a fundamentally different way
than English-speakers. An observation by an English-speaker
would focus on the difference
in time while an observation by
a Hopi-speaker would focus on
validity.3
In another example, Peter
Gordon spent many years living
among the Pirahã tribe of Brazil
learning their language and culture. He noted that the Pirahã
have only three words for numbers: one, two, and many. He
also observed that they found it
difficult to remember quantities
and numbers beyond three even
after learning the Portuguese
words for such numbers.4
Pirahã Numerical Terms:
In this short film, linguist Daniel Everett illustrates Pirahã numerical terms.

Although some scholars have criticized Whorf and Gordon’s conclusions as overly deterministic,
their work certainly illustrates the presence of a relationship between language and thought and
between cultural and biological influences. Words may not force people to think a particular way,
but they can influence our thought processes and how we view the world around us. The holistic per-

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology

9

spective of anthropology helps us to appreciate that our culture, language, and physical and cognitive
capacities for language are interrelated in complex ways.

ETHNOGRAPHY TODAY
Anthropology’s Distinctive Research Strategy
Ethnography is cultural anthropology’s distinctive research strategy. It was originally developed by
anthropologists to study small-scale, relatively isolated cultural groups. Typically, those groups had
relatively simple economies and technologies and limited access to larger, more technologically advanced societies. Early ethnographers sought to understand the entirety of a particular culture. They
spent months to years living in the community, and in that time, they documented in great detail
every dimension of people’s lives, including their language, subsistence strategies, political systems,
formation of families and marriages, and religious beliefs. This was important because it helped researchers appreciate the interconnectedness of all dimensions of social life. The key to the success of
this ethnographic approach was not only to spend considerable time observing people in their home
settings engaged in day-to-day activities but also to participate in those activities. Participation informed an emic perspective of the culture, something that had been missing in earlier social science
research.
Because of how useful the ethnographic research strategy is in developing an emic perspective, it
has been adopted by many other disciplines including sociology, education, psychology, and political science. Education researchers, for example, use ethnography to study children in classrooms to
identify their learning strategies and how they understand and make sense of learning experiences.
Sociologists use ethnography to study emerging social movements and how participants in such
movements stay motivated and connected despite their sometimes-conflicting goals.

New Sites for Ethnographic Fieldwork
Like the cultures and peoples studied, anthropology and ethnography are evolving. Field sites for
ethnographic research are no longer exclusively located in far-flung, isolated, non-industrialized societies. Increasingly, anthropologists are conducting ethnographic research in complex, technologically
advanced societies such as the United States and in urban environments elsewhere in the world. For
instance, my doctoral research took place in the United States. I studied identity formation among
undocumented Mexican immigrant college students in Minnesota. Because some of my informants
were living in Mexico when my fieldwork ended, I also traveled to Veracruz, Mexico, and spent time
conducting research there. Often, anthropologists who study migration, diasporas, and people in
motion must conduct research in multiple locations. This is known as multi-sited ethnography.
Anthropologists use ethnography to study people wherever they are and however they interact
with others. Think of the many ways you ordinarily interact with your friends, family, professors, and
boss. Is it all face-to-face communication or do you sometimes use text messages to chat with your
friends? Do you also sometimes email your professor to ask for clarification on an assignment and
then call your boss to discuss your schedule? Do you share funny videos with others on Facebook and
then later make a Skype video call to a relative? These new technological “sites” of human interaction
are fascinating to many ethnographers and have expanded the definition of fieldwork.

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Problem-oriented Research
In the early years, ethnographers were interested in exploring the entirety of a culture. Taking an
inductive approach, they generally were not concerned about arriving with a relatively narrow predefined research topic. Instead, the goal was to explore the people, their culture, and their homelands
and what had previously been written about them. The focus of the study was allowed to emerge
gradually during their time in the field. Often, this approach to ethnography resulted in rather general ethnographic descriptions.
Today, anthropologists are increasingly taking a more deductive approach to ethnographic research. Rather than arriving at the field site with only general ideas about the goals of the study, they
tend to select a particular problem before arriving and then let that problem guide their research. In
my case, I was interested in how undocumented Mexican immigrant youth in Minnesota formed a
sense of identity while living in a society that used a variety of dehumanizing labels such as illegal and
alien to refer to them. That was my research “problem,” and it oriented and guided my study from
beginning to end. I did not document every dimension of my informants’ lives; instead, I focused on
the things most closely related to my research problem.

Quantitative Methods
Increasingly, cultural anthropologists are using quantitative research methods to complement
qualitative approaches. Qualitative research in anthropology aims to comprehensively describe human behavior and the contexts in which it occurs while quantitative research seeks patterns in numerical data that can explain aspects of human behavior. Quantitative patterns can be gleaned from
statistical analyses, maps, charts, graphs, and textual descriptions. Surveys are a common quantitative
technique that usually involves closed-ended questions in which respondents select their responses
from a list of pre-defined choices such as their degree of agreement or disagreement, multiple-choice
answers, and rankings of items. While surveys usually lack the sort of contextual detail associated
with qualitative research, they tend to be relatively easy to code numerically and, as a result, can be
easier to analyze than qualitative data. Surveys are also useful for gathering specific data points within
a large population, something that is challenging to do with many qualitative techniques.
Anthropological nutritional analysis is an area of research that commonly relies on collecting
quantitative data. Nutritional anthropologists explore how factors such as culture, the environment,
and economic and political systems interplay to impact human health and nutrition. They may count
the calories people consume and expend, document patterns of food consumption, measure body
weight and body mass, and test for the presence of parasite infections or nutritional deficiencies.
In her ethnography Dancing Skeletons: Life and Death in West Africa (1993), Katherine Dettwyler
described how she conducted nutritional research in Mali, which involved weighing, measuring, and
testing her research subjects to collect a variety of quantitative data to help her understand the causes
and consequences of child malnutrition.

Mixed Methods
In recent years, anthropologists have begun to combine ethnography with other types of research
methods. These mixed-method approaches integrate qualitative and quantitative evidence to provide
a more comprehensive analysis. For instance, anthropologists can combine ethnographic data with

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology

11

questionnaires, statistical data, and a media analysis. Anthropologist Leo Chavez used mixed methods to conduct the research for his book The Latino Threat: Constructing Immigrants, Citizens, and the
Nation (2008). He started with a problem: how has citizenship been discussed as an identity marker
in the mainstream media in the United States, especially among those labeled as Latinos. He then
looked for a variety of types of data and relied on ethnographic case studies and on quantitative data
from surveys and questionnaires. Chavez also analyzed a series of visual images from photographs,
magazine covers, and cartoons that depicted Latinos to explore how they are represented in the
American mainstream.
Mixed methods can be particularly useful when conducting problem-oriented research on complex, technologically advanced societies such as the United States. Detailed statistical and quantitative data are often available for those types of societies. Additionally, the general population is
usually literate and somewhat comfortable with the idea of filling out a questionnaire.

ETHNOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUES AND PERSPECTIVES
Cultural Relativism and Ethnocentrism
The guiding philosophy of modern anthropology is cultural relativism—the idea that we should
seek to understand another person’s beliefs and behaviors from the perspective of their culture rather
than our own. Anthropologists do not judge other cultures based on their values nor view other
cultural ways of doing things as inferior. Instead, anthropologists seek to understand people’s beliefs
within the system they have for explaining things.
Cultural relativism is an important methodological consideration when conducting research. In
the field, anthropologists must temporarily suspend their own value, moral, and esthetic judgments
and seek to understand and respect the values, morals, and esthetics of the other culture on their
terms. This can be a challenging task, particularly when a culture is significantly different from the
one in which they were raised.
During my first field experience in Brazil, I learned firsthand how challenging cultural relativism
could be. Preferences for physical proximity and comfort talking about one’s body are among the
first differences likely to be noticed by U.S. visitors to Brazil. Compared to Americans, Brazilians
generally are much more comfortable standing close, touching, holding hands, and even smelling
one another and often discuss each other’s bodies. Children and adults commonly refer to each other
using playful nicknames that refer to their body size, body shape, or skin color. Neighbors and even
strangers frequently stopped me on the street to comment on the color of my skin (It concerned some
as being overly pale or pink—Was I ill? Was I sunburned?), the texture of my hair (How did I get it
so smooth? Did I straighten my hair?), and my body size and shape (“You have a nice bust, but if you
lost a little weight around the middle you would be even more attractive!”).
During my first few months in Brazil, I had to remind myself constantly that these comments were
not rude, disrespectful, or inappropriate as I would have perceived them to be in the United States.
On the contrary, it was one of the ways that people showed affection toward me. From a culturally
relativistic perspective, the comments demonstrated that they cared about me, were concerned with
my well-being, and wanted me to be part of the community. Had I not taken a culturally relativistic
view at the outset and instead judged the actions based on my cultural perspective, I would have been
continually frustrated and likely would have confused and offended people in the community. And
offending your informants and the rest of the community certainly is not conducive to completing

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

high-quality ethnography! Had I not fully understood the importance of body contact and physical
proximity in communication in Brazil, I would have missed an important component of the culture.
Another perspective that has been rejected by anthropologists is ethnocentrism—the tendency to
view one’s own culture as most important and correct and as a stick by which to measure all other cultures. People who are ethnocentric view their own cultures as central and normal and reject all other
cultures as inferior and morally suspect. As it turns out, many people and cultures are ethnocentric
to some degree; ethnocentrism is a common human experience. Why do we respond the way we do?
Why do we behave the way we do? Why do we believe what we believe? Most people find these kinds
of questions difficult to answer. Often the answer is simply “because that is how it is done.” They
believe what they believe because that is what one normally believes and doing things any other way
seems wrong.
Ethnocentrism is not a useful perspective in contexts in which people from different cultural
backgrounds come into close contact with one another, as is the case in many cities and communities throughout the world. People increasingly find that they must adopt culturally relativistic
perspectives in governing communities and as a guide for their interactions with members of the
community. For anthropologists in the field, cultural relativism is especially important. We must set
aside our innate ethnocentrisms and let cultural relativism guide our inquiries and interactions with
others so that our observations are not biased. Cultural relativism is at the core of the discipline of
anthropology.

Objectivity and Activist Anthropology
Despite the importance of cultural relativism, it is not always possible and at times is inappropriate
to maintain complete objectivity in the field. Researchers may encounter cultural practices that are an
affront to strongly held moral values or that violate the human rights of a segment of a population.
In other cases, they may be conducting research in part to advocate for a particular issue or for the
rights of a marginalized group.
Take, for example, the practice of female genital cutting (FGC), also known as female genital
mutilation (FGM), a practice that is common in various regions of the world, especially in parts of
Africa and the Middle East. Such practices involving modification of female genitals for non-medical
and cultural reasons range from clitoridectomy (partial or full removal of the clitoris) to infibulation,
which involves removal of the clitoris and the inner and outer labia and suturing to narrow the vaginal opening, leaving only a small hole for the passage of urine and menstrual fluid Anthropologists
working in regions where such practices are common often understandably have a strong negative
opinion, viewing the practice as unnecessary medically and posing a risk of serious infection, infertility, and complications from childbirth. They may also be opposed to it because they feel that it violates the right of women to experience sexual pleasure, something they likely view as a fundamental
human right. Should the anthropologist intervene to prevent girls and women from being subjected
to this practice?
Anthropologist Janice Boddy studied FGC/FGM in rural northern Sudan and sought to explain it
from a culturally relativistic perspective. She found that the practice persists, in part, because it is believed to preserve a woman’s chastity and curb her sexual desire, making her less likely to have affairs
once she is married. Boddy’s research showed how the practice makes sense in the context of a culture
in which a woman’s sexual conduct is a symbol of her family’s honor, which is important culturally.5

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology

13

Boddy’s relativistic explanation helps make the practice comprehensible and allows cultural outsiders to understand how it is internally culturally coherent. But the question remains. Once anthropologists understand why people practice FGC/FGM, should they accept it? Because they uncover
the cultural meaning of a practice, must they maintain a neutral stance or should they fight a practice
viewed as an injustice? How does an anthropologist know what is right?
Unfortunately, answers to these questions are rarely simple, and anthropologists as a group do
not always agree on an appropriate professional stance and responsibility. Nevertheless, examining
practices such as FGC/FGM can help us understand the debate over objectivity versus “activism” in
anthropology more clearly. Some anthropologists feel that striving for objectivity in ethnography is
paramount. That even if objectivity cannot be completely achieved, anthropologists’ ethnography
should be free from as much subjective opinion as possible. Others take the opposite stance and
produce anthropological research and writing as a means of fighting for equality and justice for disempowered or voiceless groups. The debate over how much (if any) activism is acceptable is ongoing.
What is clear is that anthropologists are continuing to grapple with the contentious relationship
between objectivity and activism in ethnographic research.

Science and Humanism
Anthropologists have described their field as the most humanistic of the sciences and the most
scientific of the humanities. Early anthropologists fought to legitimize anthropology as a robust
scientific field of study. To do so, they borrowed methods and techniques from the physical sciences
and applied them to anthropological inquiry. Indeed, anthropology today is categorized as a social
science in most academic institutions in the United States alongside sociology, psychology, economics, and political science. However, in recent decades, many cultural anthropologists have distanced
themselves from science-oriented research and embraced more-humanistic approaches, including
symbolic and interpretive perspectives. Interpretive anthropology treats culture as a body of “texts”
rather than attempting to test a hypothesis based on deductive or inductive reasoning. The texts
present a particular picture from a particular subjective point of view. Interpretive anthropologists
believe that it is not necessary (or even possible) to objectively interrogate a text. Rather, they study
the texts to untangle the various webs of meaning embedded in them. Consequently, interpretive
anthropologists include the context of their interpretations, their own perspectives and, importantly,
how the research participants view themselves and the meanings they attribute to their lives.
Anthropologists are unlikely to conclude that a single approach is best. Instead, anthropologists
can apply any and all of the approaches that best suit their particular problem. Anthropology is
unique among academic disciplines for the diversity of approaches used to conduct research and for
the broad range of orientations that fall under its umbrella.
Science in Anthropology:
For a discussion of science in anthropology, see the following article published by
the American Anthropological Association: AAA Responds to Public Controversy Over
Science in Anthropology.

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Ethnographic Techniques
Observation and Participant Observation
Of the various techniques and tools used to conduct ethnographic research, observation in general
and participant observation in particular are among the most important. Ethnographers are trained
to pay attention to everything happening around them when in the field—from routine daily activities such as cooking dinner to major events such as an annual religious celebration. They observe
how people interact with each other, how the environment affects people, and how people affect the
environment. It is essential for anthropologists to rigorously document their observations, usually by
writing field notes and recording their feelings and perceptions in a personal journal or diary.
As previously mentioned, participant observation involves ethnographers observing while they
participate in activities with their informants. This technique is important because it allows the
researcher to better understand why people do what they do from an emic perspective. Malinowski
noted that participant observation is an important tool by which “to grasp the native’s point of view,
his relation to life, to realize his vision of his world.”6
To conduct participant observation, ethnographers must live with or spend considerable time with
their informants to establish a strong rapport with them. Rapport is a sense of trust and a comfortable
working relationship in which the informant and the ethnographer are at ease with each other and
agreeable to working together.
Participant observation was an important part of my own research. In 2003, I spent six months
living in two Mayan villages in highland Chiapas, Mexico. I was conducting ethnographic research
on behalf of the Science Museum of Minnesota to document changes in huipil textile designs. Huipiles (pronounced “we-peel-ays”) are a type of hand-woven blouse that Mayan women in the region
weave and wear, and every town has its own style and designs. At a large city market, one can easily
identify the town each weaver is from by the colors and designs of her huipiles. For hundreds of years,
huipil designs changed very little. Then, starting around 1960, the designs and colors of huipiles in
some of the towns began to change rapidly. I was interested in learning why some towns’ designs were
changing more rapidly than other towns’ were and in collecting examples of huipiles to supplement
the museum’s existing collection.
I spent time in two towns, Zinacantán and San Andrés Larráinzar. Zinacantán was located near
the main city, San Cristóbal de las Casas. It received many tourists each year and had regularly established bus and van routes that locals used to travel to San Cristóbal to buy food and other goods.
Some of the men in the town had worked in the United States and returned with money to build
or improve their family homes and businesses. Other families were supported by remittances from
relatives working in the United States or in other parts of Mexico. San Andrés, on the other hand,
was relatively isolated and much further from San Cristóbal. Most families there relied on subsistence
farming or intermittent agricultural labor and had limited access to tourism or to outside communities. San Andrés was also the site of a major indigenous revolt in the mid-1990s that resulted in
greater autonomy, recognition, and rights for indigenous groups throughout Mexico. Politically and
socially, it was a progressive community in many ways but remained conservative in others.
I first asked people in Zinacantán why their huipil designs, motifs, and colors seemed to change
almost every year. Many women said that they did not know. Others stated that weaving was easy and
could be boring so they liked to make changes to keep the huipiles interesting and to keep weaving
from getting dull. When I asked people in San Andrés what they thought about what the women in

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology

15

Zinacantán had said, the San Andrés women replied that “Yes, perhaps they do get bored easily. But
we in San Andrés are superior weavers and we don’t need to change our designs.” Neither response
seemed like the full story behind the difference.
Though I spent hundreds of hours observing women preparing to weave, weaving, and selling
their textiles to tourists, I did not truly understand what the women were telling me until I tried
weaving myself. When I watched them, the process seemed so easy and simple. They attached strings
of thread vertically to two ends of the back-strap looms. When weaving, they increased and decreased
the tension on the vertical threads by leaning backward and forward with the back strap and teased
individual threads horizontally through the vertical threads to create the desired pattern. After each
thread was placed, they pushed it down with great force using a smooth, flat wooden trowel. They did
the entire process with great ease and fluidity. When I only watched and did not participate, I could
believe the Zinacantán women when they told me weaving was easy.
When I began to weave, it took me several days simply to learn how to sit correctly with a backstrap loom and achieve the appropriate tension. I failed repeatedly at setting up the loom with vertically strung threads and never got close to being able to create a design. Thus, I learned through
participant observation that weaving is an exceptionally difficult task. Even expert weavers who had
decades of experience sometimes made mistakes as half-finished weavings and rejected textiles littered
many homes. Although the women appeared to be able to multi-task while weaving (stoking the fire,
calling after small children, cooking food), weaving still required a great deal of concentration to do
well.
Through participant observation, I was able to recognize that other factors likely drove the changes
in their textiles. I ultimately concluded that the rate of change in huipil design in Zinacantán was
likely related to the pace of cultural change broadly in the community resulting from interactions
between its residents and tourists and relatively frequent travel to a more-urban environment. Participant observation was an important tool in my research and is central to most ethnographic studies
today.
Conversations and Interviews
Another primary technique for gathering ethnographic data is simply talking with people—from
casual, unstructured conversations about ordinary topics to formal scheduled interviews about a
particular topic. An important element for successful conversations and interviews is establishing
rapport with informants. Sometimes, engaging in conversation is part of establishing that rapport.
Ethnographers frequently use multiple forms of conversation and interviewing for a single research
project based on their particular needs. They sometimes record the conversations and interviews
with an audio recording device but more often they simply engage in the conversation and then later
write down everything they recall about it. Conversations and interviews are an essential part of most
ethnographic research designs because spoken communication is central to humans’ experiences.
Gathering Life Histories
Collecting a personal narrative of someone’s life is a valuable ethnographic technique and is often
combined with other techniques. Life histories provide the context in which culture is experienced
and created by individuals and describe how individuals have reacted, responded, and contributed to
changes that occurred during their lives. They also help anthropologists be more aware of what makes

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

life meaningful to an individual and to focus on the particulars of individual lives, on the tenor of
their experiences and the patterns that are important to them. Researchers often include life histories
in their ethnographic texts as a way of intimately connecting the reader to the lives of the informants.
The Genealogical Method
The genealogical (kinship) method has a long tradition in ethnography. Developed in the early
years of anthropological research to document the family systems of tribal groups, it is still used today
to discover connections of kinship, descent, marriage, and the overall social system. Because kinship
and genealogy are so important in many nonindustrial societies, the technique is used to collect data
on important relationships that form the foundation of the society and to trace social relationships
more broadly in communities.
When used by anthropologists, the genealogical method involves using symbols and diagrams to
document relationships. Circles represent women and girls, triangles represent men and boys, and
squares represent ambiguous or unknown gender. Equal signs between individuals represent their
union or marriage and vertical lines descending from a union represent parent-child relationships.
The death of an individual and the termination of a marriage are denoted by diagonal lines drawn
across the shapes and equal signs. Kinship charts are diagramed from the perspective of one person
who is called the Ego, and all of the relationships in the chart are based on how the others are related
to the Ego. Individuals in a chart are sometimes identified by numbers or names, and an accompanying list provides more-detailed information.

Key Informants
Within any culture or subculture, there are always particular individuals who are more knowledgeable about the culture than others and who may have more-detailed or privileged knowledge.
Anthropologists conducting ethnographic research in the field often seek out such cultural specialists
to gain a greater understanding of certain issues and to answer questions they otherwise could not

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology

17

answer. When an anthropologist establishes a rapport with these individuals and begins to rely more
on them for information than on others, the cultural specialists are referred to as key informants or
key cultural consultants.
Key informants can be exceptional assets in the field, allowing the ethnographer to uncover the
meanings of behaviors and practices the researcher cannot otherwise understand. Key informants can
also help researchers by directly observing others and reporting those observations to the researchers,
especially in situations in which the researcher is not allowed to be present or when the researcher’s
presence could alter the participants’ behavior. In addition, ethnographers can check information
they obtained from other informants, contextualize it, and review it for accuracy. Having a key informant in the field is like having a research ally. The relationship can grow and become enormously
fruitful.
A famous example of the central role that key informants can play in an ethnographer’s research is
a man named Doc in William Foote Whyte’s Street Corner Society (1943). In the late 1930s, Whyte
studied social relations between street gangs and “corner boys” in a Boston urban slum inhabited by
first- and second-generation Italian immigrants. A social worker introduced Whyte to Doc and the
two hit it off. Doc proved instrumental to the success of Whyte’s research. He introduced Whyte to
his family and social group and vouched for him in the tight-knit community, providing access that
Whyte could not have gained otherwise.
Field Notes
Field notes are indispensable when conducting ethnographic research. Although making such
notes is time-consuming, they form the primary record of one’s observations. Generally speaking,
ethnographers write two kinds of notes: field notes and personal reflections. Field notes are detailed
descriptions of everything the ethnographer observes and experiences. They include specific details
about what happened at the field site, the ethnographer’s sensory impressions, and specific words and
phrases used by the people observed. They also frequently include the content of conversations the
ethnographer had and things the ethnographer overheard others say. Ethnographers also sometimes
include their personal reflections on the experience of writing field notes. Often, brief notes are jotted
down in a notebook while the anthropologist is observing and participating in activities. Later, they
expand on those quick notes to make more formal field notes, which may be organized and typed
into a report. It is common for ethnographers to spend several hours a day writing and organizing
field notes.
Ethnographers often also keep a personal journal or diary that may include information about
their emotions and personal experiences while conducting research. These personal reflections can be
as important as the field notes. Ethnography is not an objective science. Everything researchers do
and experience in the field is filtered through their personal life experiences. Two ethnographers may
experience a situation in the field in different ways and understand the experience differently. For this
reason, it is important for researchers to be aware of their reactions to situations and be mindful of
how their life experiences affect their perceptions. In fact, this sort of reflexive insight can turn out to
be a useful data source and analytical tool that improves the researcher’s understanding.
The work of anthropologist Renato Rosaldo provides a useful example of how anthropologists can
use their emotional responses to fieldwork situations to advance their research. In 1981, Rosaldo and
his wife, Michelle, were conducting research among the Ilongots of Northern Luzon in the Philippines. Rosaldo was studying men in the community who engaged in emotional rampages in which

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

they violently murdered others by cutting off their heads. Although the practice had been banned
by the time Rosaldo arrived, a longing to continue headhunting remained in the cultural psyche of
the community.
Whenever Rosaldo asked a man why he engaged in headhunting, the answer was that rage and
grief caused him to kill others. At the beginning of his fieldwork, Rosaldo felt that the response was
overly simplistic and assumed that there had to be more to it than that. He was frustrated because he
could not uncover a deeper understanding of the phenomenon. Then, on October 11, 1981, Rosaldo’s wife was walking along a ravine when she tripped, lost her footing, and fell 65 feet to her death,
leaving Rosaldo a grieving single father. In his essay “Grief and a Headhunter’s Rage,” Rosaldo later
wrote that it was his own struggle with rage as he grieved for his wife that helped him truly grasp what
the Ilongot men meant when they described their grief and rage.
Only a week before completing the initial draft of an earlier version of this introduction,
I rediscovered my journal entry, written some six weeks after Michelle’s death, in which I
made a vow to myself about how I would return to writing anthropology, if I ever did so, by
writing Grief and a Headhunter’s Rage . . . My journal went on to reflect more broadly on
death, rage, and headhunting by speaking of my wish for the Ilongot solution; they are much
more in touch with reality than Christians. So, I need a place to carry my anger – and can we
say a solution of the imagination is better than theirs? And can we condemn them when we
napalm villages? Is our rationale so much sounder than theirs? All this was written in despair
and rage.7
Only through the very personal and emotionally devastating experience of losing his wife was Rosaldo able to understand the emic perspective of the headhunters. The result was an influential and
insightful ethnographic account.

ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Ethical Guidelines
From the earliest days of anthropology as a discipline, concern about the ethical treatment of
people who take part in studies has been an important consideration. Ethical matters are central to
any research project and anthropologists take their ethical responsibilities particularly seriously. As
discussed throughout this chapter, anthropologists are oriented toward developing empathy for their
informants and understanding their cultures and experiences from an emic perspective. Many also
have a sense of personal responsibility for the well-being of the local people with whom they work
in the field.
The American Anthropological Association has developed a Code of Ethics that all anthropologists
should follow in their work. Among the many ethical responsibilities outlined in the code, doing no
harm, obtaining informed consent, maintaining subjects’ anonymity, and making the results of the
research accessible are especially important responsibilities.

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology

19

Do No Harm
First and foremost, anthropologists must ensure that their involvement with a community does
not harm or embarrass their informants. Researchers must carefully consider any potential harm
associated with the research, including legal, emotional, political, economic, social, and cultural dimensions, and take steps to insulate their informants from such harm. Since it is not always possible
to anticipate every potential repercussion at the outset, anthropologists also must continually monitor their work to ensure that their research design and methods minimize any risk.
Regrettably, the proscription to do no harm is a deceptively complex requirement. Despite their
best efforts, anthropologists have run into ethical problems in the field. Work by Napoleon Chagnon
among an isolated indigenous tribe of the Amazon, the Yanomami, is a well-known example of ethical problems in anthropological research. In his groundbreaking ethnography Yanomamö: The Fierce
People (1968), Chagnon portrayed the Yanomami as an intensely violent and antagonistic people.
The ethnography was well received initially. However, not long after its publication, controversy
erupted. Anthropologists and other scholars have accused Chagnon of encouraging the violence he
documented, staging fights and scenes for documentary films and fabricating data.
Today, Do No Harm is a central ethical value in anthropology. However, it can be difficult to predict every challenge one may encounter in the field or after the work is published. Anthropologists
must continually reevaluate their research and writing to ensure that it does not harm the informants
or their communities. Before fieldwork begins, researchers from universities, colleges, and institutions usually must submit their research agendas to an institutional review board (IRB). IRBs review
research plans to ensure that the proposed studies will not harm human subjects. In many cases, the
IRB is aware of the unique challenges and promise of anthropological research and can guide the
researcher in eliminating or mitigating potential ethical problems.

Obtain Informed Consent
In addition to taking care to do no harm, anthropologists must obtain informed consent from all
of their informants before conducting any research. Informed consent is the informant’s agreement
to take part in the study. Originally developed in the context of medical and psychological research,
this ethical guideline is also relevant to anthropology. Informants must be aware of who the anthropologist is and the research topic, who is financially and otherwise supporting the research, how the
research will be used, and who will have access to it. Finally, their participation must be optional and
not coerced. They should be able to stop participating at any time and be aware of and comfortable
with any risks associated with their participation.
In medical and psychological research settings in the United States, researchers typically obtain
informed consent by asking prospective participants to sign a document that outlines the research
and the risks involved in their participation, acknowledging that they agree to take part. In some anthropological contexts, however, this type of informed consent may not be appropriate. People may
not trust the state, bureaucratic processes, or authority, for example. Asking them to sign a formal
legal-looking document may intimidate them. Likewise, informed consent cannot be obtained with
a signed document if many in the community cannot read. The anthropologist must determine the
most appropriate way to obtain informed consent in the context of the particular research setting.

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Maintain Anonymity and Privacy
Another important ethical consideration for anthropologists in the field is ensuring the anonymity
and privacy of informants who need such protection. When I did research among undocumented
Mexican immigrant college students, I recognized that my informants’ legal status put them at considerable risk. I took care to use pseudonyms for all of the informants, even when writing field notes.
In my writing, I changed the names of the informants’ relatives, friends, schools, and work places
to protect them from being identified. Maintaining privacy and anonymity is an important way for
anthropologists to ensure that their involvement does no harm.

Make Results Accessible
Finally, anthropologists must always make their final research results accessible to their informants
and to other researchers. For informants, a written report in the researcher’s native language may not
be the best way to convey the results. Reports can be translated or the results can be converted into a
more accessible format. Examples of creative ways in which anthropologists have made their results
available include establishing accessible databases for their research data, contributing to existing
databases, producing films that portray the results, and developing texts or recommendations that
provide tangible assistance to the informants’ communities. Though it is not always easy to make research results accessible in culturally appropriate ways, it is essential that others have the opportunity
to review and benefit from the research, especially those who participated in its creation.

WRITING ETHNOGRAPHY
Analysis and Interpretation of Research Findings
Once all or most of the fieldwork is complete, ethnographers analyze their data and research findings before beginning to write. There are many techniques for data analysis from which to choose
based on the strategy and goals of the research. Regardless of the particular technique, data analysis
involves a systematic interpretation of what the researcher thinks the data mean. The ethnographer
reviews all of the data collected, synthesizes findings from the review, and integrates those findings
with prior studies on the topic. Once the analysis is complete, the ethnographer is ready to write an
account of the fieldwork.

Ethnographic Authority
In recent years, anthropologists have expressed concern about how ethnographies should be written in terms of ethnographic authority: how ethnographers present themselves and their informants
in text. In a nonfiction text, the author is a mediator between readers and the topic and the text is
written to help readers understand an unfamiliar topic. In an ethnography, the topic is people, and
people naturally vary in terms of their thoughts, opinions, beliefs, and perspectives. That is, they have
individual voices. In the past, anthropologists commonly wrote ethnographic accounts as if they possessed the ultimate most complete scientific knowledge on the topic. Subsequently, anthropologists
began to challenge that writing style, particularly when it did not include the voices of their informants in the text and analysis. Some of this criticism originated with feminist anthropologists who

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology

21

noted that women’s experiences and perspectives frequently were omitted and misrepresented in this
style of writing. Others believed that this style of writing reinforced existing global power dynamics
and privileges afforded to Western anthropologists’ voices as most important.

Polyvocality
In response to criticisms about ethnographic authority, anthropologists have begun to include
polyvocality. A polyvocal text is one in which more than one person’s voice is presented, and its use
can range from ensuring that informants’ perspectives are presented in the text while still writing
in the researcher’s voice to including informants’ actual words rather than paraphrasing them and
co-authoring the ethnography with an informant. A good example of polyvocality is anthropologist
Ruth Behar’s book Translated Woman: Crossing the Border with Esperanza’s Story (1993). Behar’s book
documents the life story of a Mexican street peddler, Esperanza Hernández, and their unique friendship. Large sections of the book are in Esperanza’s own words and discuss issues that are important
to her. Behar also includes pieces of her own life story and an anthropological analysis of Esperanza’s
story.
By using polyvocality, researchers can avoid writing from the perspective of the ultimate ethnographic authority. A polyvocal style also allows readers to be more involved in the text since they have
the opportunity to form their own opinions about the ethnographic data and perhaps even critique
the author’s analysis. It also encourages anthropologists to be more transparent when presenting their
methods and data.

Reflexivity
Reflexivity is another relatively new approach to ethnographic research and writing. Beginning
in the 1960s, social science researchers began to think more carefully about the effects of their life
experiences, status, and roles on their research and analyses. They began to insert themselves into
their texts, including information about their personal experiences, thoughts, and life stories and to
analyze in the accounts how those characteristics affected their research and analysis.
Adoption of reflexivity is perhaps the most significant change in how ethnography is researched
and written in the past 50 years. It calls on anthropologists to acknowledge that they are part of the
world they study and thus can never truly be objective. Reflexivity has also contributed to anthropologists’ appreciation of the unequal power dynamics of research and the effects those dynamics can
have on the results. Reflexivity reminds the ethnographer that there are multiple ways to interpret
any given cultural scenario. By acknowledging how their backgrounds affect their interpretations,
anthropologists can begin to remove themselves from the throne of ethnographic authority and allow
other, less-empowered voices to be heard.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. If you were to conduct anthropological fieldwork anywhere in the world, were would you go?
What would you study? Why? Which ethnographic techniques would you use? What kinds of
ethical considerations would you likely encounter? How would you disseminate your research?
2. What is unique about ethnographic fieldwork and how did it emerge as a key strategy in
anthropology?

22

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

3. How do traditional approaches to ethnographic fieldwork contrast with contemporary
approaches?
4. What are some of the contemporary ethnographic fieldwork techniques and perspectives and
why are they important to anthropology?
5. What are some of the ethical considerations in doing anthropological fieldwork and why are
they important?
6. How do anthropologists transform their fieldwork data into a story that communicates
meaning? How are reflexivity and polyvocality changing the way anthropologists communicate
their work?

GLOSSARY
Contested identity: a dispute within a group about the collective identity or identities of the group.
Cultural relativism: the idea that we should seek to understand another person’s beliefs and behaviors from the perspective of their own culture and not our own.
Deductive: reasoning from the general to the specific; the inverse of inductive reasoning. Deductive
research is more common in the natural sciences than in anthropology. In a deductive approach, the
researcher creates a hypothesis and then designs a study to prove or disprove the hypothesis. The
results of deductive research can be generalizable to other settings.
Diaspora: the scattering of a group of people who have left their original homeland and now live
in various locations. Examples of people living in the diaspora are Salvadoran immigrants in the
United States and Europe, Somalian refugees in various countries, and Jewish people living around
the world.
Emic: a description of the studied culture from the perspective of a member of the culture or insider.
Ethnocentrism: the tendency to view one’s own culture as most important and correct and as the
stick by which to measure all other cultures.
Ethnography: the in-depth study of the everyday practices and lives of a people.
Etic: a description of the studied culture from the perspective of an observer or outsider.
Indigenous: people who have continually lived in a particular location for a long period of time
(prior to the arrival of others) or who have historical ties to a location and who are culturally distinct
from the dominant population surrounding them. Other terms used to refer to indigenous people
are aboriginal, native, original, first nation, and first people. Some examples of indigenous people are
Native Americans of North America, Australian Aborigines, and the Berber (or Amazigh) of North
Africa.
Inductive: a type of reasoning that uses specific information to draw general conclusions. In an
inductive approach, the researcher seeks to collect evidence without trying to definitively prove or
disprove a hypothesis. The researcher usually first spends time in the field to become familiar with
the people before identifying a hypothesis or research question. Inductive research usually is not
generalizable to other settings.
Key Informants: individuals who are more knowledgeable about their culture than others and who
are particularly helpful to the anthropologist.

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology

23

Kinship: blood ties, common ancestry, and social relationships that form families within human
groups.
Land tenure: how property rights to land are allocated within societies, including how permissions
are granted to access, use, control, and transfer land.
Noble savage: an inaccurate way of portraying indigenous groups or minority cultures as innocent,
childlike, or uncorrupted by the negative characteristics of “civilization.”
Participant observation: a type of observation in which the anthropologist observes while participating in the same activities in which her informants are engaged.
Qualitative: anthropological research designed to gain an in-depth, contextualized understanding of
human behavior.
Quantitative: anthropological research that uses statistical, mathematical, and/or numerical data to
study human behavior.
Remittances: money that migrants laboring outside of the region or country send back to their
hometowns and families. In Mexico, remittances make up a substantial share of the total income of
some towns’ populations.
Thick description: a term coined by anthropologist Clifford Geertz in his 1973 book The Interpretation of Cultures to describe a detailed description of the studied group that not only explains the
behavior or cultural event in question but also the context in which it occurs and anthropological
interpretations of it.
Undocumented: the preferred term for immigrants who live in a country without formal authorization from the state. Undocumented refers to the fact that these people lack the official documents
that would legally permit them to reside in the country. Other terms such as illegal immigrant and
illegal alien are often used to refer to this population. Anthropologists consider those terms to be
discriminatory and dehumanizing. The word undocumented acknowledges the human dignity and
cultural and political ties immigrants have developed in their country of residence despite their inability to establish formal residence permissions.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Katie Nelson, PhD is a professor of anthropology at Inver Hills Community College. Her current research focuses on identity, belonging and citizenship(s) among migrant and undocumented
populations in the U.S., Mexico and Morocco. She is particularly interested in examining how migrants forge a sense of identity and belonging in the contexts of
national discourses that problematize their presence. She serves
as the incoming Chair-elect of the Teaching Anthropology Interest Group, a part of the General Anthropology Division of
the American Anthropological Association. She is fluent in the
Spanish and Portuguese languages and is currently learning
French and Arabic. Katie received her BA in Anthropology and
Latin American Studies from Macalester College, her MA in Anthropology from the University of California, Santa Barbara, an
MA in Education and Instructional Technology from the University of Saint Thomas and her PhD from CIESAS Occidente

24

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

(Centro de Investigaciones y Estudios Superiores en Antropología Social – Center for Research and
Higher Education in Social Anthropology), based in Guadalajara, Mexico.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Behar, Ruth. Translated Woman: Crossing the Border with Esperanza’s Story. Boston, MA: Beacon Press,
1993.
Boddy, Janice. Civilizing Women: British Crusades in Colonial Sudan. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2007.
Chagnon, Napoleon. Yanomamö: The Fierce People. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1968.
Chavez, Leo. The Latino Threat: Constructing Immigrants, Citizens and the Nation. Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 2008.
Dettwyler, Katherine A. Dancing Skeletons: Life and Death in West Africa. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press,
2014
Frazer, James. The Golden Bough: A Study in Comparative Religion. London: Macmillian Press, 1894.
Geertz, Clifford. The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays. New York: Basic Books, 1973.
Gordon, Peter. “Numerical Cognition without Words: Evidence from Amazonia.” Science 306 no. 5695
(2004): 496–499.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An Account of Native Enterprise and Adventure in the
Archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea. London: Kegan Paul 1922.
Mead, Margaret. Coming of Age in Samoa: A Psychological Study of Primitive Youth for Western Civilization.
New York: William Morrow and Company, 1928.
Miner, Horace. “Body Ritual Among the Nacirema.” American Anthropologist 58 no. 3 (1956): 503-507.
Nelson, Katherine. 2015. Between Citizenship and Alienage: Flexible Identity Among Informally Authorized
Mexican College Students in Minnesota, USA. PhD diss., CIESAS Occidente (Centro de Investigaciones
y Estudios Superiores en Antropología Social – Institute for Research and Higher Education in Social
Anthropology).
Rosaldo, Renato. “Grief and a Headhunter’s Rage” in Violence in War and Peace, edited by Nancy ScheperHughes and Philippe I. Bourgois, 150-156. Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004.
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy. Saints, Scholars, Schizophrenics: Mental Illness in Rural Ireland. Los Angeles, CA:
University of California Press, 1979.
Whorf, Benjamin Lee. “Science and Linguistics.” MIT Technology Review: 42 (1940): 229–248.
Whyte, William Foote. Street Corner Society: The Social Structure of an Italian Slum. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1993[1943].

NOTES
1. Franz Boas, “Foreward,” in Coming of Age in Samoa by Margaret Mead (New York: William Morrow, 1928).
2. Examples of Curtis’ photography can be found in Edward Curtis, The North American Indian: The Photographic Images (New
York: Aperture, 2005).
3. Benjamin Lee Whorf, “Science and Linguistics,” MIT Technology Review 42 (1940): 229–248.
4. Peter Gordon, “Numerical Cognition Without Words: Evidence from Amazonia,” Science 306 no. 5695 (2004): 496–499.
5. Janice Bodd, Civilizing Women: British Crusades in Colonial Sudan (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007).
6. Bronislaw Malinowski, Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An Account of Native Enterprise and Adventure in the Archipelagoes of
Melanesian New Guinea (London: Kegan Paul, 1922), 25.
7. Renato Rosaldo, “Grief and a Headhunter’s Rage,” in Violence in War and Peace, ed. Nancy Scheper-Hughes and Philippe
I. Bourgois (Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2004), 171.

Language
Linda Light, California State University, Long Beach
Linda.Light@csulb.edu

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

THE IMPORTANCE OF HUMAN
LANGUAGE TO HUMAN CULTURE

• Identify the universal features of
human languages and the design
features that make them unique.

Students in my cultural anthropology classes are required
to memorize a six-point thumbnail definition of culture,
which includes all of the features most anthropologists agree
are key to its essence. Then, I refer back to the definition as
we arrive at each relevant unit in the course. Here it is—
with the key features in bold type.

• Explain the relationship between
human language and culture.

• Describe the structures of language:
phonemes, morphemes, syntax,
semantics, and pragmatics.
• Assess the relationship between
language variations and ethnic or
cultural identity.
• Explain how language is affected by
social class, ethnicity, gender and
other aspects of identity.
• Evaluate the reasons why languages
change and efforts that can be made
to preserve endangered languages.

Culture is:
1. An integrated system of mental elements (beliefs, values, worldview, attitudes, norms),
the behaviors motivated by those mental elements, and the material items created by those
behaviors;
2. A system shared by the members of the society;
3. 100 percent learned, not innate;
4. B
 ased on symbolic systems, the most important of which is language;
5. Humankind’s most important adaptive mechanism, and
6. Dynamic, constantly changing.

This definition serves to underscore the crucial importance of language to all human cultures. In fact, human language can be considered a culture’s most important feature
since complex human culture could not exist without language and language could not exist without culture. They
are inseparable because language encodes culture and provides the means through which culture is shared and passed
from one generation to the next. Humans think in language
and do all cultural activities using language. It surrounds
our every waking and sleeping moments, although we do
not usually think about its importance. For that matter, humans do not think about their immersion in culture either,
much as fish, if they were endowed with intelligence, would
not think much about the water that surrounds them.
Without language and culture, humans would be just an-

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

other great ape. Anthropologists must have skills in linguistics so they can learn the languages and
cultures of the people they study.
All human languages are symbolic systems that make use of symbols to convey meaning. A symbol
is anything that serves to refer to something else, but has a meaning that cannot be guessed because
there is no obvious connection between the symbol and its referent. This feature of human language
is called arbitrariness. For example, many cultures assign meanings to certain colors, but the meaning for a particular color may be completely different from one culture to another. Western cultures
like the United States use the color black to represent death, but in China it is the color white that
symbolizes death. White in the United States symbolizes purity and is used for brides’ dresses, but no
Chinese woman would ever wear white to her wedding. Instead, she usually wears red, the color of
good luck. Words in languages are symbolic in the same way. The word key in English is pronounced
exactly the same as the word qui in French, meaning “who,” and ki in Japanese, meaning “tree.” One
must learn the language in order to know what any word means.

THE BIOLOGICAL BASIS OF LANGUAGE
The human anatomy that allowed the development of language emerged six to seven million years
ago when the first human ancestors became bipedal—habitually walking on two feet. Most other
mammals are quadrupedal—they move about on four feet. This evolutionary development freed up
the forelimbs of human ancestors for other activities, such as carrying items and doing more and
more complex things with their hands. It also started a chain of anatomical adaptations. One adaptation was a change in the way the skull was placed on the spine. The skull of quadrupedal animals is
attached to the spine at the back of the skull because the head is thrust forward. With the new upright
bipedal position of pre-humans, the attachment to the spine moved toward the center of the base of
the skull. This skeletal change in turn brought about changes in the shape and position of the mouth
and throat anatomy.
Humans have all the same organs in the
mouth and throat that the other great apes have,
but the larynx, or voice box (you may know it
as the Adam’s apple), is in a lower position in
the throat in humans. This creates a longer pharynx, or throat cavity, which functions as a resonating and amplifying chamber for the speech
sounds emitted by the larynx. The rounding of
the shape of the tongue and palate, or the roof
of the mouth, enables humans to make a greater
variety of sounds than any great ape is capable of
making (see Figure 1).
Speech is produced by exhaling air from the
lungs, which passes through the larynx. The
voice is created by the vibration of the vocal
folds in the larynx when they are pulled tightly
together, leaving a narrow slit for the air to pass
through under pressure. The narrower the slit,

Language

3

the higher the pitch of the sound produced. The sound waves in the exhaled air pass through the
pharynx then out through the mouth and/or the nose. The different positions and movements of the
articulators—the tongue, the lips, the jaw—produce the different speech sounds.
Along with the changes in mouth and throat anatomy that made speech possible came a gradual
enlargement and compartmentalization of the brain of human ancestors over millions of years. The
modern human brain is among the largest, in proportion to body size, of all animals. This development was crucial to language ability because a tremendous amount of brain power is required to
process, store, produce, and comprehend the complex system of any human language and its associated culture. In addition, two areas in the left brain are specifically dedicated to the processing of
language; no other species has them. They are Broca’s area in the left frontal lobe near the temple, and
Wernicke’s area, in the temporal lobe just behind the left ear.

Language Acquisition in Childhood
Linguist Noam Chomsky proposed that all languages share the properties of what he called Universal Grammar (UG), a basic template for all human languages, which he believed was embedded
in our genes, hard-wiring the brains of all human children to acquire language. Although the theory
of UG is somewhat controversial, it is a fact that all normally developing human infants have an innate ability to acquire the language or languages used around them. Without any formal instruction,
children easily acquire the sounds, words, grammatical rules, and appropriate social functions of the
language(s) that surround them. They master the basics by about age three or four. This also applies
to children, both deaf and hearing, who are exposed to signed language.
If a child is not surrounded by people who are using a language, that child will gradually lose the
ability to acquire language naturally without effort. If this deprivation continues until puberty, the
child will no longer be biologically capable of attaining native fluency in any language, although they
might be able to achieve a limited competency. This phenomenon has been called the Critical Age
Range Hypothesis. A number of abused children who were isolated from language input until they
were past puberty provide stark evidence to support this hypothesis. The classic case of “Genie” is an
example of this evidence.1 Found at the age of almost 14, Genie had been confined for all of her life
to her room and, since the age of two, had been tied to a potty chair during the day and to a crib at
night with almost no verbal interaction and only minimal attention to her physical needs. After her
rescue, a linguist worked with her intensively for about five years in an attempt to help her learn to
talk, but she never achieved language competence beyond that of a two-year old child. The hypothesis also applies to the acquisition of a second language. A person who starts the study of another
language after puberty will have to exert a great deal of effort and will rarely achieve native fluency,
especially in pronunciation. There is plenty of evidence for this in the U.S. educational system. You
might very well have had this same experience. It makes you wonder why our schools rarely offer
foreign language classes before the junior high school level.

The Gesture Call System and Non-Verbal Human Communication
All animals communicate and many animals make meaningful sounds. Others use visual signs,
such as facial expressions, color changes, body postures and movements, light (fireflies), or electricity
(some eels). Many use the sense of smell and the sense of touch. Most animals use a combination of

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

two or more of these systems in their communication, but their systems are closed systems in that
they cannot create new meanings or messages. Human communication is an open system that can
easily create new meanings and messages. Most animal communication systems are basically innate;
they do not have to learn them, but some species’ systems entail a certain amount of learning. For
example, songbirds have the innate ability to produce the typical songs of their species, but most of
them must be taught how to do it by older birds.
Great apes and other primates have relatively complex systems of communication that use varying combinations of sound, body language, scent, facial expression, and touch. Their systems have
therefore been referred to as a gesture-call system. Humans share a number of forms of this
gesture-call, or non-verbal system with the great
apes. Spoken language undoubtedly evolved
embedded within it. All human cultures have
not only verbal languages, but also non-verbal
systems that are consistent with their verbal languages and cultures and vary from one culture to
another. We will discuss the three most important human non-verbal communication systems.
Kinesics
Kinesics is the term used to designate all forms of human body language, including gestures, body
position and movement, facial expressions, and eye contact. Although all humans can potentially
perform these in the same way, different cultures may have different rules about how to use them.
For example, eye contact for Americans is highly valued as a way to show we are paying attention and
as a means of showing respect. But for the Japanese, eye contact is usually inappropriate, especially
between two people of different social statuses. The lower status person must look down and avoid
eye contact to show respect for the higher status person.
Facial expressions can convey a host of messages, usually related to the person’s attitude or emotional state. Hand gestures may convey unconscious messages, or constitute deliberate messages that
can replace or emphasize verbal ones.
Proxemics
Proxemics is the study of the social use of space, specifically the distance an individual tries to
maintain around himself in interactions with others. The size of the “space bubble” depends on a
number of social factors, including the relationship between the two people, their relative status,
their gender and age, their current attitude toward each other, and above all their culture. In some
cultures, such as in Brazil, people typically interact in a relatively close physical space, usually along
with a lot of touching. Other cultures, like the Japanese, prefer to maintain a greater distance with
a minimum amount of touching or none at all. If one person stands too far away from the other according to cultural standards, it might convey the message of emotional distance. If a person invades
the culturally recognized space bubble of another, it could mean a threat. Or, it might show a desire
for a closer relationship. It all depends on who is involved.

Language

5

Paralanguage
Paralanguage refers to those characteristics of speech beyond the actual words spoken. These
include the features that are inherent to all speech: pitch, loudness, and tempo or duration of the
sounds. Varying pitch can convey any number of messages: a question, sarcasm, defiance, surprise,
confidence or lack of it, impatience, and many other often subtle connotations. An utterance that is
shouted at close range usually conveys an emotional element, such as anger or urgency. A word or
syllable that is held for an undue amount of time can intensify the impact of that word. For example,
compare “It’s beautiful” versus It’s beauuuuu-tiful!” Often the latter type of expression is further
emphasized by extra loudness of the syllable, and perhaps higher pitch; all can serve to make a part
of the utterance more important. Other paralinguistic features that often accompany speech might
be a chuckle, a sigh or sob, deliberate throat clearing, and many other non-verbal sounds like “hm,”
“oh,” “ah,” and “um.”
Most non-verbal behaviors are unconsciously performed and not noticed unless someone violates
the cultural standards for them. In fact, a deliberate violation itself can convey meaning. Other
non-verbal behaviors are done consciously like the U.S. gestures that indicate approval, such as
thumbs up, or making a circle with your thumb and forefinger—“OK.” Other examples are waving
at someone or putting a forefinger to your lips to quiet another person. Many of these deliberate
gestures have different meanings (or no meaning at all) in other cultures. For example, the gestures
of approval in U.S. culture mentioned above may be obscene or negative gestures in another culture.
Try this: As an experiment in the power of non-verbal communication, try violating one
of the cultural rules for proxemics or eye contact with a person you know. Choosing your
“guinea pigs” carefully (they might get mad at you!), try standing or sitting a little closer or
farther away from them than you usually would for a period of time, until they notice (and
they will notice). Or, you could choose to give them a bit too much eye contact, or too little,
while you are conversing with them. Note how they react to your behavior and how long it
takes them to notice.

HUMAN LANGUAGE COMPARED WITH THE COMMUNICATION
SYSTEMS OF OTHER SPECIES
Human language is qualitatively and quantitatively different from the communication systems of
all other species of animals. Linguists have long tried to create a working definition that distinguishes
it from non-human communication systems. Linguist Charles Hockett’s solution was to create a hierarchical list of what he called design features, or descriptive characteristics, of the communication
systems of all species, including that of humans.2 Those features of human language not shared with
any other species illustrate exactly how it differs from all other species.
Hockett’s Design Features
The communication systems of all species share the following features:
1. A
 mode of communication by which messages are transmitted through a system of
signs, using one or more sensory systems to transmit and interpret, such as vocal-auditory, visual, tactile, or kinesic;

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
2. S
 emanticity: the signs carry meaning for the users, and
3. P
 ragmatic function: all signs serve a useful purpose in the life of the users, from
survival functions to influencing others’ behavior.
Some communication systems (including humans) also exhibit the following features:
4. Interchangeability: the ability of individuals within a species to both send and receive messages. One species that lacks this feature is the honeybee. Only a female
“worker bee” can perform the dance that conveys to her hive-mates the location of a
newly discovered food source. Another example is the mockingbird whose songs are
performed only by the males to attract a mate and mark his territory.
5. Cultural transmission: the need for some aspects of the system to be learned
through interaction with others, rather than being 100 percent innate or genetically
programmed. The mockingbird learns its songs from other birds, or even from other
sounds in its environment that appeal to it.
6. Arbitrariness: the form of a sign is not inherently or logically related to its meaning;
signs are symbols. It could be said that the movements in the honeybees’ dance are
arbitrary since anyone who is not a honeybee could not interpret their meaning.
Only true human language also has the following characteristics:
7. Discreteness: every human language is made up of a small number of meaningless
discrete sounds. That is, the sounds can be isolated from each other, for purposes of
study by linguists, or to be represented in a writing system.
8. Duality of patterning (two levels of combination): at the first level of patterning,
these meaningless discrete sounds, called phonemes, are combined to form words
and parts of words that carry meaning, or morphemes. In the second level of patterning, morphemes are recombined to form an infinite possible number of longer
messages such as phrases and sentences according to a set of rules called syntax.
It is this level of combination that is entirely lacking in the communication abilities of
all other animals and makes human language an open system while all other animal
systems are closed.
9. Displacement: the ability to communicate about things that are outside of the here
and now made possible by the features of discreteness and duality of patterning.
While other species are limited to communicating about their immediate time and
place, we can talk about any time in the future or past, about any place in the universe, or even fictional places.
10. Productivity/creativity: the ability to produce and understand messages that have
never been expressed before or to express new ideas. People do not speak according to prepared scripts, as if they were in a movie or a play; they create their utterances spontaneously, according to the rules of their language. It also makes possible the
creation of new words and even the ability to lie.

A number of great apes, including gorillas, chimpanzees, bonobos and orangutans, have been
taught human sign languages with all of the human design features. In each case, the apes have been
able to communicate as humans do to an extent, but their linguistic abilities are reduced by the limited cognitive abilities that accompany their smaller brains.

Language

7

UNIVERSALS OF LANGUAGE
Languages we do not speak or understand may sound like meaningless babble to us, but all the
human languages that have ever been studied by linguists are amazingly similar. They all share a
number of characteristics, which linguists call language universals. These language universals can
be considered properties of the Universal Grammar that Chomsky proposed. Here is a list of some
of the major ones.
1. All human cultures have a human language and use it to communicate.
2. All human languages change over time, a reflection of the fact that all cultures are also constantly changing.
3. All languages are systematic, rule driven, and equally complex overall, and equally capable of
expressing any idea that the speaker wishes to convey. There are no primitive languages.
4. All languages are symbolic systems.
5. All languages have a basic word order of elements, like subject, verb, and object, with variations.
6. All languages have similar basic grammatical categories such as nouns and verbs.
7. Every spoken language is made up of discrete sounds that can be categorized as vowels or
consonants.
8. The underlying structure of all languages is characterized by the feature duality of patterning,
which permits any speaker to utter any message they need or wish to convey, and any speaker
of the same language to understand the message.

DESCRIPTIVE LINGUISTICS: STRUCTURES OF LANGUAGE
The study of the structures of language is called descriptive linguistics. Descriptive linguists discover and describe the phonemes of a language, research called phonology. They study the lexicon
(the vocabulary) of a language and how the morphemes are used to create new words, or morphology. They analyze the rules by which speakers create phrases and sentences, or the study of syntax.
And they look at how these features all combine to convey meaning in certain social contexts, fields
of study called semantics and pragmatics.

The Sounds of Language: Phonemes
A phoneme is defined as the minimal unit of sound that can make a difference in meaning if
substituted for another sound in a word that is otherwise identical. The phoneme itself does not
carry meaning. For example, in English if the sound we associate with the letter “p” is substituted
for the sound of the letter “b” in the word bit, the word’s meaning is changed because now it is pit,
a different word with an entirely different meaning. The human articulatory anatomy is capable of
producing many hundreds of sounds, but no language has more than about 100 phonemes. English
has about 36 or 37 phonemes, including about eleven vowels, depending on dialect. Hawaiian has
only five vowels and about eight consonants. No two languages have the same exact set of phonemes.
Linguists use a written system called the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) to represent the
sounds of a language. Unlike the letters of our alphabet that spell English words, each IPA symbol
always represents only one sound no matter the language. For example, the letter “a” in English can
represent the different vowel sounds in such words as cat, make, papa, law, etc., but the IPA symbol
/a/ always and only represents the vowel sound of papa or pop.

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

The Units That Carry Meaning: Morphemes
A morpheme is a minimal unit of meaning in a language; a morpheme cannot be broken down
into any smaller units that still relate to the original meaning. It may be a word that can stand alone,
called an unbound morpheme (dog, happy, go, educate). Or it could be any part of a word that
carries meaning that cannot stand alone but must be attached to another morpheme, bound morphemes. They may be placed at the beginning of the root word, such as un- (“not,” as in unhappy),
or re- (“again,” as in rearrange). Or, they may follow the root, as in -ly (makes an adjective into an
adverb: quickly from quick), -s (for plural, possessive, or a verb ending) in English. Some languages,
like Chinese, have very few if any bound morphemes. Others, like Swahili have so many that nouns
and verbs cannot stand alone as separate words; they must have one or more other bound morphemes
attached to them.

The Structure of Phrases and Sentences: Syntax
Rules of syntax tell the speaker how to put morphemes together grammatically and meaningfully.
There are two main types of syntactic rules: rules that govern word order, and rules that direct the use
of certain morphemes that perform a grammatical function. For example, the order of words in the
English sentence “The cat chased the dog” cannot be changed around or its meaning would change:
“The dog chased the cat” (something entirely different) or “Dog cat the chased the” (something
meaningless). English relies on word order much more than many other languages do because it has
so few morphemes that can do the same type of work.
For example, in our sentence above, the phrase “the cat” must go first in the sentence, because that
is how English indicates the subject of the sentence, the one that does the action of the verb. The
phrase “the dog” must go after the verb, indicating that it is the dog that received the action of the
verb, or is its object. Other syntactic rules tell us that we must put “the” before its noun, and “–ed”
at the end of the verb to indicate past tense. In Russian, the same sentence has fewer restrictions on
word order because it has bound morphemes that are attached to the nouns to indicate which one is
the subject and which is the object of the verb. So the sentence koshka [chased] sobaku, which means
“the cat chased the dog,” has the same meaning no matter how we order the words, because the –a
on the end of koshka means the cat is the subject, and the –u on the end of sobaku means the dog is
the object. If we switched the endings and said koshku [chased] sobaka, now it means the dog did the
chasing, even though we haven’t changed the order of the words. Notice, too, that Russian does not
have a word for “the.”

Conveying Meaning in Language: Semantics and Pragmatics
The whole purpose of language is to communicate meaning about the world around us so the
study of meaning is of great interest to linguists and anthropologists alike. The field of semantics
focuses on the study of the meanings of words and other morphemes as well as how the meanings
of phrases and sentences derive from them. Recently linguists have been enjoying examining the
multitude of meanings and uses of the word “like” among American youth, made famous through
the film Valley Girl in 1983. Although it started as a feature of California English, it has spread all
across the country, and even to many young second-language speakers of English. It’s, like, totally
awesome dude!

Language

9

The study of pragmatics looks at the social and cultural aspects of meaning and how the context
of an interaction affects it. One aspect of pragmatics is the speech act. Any time we speak we are
performing an act, but what we are actually trying to accomplish with that utterance may not be
interpretable through the dictionary meanings of the words themselves. For example, if you are at
the dinner table and say, “Can you pass the salt?” you are probably not asking if the other person is
capable of giving you the salt. Often the more polite an utterance, the less direct it will be syntactically. For example, rather than using the imperative syntactic form and saying “Give me a cup of
coffee,” it is considered more polite to use the question form and say “Would you please give me a
cup of coffee?”

LANGUAGE VARIATION: SOCIOLINGUISTICS
Languages Versus Dialects
The number of languages spoken around the world is somewhat difficult to pin down, but we
usually see a figure between 6,000 and 7,000. Why are they so hard to count? The term language is
commonly used to refer to the idealized “standard” of a variety of speech with a name, such as English, Turkish, Swedish, Swahili, or Urdu. One language is usually considered to be incomprehensible
to speakers of another one. The word dialect is often applied to a subordinate variety of a language
and the common assumption is that we can understand someone who speaks another dialect of our
own language.
These terms are not really very useful to describe actual language variation. For example, many of
the hundreds of “dialects” spoken in China are very different from each other and are not mutually
comprehensible to speakers of other Chinese “dialects.” The Chinese government promotes the idea
that all of them are simply variants of the “Chinese language” because it helps to promote national
solidarity and loyalty among Chinese people to their country and reduce regional factionalism. In
contrast, the languages of Sweden, Denmark, and Norway are considered separate languages, but
actually if a Swede, a Dane, and a Norwegian were to have a conversation together, each could use
their own language and understand most of what the others say. Does this make them dialects or languages? The Serbian and Croatian languages are considered by their speakers to be separate languages
due to distinct political and religious cultural identities. They even employ different writing systems
to emphasize difference, but they are essentially the same and easily understandable to each other.
So in the words of linguist John McWhorter, actually “dialects is all there is.”3 What he means
by this is that a continuum of language variation is geographically distributed across populations in
much the same way that human physical variation is, with the degree of difference between any two
varieties increasing across increasing distances. This is the case even across national boundaries. Catalan, the language of northeastern Spain, is closer to the languages of southern France, Provençal and
Occitan than any one is to its associated national language, Spanish or French. One language variety
blends with the next geographically like the colors of the rainbow. However, the historical influence
of colonizing states has affected that natural distribution. Thus, there is no natural “language” with
variations called “dialects.” Usually one variety of a language is considered the “standard,” but this
choice is based on the social and political prestige of the group that speaks that variety; it has no
inherent superiority over the other variants called its “dialects.” The way people speak is an indicator
of who they are, where they come from, and what social groups they identify with, as well as what

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

particular situation they find themselves in, and what they want to accomplish with a specific interaction.

How Does Language Variation Develop?
Why do people from different regions in the United States speak so differently? Why do they speak
differently from the people of England? A number of factors have influenced the development of
English dialects, and they are typical causes of dialect variation in other languages as well.
Settlement patterns: The first English settlers to North America brought their own dialects with them. Settlers from different parts of the British Isles spoke different dialects
(they still do), and they tended to cluster together in their new homeland. The present-day
dialects typical of people in various areas of the United States, such as New England, Virginia, New Jersey, and Delaware, still reflect these original settlement sites, although they
certainly have changed from their original forms.
Migration routes: After they first settled in the United States, some people migrated further west, establishing dialect boundaries as they traveled and settled in new places.
Geographical factors: Rivers, mountains, lakes and islands affected migration routes
and settlement locations, as well as the relative isolation of the settlements. People in the
Appalachian mountains and on certain islands off the Atlantic coast were relatively isolated
from other speakers for many years and still speak dialects that sound very archaic compared with the mainstream.
Language contact: Interactions with other language groups, such as Native Americans,
French, Spanish, Germans, and African-Americans, along paths of migration and settlement resulted in mutual borrowing of vocabulary, pronunciation, and some syntax.
Have you ever heard of “Spanglish”? It is a form of Spanish spoken near the borders of
the United States that is characterized by a number of words adopted from English and
incorporated into the phonological, morphological and syntactic systems of Spanish. For
example, the Spanish sentence Voy a estacionar mi camioneta, or “I’m going to park my
truck” becomes in Spanglish Voy a parquear mi troca. Many other languages have such
English-flavored versions, including Franglais and Chinglish. Some countries, especially
France, actively try to prevent the incursion of other languages (especially English) into
their language, but the effort is always futile. People will use whatever words serve their
purposes, even when the “language police” disapprove. Some Franglais words that have
invaded in spite of the authorities protestations include the recently acquired binge-drinking, beach, e-book, and drop-out, while older ones include le weekend and stop.
Region and occupation: Rural farming people may continue to use archaic expressions
compared with urban people, who have much more contact with contemporary life styles
and diverse speech communities.
Social class: Social status differences cut across all regional variations of English. These
differences reflect the education and income level of speakers.
Group reference: Other categories of group identity, including ethnicity, national origin of
ancestors, age, and gender can be symbolized by the way we speak, indicating in-group
versus out-group identity. We talk like other members of our groups, however we define
that group, as a means of maintaining social solidarity with other group members. This

Language

11

can include occupational or interest-group jargon, such as medical or computer terms, or
surfer talk, as well as pronunciation and syntactic variations. Failure to make linguistic accommodation to those we are speaking to may be interpreted as a kind of symbolic group
rejection even if that dialect might be relatively stigmatized as a marker of a disrespected
minority group. Most people are able to use more than one style of speech, also called
register, so that they can adjust depending on who they are interacting with: their family
and friends, their boss, a teacher, or other members of the community.
Linguistic processes: New developments that promote the simplification of pronunciation or syntactic changes to clarify meaning can also contribute to language change.

These factors do not work in isolation. Any language variation is the result of a number of social,
historical, and linguistic factors that might affect individual performances collectively and therefore
dialect change in a particular speech community is a process that is continual.
Try This: Which of these terms do you use, pop versus soda versus coke? Pail versus
bucket? Do you say “vayse” or “vahze” for the vessel you put flowers in? Where are you
from? Can you find out where each term or pronunciation is typically used? Can you find
other regional differences like these?

What Is a “Standard” Variety of a Language?
The standard of any language is simply one of many variants that has been given special prestige in
the community because it is spoken by the people who have the greatest amount of prestige, power,
and (usually) wealth. In the case of English its development has been in part the result of the invention of the printing press in the sixteenth-century and the subsequent increase in printed versions of
the language. This then stimulated more than a hundred years of deliberate efforts by grammarians
to standardize spelling and grammatical rules. Their decisions invariably favored the dialect spoken
by the aristocracy. Some of their other decisions were rather arbitrarily determined by standards
more appropriate to Latin, or even mathematics. For example, as it is in many other languages, it was
typical among the common people of the time (and it still is among the present-day working classes
and in casual speech), to use multiple negative particles in a sentence, like “I don’t have no money.”
Those eighteenth-century grammarians said we must use either don’t or no, but not both, that is, “I
don’t have any money” or “I have no money.” They based this on a mathematical rule that says that
two negatives make a positive. (When multiplying two signed negative numbers, such as -5 times -2,
the result is +10.) These grammarians claimed that if we used the double negative, we would really be
saying the positive, or “I have money.” Obviously, anyone who utters that double-negative sentence
is not trying to say that they have money, but the rule still applies for standard English to this day.
Non-standard varieties of English, also known as vernaculars, are usually distinguished from the
standard by their inclusion of such stigmatized forms as multiple negatives, the use of the verb form
ain’t (which was originally the normal contraction of am not, as in “I ain’t,” comparable to “you aren’t,” or “she isn’t”); pronunciation of words like this and that as dis and dat; pronunciation of final
“–ing” as “–in;” and any other feature that grammarians have decreed as “improper” English.
The standard of any language is a rather artificial, idealized form of language, the language of
education. One must learn its rules in school because it is not anyone’s true first language. Everyone

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

speaks a dialect, although some dialects are closer to the standard than others. Those that are regarded
with the least prestige and respect in society are associated with the groups of people who have the
least amount of social prestige. People with the highest levels of education have greater access to the
standard, but even they usually revert to their first dialect as the appropriate register in the context
of an informal situation with friends and family. In other words, no language variety is inherently
better or worse than any other one. It is due to social attitudes that people label some varieties as
“better” or “proper,” and others as “incorrect” or “bad.” Recall Language Universal 3: “All languages
are systematic, rule driven, and equally complex overall, and equally capable of expressing any idea
that the speaker wishes to convey.”
In 1972 sociolinguist William Labov did an interesting study in which he looked at the pronunciation of the sound /r/ in the speech of New Yorkers in two different department stores. Many people
from that area drop the /r/ sound in words like fourth and floor (fawth, floah), but this pronunciation
is primarily associated with lower social classes and is not a feature of the approved standard for English, even in New York City. In two different contexts, an upscale store and a discount store, Labov
asked customers what floor a certain item could be found on, already knowing it was the fourth floor.
He then asked them to repeat their answer, as though he hadn’t heard it correctly. He compared the
first with the second answers by the same person, and he compared the answers in the expensive store
versus the cheaper store. He found 1) that the responders in the two stores differed overall in their
pronunciation of this sound, and 2) that the same person may differ between situations of less and
more self-consciousness (first versus second answer). That is, people in the upscale store tended to
pronounce the /r/, and responders in both stores tended to produce the standard pronunciation more
in their second answers in an effort to sound “higher class.” These results showed that the pronunciation or deletion of /r/ in New York correlates with both social status and context.4
There is nothing inherently better or worse in either pronunciation; it depends entirely on the
social norms of the community. The same /r/ deletion that is stigmatized in New York City is the
prestigious, standard form in England, used by the upper class and announcers for the BBC. The
pronunciation of the /r/ sound in England is stigmatized because it is used by lower-status people in
some industrial cities.
It is important to note that almost everyone has access to a number of different language variations
and registers. They know that one variety is appropriate to use with some people in some situations,
and others should be used with other people or in other situations. The use of several language varieties in a particular interaction is known as code-switching.
Try This: To understand the importance of using the appropriate register in a given context, the next time you are with a close friend or family member try using the register, or
style of speech, that you might use with your professor or a respected member of the
clergy. What is your friend’s reaction? I do not recommend trying the reverse experiment,
using a casual vernacular register with such a respected person (unless they are also a
close friend). Why not?

Linguistic Relativity: The Whorf Hypothesis
In the 1920s, Benjamin Whorf was a graduate student studying with linguist Edward Sapir at
Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut. Sapir, considered the father of American linguistic

Language

13

anthropology, was responsible for documenting and recording the languages and cultures of many
Native American tribes, which were disappearing at an alarming rate. This was due primarily to the
deliberate efforts of the United States government to force Native Americans to assimilate into the
Euro-American culture. Sapir and his predecessors were well aware of the close relationship between
culture and language because each culture is reflected in and influences its language. Anthropologists
need to learn the language of the culture they are studying in order to understand the world view
of its speakers. Whorf believed that the reverse is also true, that a language affects culture as well, by
actually influencing how its speakers think. His hypothesis proposes that the words and the structures
of a language influence how its speakers think about the world, how they behave, and ultimately the
culture itself. (See our definition of culture above.) Simply stated, Whorf believed that human beings
see the world the way they do because the specific languages they speak influence them to do so. He
developed this idea through both his work with Sapir and his work as a chemical engineer for the
Hartford Insurance Company investigating the causes of fires.
One of his cases while working for the insurance company was a fire at a business where there
were a number of gasoline drums. Those that contained gasoline were surrounded by signs warning
employees to be cautious around them and to avoid smoking near them. The workers were always
careful around those drums. On the other hand, empty gasoline drums were stored in another area,
but employees were more careless there. Someone tossed a cigarette or lighted match into one of the
“empty” drums, it went up in flames, and started a fire that burned the business to the ground. Whorf
theorized that the meaning of the word empty implied to the worker that “nothing” was there to be
cautious about so the worker behaved accordingly. Unfortunately, an “empty” gasoline drum may
still contain fumes, which are more flammable than the liquid itself.
Whorf ’s studies at Yale involved working with Native American languages, including Hopi. The
Hopi language is quite different from English, in many ways. For example, let’s look at how the Hopi
language deals with time. Western languages (and cultures) view time as a flowing river in which we
are being carried continuously away from a past, through the present, and into a future. Our verb
systems reflect that concept with specific tenses for past, present, and future. We think of this concept
of time as universal, that all humans see it the same way. A Hopi speaker has very different ideas and
the structure of their language both reflects and shapes the way they think about time. The Hopi
language has no present, past, or future tense. Instead, it divides the world into what Whorf called
the manifested and unmanifest domains. The manifested domain deals with the physical universe,
including the present, the immediate past and future; the verb system uses the same basic structure
for all of them. The unmanifest domain involves the remote past and the future, as well as the world
of desires, thought, and life forces. The set of verb forms dealing with this domain are consistent
for all of these areas, and are different from the manifested ones. Also, there are no words for hours,
minutes, or days of the week.
Native Hopi speakers often had great difficulty adapting to life in the English speaking world
when it came to being “on time” for work or other events. It is simply not how they had been conditioned to behave with respect to time in their Hopi world, which followed the phases of the moon
and the movements of the sun. In a book about the Abenaki who lived in Vermont in the mid-1800s,
Trudy Ann Parker described their concept of time, which very much resembled that of the Hopi and
many of the other Native American tribes. “They called one full day a sleep, and a year was called a
winter. Each month was referred to as a moon and always began with a new moon. An Indian day
wasn’t divided into minutes or hours. It had four time periods—sunrise, noon, sunset, and midnight.
Each season was determined by the budding or leafing of plants, the spawning of fish or the rutting

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

time for animals. Most Indians thought the white race had been running around like scared rabbits
ever since the invention of the clock.”5
The lexicon, or vocabulary, of a language is an inventory of the items a culture talks about and has
categorized in order to make sense of the world and deal with it effectively. For example, modern life
is dictated for many by the need to travel by some kind of vehicle—cars, trucks, SUVs, trains, buses,
etc. We therefore have thousands of words to talk about them, including types of vehicles, models,
brands, or parts.
The most important aspects of each culture are similarly reflected in the lexicon of its language.
Among the societies living in the islands of Oceania in the Pacific, fish have great economic and
cultural importance. This is reflected in the rich vocabulary that describes all aspects of the fish and
the environments that islanders depend on for survival. For example, in Palau there are about 1,000
fish species and Palauan fishermen knew, long before biologists existed, details about the anatomy,
behavior, growth patterns and habitat of most of them—in many cases far more than modern biologists know even today. Much of fish behavior is related to the tides and the phases of the moon.
Throughout Oceania, the names given to certain days of the lunar months reflect the likelihood of
successful fishing. For example, in the Caroline Islands, the name for the night before the new moon
is otolol, which means “to swarm.” The name indicates that the best fishing days cluster around the
new moon. In Hawai`i and Tahiti two sets of days have names containing the particle `ole or `ore;
one occurs in the first quarter of the moon and the other in the third quarter. The same name is given
to the prevailing wind during those phases. The words mean “nothing,” because those days were
considered bad for fishing as well as planting.
Parts of Whorf ’s hypothesis, known as linguistic relativity, were controversial from the beginning, and still are among some linguists. Yet Whorf ’s ideas now form the basis for an entire sub-field
of cultural anthropology: cognitive or psychological anthropology. A number of studies have been
done that support Whorf ’s ideas. Linguist George Lakoff’s work looks at the pervasive existence of
metaphors in everyday speech that can be said to predispose a speaker’s world view and attitudes on
a variety of human experiences.6 A metaphor is an expression in which one kind of thing is understood and experienced in terms of another entirely unrelated thing; the metaphors in a language can
reveal aspects of the culture of its speakers. Take, for example, the concept of an argument. In logic
and philosophy, an argument is a discussion involving differing points of view, or a debate. But the
conceptual metaphor in American culture can be stated as ARGUMENT IS WAR. This metaphor is
reflected in many expressions of the everyday language of American speakers: I won the argument. He
shot down every point I made. They attacked every argument we made. Your point is right on target. I
had a fight with my boyfriend last night. In other words, we use words appropriate for discussing war
when we talk about arguments, which are certainly not real war. But we actually think of arguments
as a verbal battle that often involve anger, and even violence, which then structures how we argue.
To illustrate that this concept of argument is not universal, Lakoff suggests imagining a culture
where an argument is not something to be won or lost, with no strategies for attacking or defending,
but rather as a dance where the dancers’ goal is to perform in an artful, pleasing way. No anger or
violence would occur or even be relevant to speakers of this language, because the metaphor for that
culture would be ARGUMENT IS DANCE.

Language

15

LANGUAGE IN ITS SOCIAL SETTINGS: LANGUAGE AND IDENTITY
The way we speak can be seen as a marker of who we are and with whom we identify. We talk like
the other people around us: where we live, our social class, our region of the country, our ethnicity,
and even our gender. These categories are not homogeneous. All New Yorkers do not talk exactly the
same; all women do not speak according to stereotypes; all African-Americans do not speak an African-American dialect. No one speaks the same way in all situations and contexts, but there are some
consistencies in speaking styles that are associated with many of these categories.

Social Class
As discussed above, people can indicate social class by the way they speak. The closer to the standard version their dialect is, the more they are seen as a member of a higher social class because the
dialect reflects a higher level of education. In American culture, social class is defined primarily by
income and net worth, and it is difficult (but not impossible) to acquire wealth without a high level
of education. However, the speech of people in the higher social classes also varies with the region of
the country where they live, because there is no single standard of American English, especially with
respect to pronunciation. An educated Texan will sound different from an educated Bostonian, but
they will use the standard version of English from their own region. The lower the social class of a
community, the more their language variety will differ from both the standard and from the vernaculars of other regions.

Ethnicity
An ethnicity, or ethnic group, is a group of people who identify with each other based on some
combination of shared cultural heritage, ancestry, history, country of origin, language, or dialect.
In the United States such groups are frequently referred to as “races,” but there is no such thing as
biological race, and this misconception has historically led to racism and discrimination. Because
of the social implications and biological inaccuracy of the term “race,” it is often more accurate and
appropriate to use the terms ethnicity or ethnic group. A language variety is often associated with
an ethnic group when its members use language as a marker of solidarity. They may also use it to
distinguish themselves from a larger, sometimes oppressive, language group when they are a minority
population.
A familiar example of an oppressed ethnic group with a distinctive dialect is African-Americans.
They have a unique history among minorities in the United States, with their centuries-long experience as captive slaves and subsequent decades under Jim Crow laws. (These laws restricted their rights
after their emancipation from slavery.) With the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and 1968 and other laws,
African-Americans gained legal rights to access public places and housing, but it is not possible to
eliminate racism and discrimination only by passing laws; both still exist among the white majority.
It is no longer culturally appropriate to openly express racism, but it is much less frowned upon to
express negative attitudes about African-American Vernacular English (AAVE). Typically, it is not the
language itself that these attitudes are targeting; it is the people who speak it.
As with any language variety, AAVE is a complex, rule-driven, grammatically consistent language
variety, a dialect of American English with a distinctive history. A widely accepted hypothesis of
the origins of AAVE is as follows. When Africans were captured and brought to the Americas, they

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

brought their own languages with them. But some of them already spoke a version of English called a
pidgin. A pidgin is a language that springs up out of a situation in which people who do not share a
language must spend extended amounts of time together, usually in a working environment. Pidgins
are the only exception to the Language Universal number 3 (all languages are systematic, rule driven,
and equally complex overall, and equally capable of expressing any idea that the speaker wishes to
convey).
There are no primitive languages, but a pidgin is a simplified language form, cobbled together
based mainly on one core language, in this case English, using a small number of phonemes, simplified syntactic rules, and a minimal lexicon of words borrowed from the other languages involved.
A pidgin has no native speakers; it is used primarily in the environment in which it was created. An
English-based pidgin was used as a common language in many areas of West Africa by traders interacting with people of numerous language groups up and down the major rivers. Some of the captive
Africans could speak this pidgin, and it spread among them after the slaves arrived in North America
and were exposed daily to English speakers. Eventually, the use of the pidgin expanded to the point
that it developed into the original forms of what has been called a Black English plantation creole. A
creole is a language that develops from a pidgin when it becomes so widely used that children acquire
it as one of their first languages. In this situation it becomes a more fully complex language consistent
with Universal number 3.
All African-Americans do not speak AAVE, and people other than African-Americans also speak
it. Anyone who grows up in an area where their friends speak it may be a speaker of AAVE like the
rapper Eminem, a white man who grew up in an African-American neighborhood in Detroit. Present-day AAVE is not homogeneous; there are many regional and class variations. Most variations
have several features in common, for instance, two phonological features: the dropped /r/ typical of
some New York dialects, and the pronunciation of the “th” sound of words like this and that as a /d/
sound, dis and dat. Most of the features of AAVE are also present in many other English dialects,
but those dialects are not as severely stigmatized as AAVE is. It is interesting, but not surprising, that
AAVE and southern dialects of white English share many features. During the centuries of slavery
in the south, African-American slaves outnumbered whites on most plantations. Which group do
you think had the most influence on the other group’s speech? The African-American community
itself is divided about the acceptability of AAVE. It is probably because of the historical oppression
of African-Americans as a group that the dialect has survived to this day, in resistance to the majority
white society’s disapproval.

Language and Gender
In any culture that has differences in gender role expectations—and all cultures do—there are
differences in how people talk based on their sex and gender identity. These differences have nothing to do with biology. Children are taught from birth how to behave appropriately as a male or a
female in their culture, and different cultures have different standards of behavior. It must be noted
that not all men and women in a society meet these standards, but when they do not they may pay
a social price. Some societies are fairly tolerant of violations of their standards of gendered behavior,
but others are less so.
In the United States, men are generally expected to speak in a low, rather monotone pitch; it is seen
as masculine. If they do not sound sufficiently masculine, American men are likely to be negatively
labeled as effeminate. Women, on the other hand, are freer to use their entire pitch range, which

Language

17

they often do when expressing emotion, especially excitement. When a woman is a television news
announcer, she will modulate the pitch of her voice to a sound more typical of a man in order to
be perceived as more credible. Women tend to use minimal responses in a conversation more than
men. These are the vocal indications that one is listening to a speaker, such as m-hm, yeah, I see, wow,
and so forth. They tend to face their conversation partners more and use more eye contact than men.
This is one reason women often complain that men do not listen to them.
Deborah Tannen, a professor of linguistics at Georgetown University in Washington, D.C., has
done research for many years on language and gender. Her basic finding is that in conversation
women tend to use styles that are relatively cooperative, to emphasize an equal relationship, while
men seem to talk in a more competitive way in order to establish their positions in a hierarchy. She
emphasizes that both men and women may be cooperative and competitive in different ways.7
Other societies have very different standards for gendered speech styles. In Madagascar, men use
a very flowery style of talk, using proverbs, metaphors and riddles to indirectly make a point and to
avoid direct confrontation. The women on the other hand speak bluntly and say directly what is on
their minds. Both admire men’s speech and think of women’s speech as inferior. When a man wants
to convey a negative message to someone, he will ask his wife to do it for him. In addition, women
control the marketplaces where tourists bargain for prices because it is impossible to bargain with a
man who will not speak directly. It is for this reason that Malagasy women are relatively independent
economically.
In Japan, women were traditionally expected to be subservient to men and speak using a “feminine” style, appropriate for their position as wife and mother, but the Japanese culture has been
changing in recent decades so more and more women are joining the work force and achieving positions of relative power. Such women must find ways of speaking to maintain their feminine identities
and at the same time express their authority in interactions with men, a challenging balancing act.
Women in the United States do as well, to a certain extent. Even Margaret Thatcher, prime minister
of England, took speech therapy lessons to “feminize” her language use while maintaining an expression of authority.

The Deaf Culture and Signed Languages
Deaf people constitute a linguistic minority in many societies worldwide based on their common
experience of life. This often results in their identification with a local Deaf culture. Such a culture
may include shared beliefs, attitudes, values, norms, and values, like any other culture, and it is
invariably marked by communication through the use of a sign language. It is not enough to be
physically deaf (spelled with a lower case “d”) to belong to a Deaf culture (written with a capital “D”).
In fact, one does not even need to be deaf. Identification with a Deaf culture is a personal choice. It
can include family members of deaf people or anyone else who associates with deaf people, as long
as the community accepts them. Especially important, members of Deaf culture are expected to be
competent communicators in the sign language of the culture. In fact, there have been profoundly
deaf people who were not accepted into the local Deaf community because they could not sign. In
some deaf schools, at least in the United States, the practice has been to teach deaf children how to
lip read and speak orally, and to prevent them from using a signed system. They were expected to
blend in with the hearing community as much as possible. This is called the oralist approach to
education, but it is considered by members of the Deaf community to be a threat to the existence of
their culture. For the same reason, the development of cochlear implants, which can restore hearing

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

for some deaf children, has been controversial in U.S. Deaf communities. The members often have
a positive attitude toward their deafness and do not consider it to be a disability. To them, regaining
hearing represents disloyalty to the group and a desire to leave it.
According to the World Federation of the Deaf, there are over 200 distinct sign languages in the
world, which are not mutually comprehensible. They are all considered by linguists to be true languages, consistent with linguistic definitions of all human languages. They differ only in the fact that
they are based on a gestural-visual rather than a vocal-auditory sensory mode. Each is a true language
with basic units comparable to phonemes but composed of hand positions, shapes, and movements,
plus some facial expressions. Each has its own unique set of morphemes and grammatical rules.
American Sign Language (ASL), too, is a true language separate from English; it is not English on
the hands. Like all other signed languages, it is possible to sign with a word-for-word translation from
English, using finger spelling for some words, which is helpful in teaching the deaf to read, but they
prefer their own language, ASL, for ordinary interactions. Of course, Deaf culture identity intersects
with other kinds of cultural identity, like nationality, ethnicity, gender, class, and sexual orientation,
so each Deaf culture is not only small but very diverse.

LANGUAGE CHANGE: HISTORICAL LINGUISTICS
Recall the language universal stating that all languages change over time. In fact, it is not possible
to keep them from doing so. How and why does this happen? The study of how languages change
is known as historical linguistics. The processes, both historical and linguistic, that cause language
change can affect all of its systems: phonological, morphological, lexical, syntactic, and semantic.
Historical linguists have placed most of the languages of the world into taxonomies, groups of
languages classified together based on words that have the same or similar meanings. Language taxonomies create something like a family tree of languages. For example, words in the Romance family
of languages, called sister languages, show great similarities to each other because they have all derived from the same “mother” language, Latin (the language of Rome). In turn, Latin is considered a
“sister” language to Sanskrit (once spoken in India and now the mother language of many of India’s
modern languages, and still the language of the Hindu religion) and classical Greek. Their “mother”
language is called “Indo-European,” which is also the mother (or grandmother!) language of almost
all the rest of European languages.
Let’s briefly examine the history of the English language as an example of these processes of change.
England was originally populated by Celtic peoples, the ancestors of today’s Irish, Scots, and Welsh.
The Romans invaded the islands in the first-century AD, bringing their Latin language with them.
This was the edge of their empire; their presence there was not as strong as it was on the European
mainland. When the Roman Empire was defeated in about 500 AD by Germanic speaking tribes
from northern Europe (the “barbarians”), a number of those related Germanic languages came to be
spoken in various parts of what would become England. These included the languages of the Angles
and the Saxons, whose names form the origin of the term Anglo-Saxon and of the name of England
itself—Angle-land. At this point, the languages spoken in England included those Germanic languages, which gradually merged as various dialects of English, with a small influence from the Celtic
languages, some Latin from the Romans, and a large influence from Viking invaders. This form of
English, generally referred to as Old English, lasted for about 500 years. In 1066 AD, England was
invaded by William the Conqueror from Normandy, France. New French rulers brought the French
language. French is a Latin-based language, and it is by far the greatest source of the Latin-based

Language

19

words in English today; almost 10,000 French words were adopted into the English of the time period. This was the beginning of Middle English, which lasted another 500 years or so.
The change to Modern English had two main causes. One was the invention of the printing press
in the fifteenth century, which resulted in a deliberate effort to standardize the various dialects of
English, mostly in favor of the dialect spoken by the elite. The other source of change, during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, was a major shift in the pronunciation of many of the vowels. Middle
English words like hus and ut came to be pronounced house and out. Many other vowel sounds also
changed in a similar manner.
None of the early forms of English are easily recognizable as English to modern speakers. Here
is an example of the first two lines of the Lord’s Prayer in Old English, from 995 AD, before the
Norman Invasion:
Fæder ūre, ðū ðē eart on heofonum,
Sī ðīn nama gehālgod.
Here are the same two lines in Middle English, English spoken from 1066 AD until about 1500 AD.
These are taken from the Wycliffe Bible in 1389 AD:
Our fadir that art in heuenes,
halwid be thi name.
The following late Middle English/early Modern English version from the 1526 AD Tyndale Bible,
shows some of the results of grammarians’ efforts to standardize spelling and vocabulary for wider
distribution of the printed word due to the invention of the printing press:
O oure father which arte in heven,
halowed be thy name.
And finally, this example is from the King James Version of the Bible, 1611 AD, in the early Modern
English language of Shakespeare. It is almost the same archaic form that modern Christians use.
Our father which art in heauen,
hallowed be thy name.8
Over the centuries since the beginning of Modern English, it has been further affected by exposure
to other languages and dialects worldwide.9 This exposure brought about new words and changed
meanings of old words. More changes to the sound systems resulted from phonological processes that
may or may not be attributable to the influence of other languages. Many other changes, especially
in recent decades, have been brought about by cultural and technological changes that require new
vocabulary to deal with them.
Try This: Just think of all the words we use today that have either changed their primary
meanings, or are completely new: mouse and mouse pad, google, app, computer (which
used to be a person who computes!), texting, cool, cell, gay. How many more can you think
of?

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

GLOBALIZATION AND LANGUAGE
Globalization is the spread of people, their cultures and languages, products, money, ideas, and
information around the world. Globalization is nothing new; it has been happening throughout the
existence of humans, but for the last 500 years it has been increasing in its scope and pace, primarily
due to improvements in transportation and communication. Beginning in the fifteenth-century,
English explorers started spreading their language to colonies in all parts of the world. English is now
one of the three or four most widely spoken languages. It has official status in at least 60 countries,
and it is widely spoken in many others. Other colonizers also spread their languages, especially Spanish, French, Portuguese, Arabic, and Russian. Like English, each has its regional variants. One effect
of colonization has often been the suppression of local languages in favor of the language of the more
powerful colonizers.
In the past half century, globalization has been dominated by the spread of North American popular culture and language to other countries. Today it is difficult to find a country that does not have
American music, movies and television programs, or Coca Cola and McDonald’s, or many other
artifacts of life in the United States, and the English terms that go with them.
In addition, people are moving from rural areas to cities in their own countries, or they are migrating to other countries in unprecedented numbers. Many have moved because they are refugees
fleeing violence, or they found it increasingly difficult to survive economically in their own countries.
This mass movement of people has led to the on-going extinction of large numbers of the world’s
languages as people abandon their home regions and language in order to assimilate into their new
homes.

Language Shift, Language Maintenance, and Language Death
Of the approximately 6,000 languages still surviving today, about half the world’s more than seven
billion people speak only ten. These include Mandarin Chinese, two languages from India, Spanish, English, Arabic, Portuguese, Russian, Japanese, and German. Many of the rest of the world’s
languages are spoken by a few thousand people, or even just a few hundred, and most of them are
threatened with extinction, called language death. It has been predicted that by the end of this
century up to 90 percent of the languages spoken today will be gone. The rapid disappearance of so
many languages is of great concern to linguists and anthropologists alike. When a language is lost,
its associated culture and unique set of knowledge and worldview are lost with it forever. Remember
Whorf ’s hypothesis. An interesting website shows short videos of the last speakers of several endangered languages, including one speaking an African “click language.”
Some minority languages are not threatened with extinction, even those that are spoken by a
relatively small number of people. Others, spoken by many thousands, may be doomed. What determines which survive and which do not? Smaller languages that are associated with a specific country
are likely to survive. Others that are spoken across many national boundaries are also less threatened,
such as Quechua, an indigenous language spoken throughout much of South America, including
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Chile, Bolivia, and Argentina. The great majority of the world’s languages
are spoken by people with minority status in their countries. After all, there are only about 193 countries in the world, and over 6,000 languages are spoken in them. You can do the math.
The survival of the language of a given speech community is ultimately based on the accumulation
of individual decisions by its speakers to continue using it or to abandon it. The abandonment of

Language

21

a language in favor of a new one is called language shift. These decisions are usually influenced by
the society’s prevailing attitudes. In the case of a minority speech community that is surrounded by
a more powerful majority, an individual might keep or abandon the native language depending on
a complex array of factors. The most important factors will be the attitudes of the minority people
toward themselves and their language, and the attitude of the majority toward the minority.
Language represents a marker of identity, an emblem of group membership and solidarity, but that
marker may have a downside as well. If the majority look down on the minority as inferior in some
way and discriminates against them, some members of the minority group may internalize that attitude and try to blend in with the majority by adopting the majority’s culture and language. Others
might more highly value their identity as a member of that stigmatized group, in spite of the discrimination by the majority, and continue to speak their language as a symbol of resistance against the
more powerful group. One language that is a minority language when spoken in the United States
and that shows no sign of dying out either there or in the world at large, is Spanish. It is the primary
language in many countries and in the United States it is by far the largest minority language.
A former student of mine, James Kim (pictured in Figure 3 as a child with his brother),
illustrates some of the common dilemmas a child
of immigrants might go through as he loses his
first language. Although he was born in California, he spoke only Korean for the first six years
of his life. Then he went to school, where he was
the only Korean child in his class. He quickly
learned English, the language of instruction and
the language of his classmates. Under peer pressure, he began refusing to speak Korean, even to
his parents, who spoke little English. His parents
tried to encourage him to keep his Korean language and culture by sending him to Korean school on
Saturdays, but soon he refused to attend. As a college student, James began to regret the loss of the
language of his parents, not to mention his relationship with them. He tried to take a college class in
Korean, but it was too difficult and time consuming. After consulting with me, he created a six-minute radio piece, called “First Language Attrition: Why My Parents and I Don’t Speak the Same Language,” while he was an intern at a National Public Radio station. He interviewed his parents in the
piece and was embarrassed to realize he needed an interpreter.10 Since that time, he has started taking
Korean lessons again, and he took his first trip to Korea with his family during the summer of 2014.
He was very excited about the prospect of reconnecting with his culture, with his first language, and
especially with his parents.
The Korean language as a whole is in no danger of extinction, but many Korean speaking communities of immigrants in the United States, like other minority language groups in many countries,
are having difficulty maintaining their language and culture. Those who are the most successful live
in large, geographically coherent neighborhoods; they maintain closer ties to their homeland by
frequent visits, telephone, and email contact with relatives. There may also be a steady stream of new
immigrants from the home country. This is the case with most Spanish speaking communities in the
United States, but it is less so with the Korean community.11
Another example of an oppressed minority group that has struggled with language and culture
loss is Native Americans. Many were completely wiped out by the European colonizers, some by

22

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

deliberate genocide but the great majority (up to 90 percent) by the diseases that the white explorers
brought with them, against which the Native Americans had no immunity. In the twentieth-century,
the American government stopped trying to kill Native Americans but instead tried to assimilate
them into the white majority culture. It did this in part by forcing Native American children to go
to boarding schools where they were required to cut their hair, practice Christianity, and speak only
English. When they were allowed to go back home years later, they had lost their languages and their
culture, but had not become culturally “white” either. The status of Native Americans in the nineteenth and twentieth-centuries as a scorned minority prompted many to hide their ethnic identities
even from their own children. In this way, the many hundreds of original Native American languages
in the United States have dwindled to less than 140 spoken today, according to UNESCO. More
than half of those could disappear in the next few years, since many are spoken by only a handful
of older members of their tribes. However, a number of Native American tribes have recently been
making efforts to revive their languages and cultures, with the help of linguists and often by using
texts and old recordings made by early linguists like Edward Sapir.

Revitalization of Indigenous Languages
A fascinating example of a tribal language revitalization program is that of the Wampanoag tribe
in Massachusetts. The Wampanoag were the Native Americans who met the Puritans when they
landed at Plymouth Rock, helped them survive the first winter, and who were with them at the first
Thanksgiving. The contemporary descendants of that historic tribe still live in Massachusetts, but
bringing back their language was not something Wampanoag people had ever thought possible because no one had spoken it for more than a century.
A young Wampanoag woman
named Jessie Little Doe Baird (pictured
in Figure 4 with her daughter Mae) was
inspired by a series of dreams in which
her ancestors spoke to her in their language, which she of course did not understand. She eventually earned a master’s degree in Algonquian linguistics at
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
in Boston and launched a project to
bring her language back from the dead.
This process was made possible by the
existence of a large collection of documents, including copies of the King
James Bible, written phonetically in
Wampanoag during the seventeenth
and eighteenth-centuries. She also worked with speakers of languages related to the Algonquian family to help in the reconstruction of the language. The community has established a school to teach
the language to the children and promote its use among the entire community. Her daughter Mae is
among the first new native speakers of Wampanoag.12

Language

23

How Is the Digital Age Changing Communication?
The invention of the printing press in the fifteenth-century was just the beginning of technological
transformations that made the spread of information in European languages and ideas possible across
time and space using the printed word. Recent advances in travel and digital technology are rapidly
transforming communication; now we can be in contact with almost anyone, anywhere, in seconds.
However, it could be said that the new age of instantaneous access to everything and everyone is
actually continuing a social divide that started with the printing press.
In the fifteenth-century, few people could read and write, so only the tiny educated minority were
in a position to benefit from printing. Today, only those who have computers and the skills to use
them, the educated and relatively wealthy, have access to this brave new world of communication.
Some schools have adopted computers and tablets for their students, but these schools are more often
found in wealthier neighborhoods. Thus, technology is continuing to contribute to the growing gap
between the economic haves and the have-nots.
There is also a digital generation gap between the young, who have grown up with computers, and
the older generations, who have had to learn to use computers as adults. These two generations have
been referred to as digital natives and digital immigrants.13 The difference between the two groups
can be compared to that of children versus adults learning a new language; learning is accomplished
much more easily by the young.
Computers, and especially social media, have made it possible for millions of people to connect
with each other for purposes of political activism, including “Occupy Wall Street” in the United
States and the “Arab Spring” in the Middle East. Some anthropologists have introduced computers
and cell phones to the people they studied in remote areas, and in this way they were able to stay in
contact after finishing their ethnographic work. Those people, in turn, were now able to have greater
access to the outside world.
Facebook and Twitter are becoming key elements in the survival of a number of endangered indigenous languages. Facebook is now available in over 70 languages, and Twitter in about 40 languages.
For example, a website has been created that seeks to preserve Anishinaabemowin, an endangered
Native American language from Michigan.
The language has 8,000-10,000 speakers, but most of the native speakers are over 70 years old,
which means the language is threatened with extinction. Modern social media are an ideal medium
to help encourage young people to communicate in their language to keep it alive.14
Clearly, language and communication through modern technology are in the forefront of a rapidly changing world, for better or for worse. It’s anybody’s guess what will happen next.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. How do you think modern communication technologies like cell phones and computers are
changing how people communicate? Is the change positive or negative?
2. How is language related to social and economic inequality? Do you think that attitudes about
language varieties have affected you and/or your family?
3. How has the use of specific terms in the news helped to shape public opinion? For example,
what are the different implications of the terms terrorist versus freedom fighter? Downsizing
versus firing staff at a company? Euphemistic terms used in reference to war include friendly
fire, pacification, collateral damage? Can you think of other examples?

24

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

4. Think about the different styles you use when speaking to your siblings and parents, your
friends, your significant other, your professors, your grandparents. What are some of the
specific differences among these styles? What do these differences indicate about the power
relationships between you and others?

GLOSSARY
Arbitrariness: the relationship between a symbol and its referent (meaning), in which there is no
obvious connection between them.
Bound morpheme: a unit of meaning that cannot stand alone; it must be attached to another morpheme.
Closed system: a form of communication that cannot create new meanings or messages; it can only
convey pre-programmed (innate) messages.
Code-switching: using two or more language varieties in a particular interaction.
Creole: a language that develops from a pidgin when the pidgin becomes so widely used that children
acquire it as one of their first languages. Creoles are more fully complex than pidgins.
Critical age range hypothesis: research suggesting that a child will gradually lose the ability to
acquire language naturally and without effort if he or she is not exposed to other people speaking a
language until past the age of puberty. This applies to the acquisition of a second language as well.
Cultural transmission: the process by which aspects of culture are passed from person to person,
often generation to generation; a feature of some species’ communication systems.
Design features: descriptive characteristics of the communication systems of all species, including
that of humans, proposed by linguist Charles Hockett to serve as a definition of human language.
Dialect: a variety of speech. The term is often applied to a subordinate variety of a language. Speakers
of two dialects of the same language do not necessarily always understand each other.
Discreteness: a feature of human speech that can be isolated from others.
Displacement: the ability to communicate about things that are outside of the here and now.
Duality of patterning: at the first level of patterning, meaningless discrete sounds of speech are
combined to form words and parts of words that carry meaning. In the second level of patterning,
those units of meaning are recombined to form an infinite possible number of longer messages such
as phrases and sentences.
Gesture-call system: a system of non-verbal communication using varying combinations of sound,
body language, scent, facial expression, and touch, typical of great apes and other primates, as well
as humans.
Historical linguistics: the study of how languages change.
Interchangeability: the ability of all individuals of the species to both send and receive messages; a
feature of some species’ communication systems.
Kinesics: the study of all forms of human body language.
Language: an idealized form of speech, usually referred to as the standard variety.
Language death: the total extinction of a language.
Language shift: when a community stops using their old language and adopts a new one.

Language

25

Language universals: characteristics shared by all linguists.
Larynx: the voice box, containing the vocal bands that produce the voice.
Lexicon: the vocabulary of a language.
Linguistic relativity: the idea that the structures and words of a language influence how its speakers
think, how they behave, and ultimately the culture itself (also known as the Whorf Hypothesis).
Middle English: the form of the English language spoken from 1066 AD until about 1500 AD.
Minimal response: the vocal indications that one is listening to a speaker.
Modern English: the form of the English language spoken from about 1500 AD to the present.
Morphemes: the basic meaningful units in a language.
Morphology: the study of the morphemes of language.
Old English: English language from its beginnings to about 1066 AD.
Open system: a form of communication that can create an infinite number of new messages; a feature of human language only.
Oralist approach: an approach to the education of deaf children that emphasizes lip reading and
speaking orally while discouraging use of signed language.
Palate: the roof of the mouth.
Paralanguage: those characteristics of speech beyond the actual words spoken, such as pitch, loudness, tempo.
Pharynx: the throat cavity, located above the larynx.
Phonemes: the basic meaningless sounds of a language.
Phonology: the study of the sounds of language.
Pidgin: a simplified language that springs up out of a situation in which people who do not share a
language must spend extended amounts of time together.
Pragmatic function: the useful purpose of a communication. Usefulness is a feature of all species’
communication systems.
Pragmatics: how social context contributes to meaning in an interaction.
Productivity/creativity: the ability to produce and understand messages that have never been expressed before.
Proxemics: the study of the social use of space, including the amount of space an individual tries to
maintain around himself in interactions with others.
Register: a style of speech that varies depending on who is speaking to whom and in what context.
Semanticity: the meaning of signs in a communication system; a feature of all species’ communication systems.
Semantics: how meaning is conveyed at the word and phrase level.
Speech act: the intention or goal of an utterance; the intention may be different from the dictionary
definitions of the words involved.
Standard: the variant of any language that has been given special prestige in the community.
Symbol: anything that serves to refer to something else.
Syntax: the rules by which a language combines morphemes into larger units.

26

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Taxonomies: a system of classification.
Universal grammar (UG): a theory developed by linguist Noam Chomsky suggesting that a basic
template for all human languages is embedded in our genes.
Unbound morpheme: a morpheme that can stand alone as a separate word.
Vernaculars: non-standard varieties of a language, which are usually distinguished from the standard
by their inclusion of stigmatized forms.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Linda Light has been a lecturer in linguistic and cultural anthropology at California State University Long Beach since 1995. During much of that period she also taught as adjunct professor at
Cypress College, Santa Ana College, Rancho Santiago College, and Golden
West College, all in Orange County, California. She was a consultant to Coastline Community College District in the production of thirty-five educational
videos that were used in three series, including the cultural anthropology series
Our Diverse World. Her main areas of interest have been indigenous language
loss and maintenance, language and gender, and first language attrition in the
children of immigrants.

NOTES
1. You can find a documentary film about Genie via Google or YouTube under the title Genie, Secret of the Wild Child, a
NOVA production.
2. Adapted here from Nick Cipollone, Steven Keiser, and Shravan Vasishth, Language Files (Columbus: Ohio State University
Press 1998), 20-23.
3. John McWhorter, The Power of Babel: A Natural History of Language (New York: Times Books, Henry Holt, 2001), 53.
4. William Labov, The Social Stratification of English in New York City (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1964).
5. Trudy Ann Parker, Aunt Sarah, Woman of the Dawnland (Lancaster, NH, Dawnland Publications 1994), 56.
6. George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, Metaphors We Live By (Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press, 1980),
4-5.
7. For more information see Deborah Tannen, Gender and Discourse (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1996). Or, Deborah Tannen, You Just Don’t Understand: Women and Men in Conversation (New York: Harper Collins, 2010).
8. From Wikipedia: History of the Lord’s Prayer in English.
9. You can hear the entire prayers in Old English and Middle English read out loud in YouTube files: The Lord’s Prayer in Old
English from the Eleventh Century, and The Lord’s Prayer/Preier of Oure Lord in Recorded Middle English.
10. You can hear the 6-minute piece at http://www.scpr.org/programs/offramp/2012/04/05/25912/first-language-attritionwhy-my-parents-and-i-dont/
11. From François Grosjean, Life with Two Languages: An Introduction to Bilingualism (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University
Press, 1982), chapter two.
12. Filmmaker Anne Makepeace created a documentary of the story, called We Still Live Here: Âs Nutayuneân, which PBS
broadcast in 2010. You can watch the clips from the video online.
13. Terms first coined by John Palfrey and Urs Gasser, Born Digital: Understanding the First Generation of Digital Native (New
York, Basic Books, 2008).
14. Lydia Emmanouilidou, For Rare Languages, Social Media Provide New Hope. http://www.npr.org/sections/
alltechconsidered/2014/07/26/333732206/for-rare-languages-social-media-provide-new-hope

Subsistence
Isaac Shearn, Community College of Baltimore County
ishearn@ccbcmd.edu
http://ccbcmd.academia.edu/IsaacShearn

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Identify the four modes of subsistence
and describe the major activities
associated with obtaining food in
each system.
• Explain the difference between wild
and domesticated resources and how
plants and animals are domesticated.
• Explain the relationship between the
subsistence system used in a society
and the amount of private property or
wealth differences that develop.
• Assess the ways in which subsistence
systems are linked to expectations
about gender roles.
• Categorize the social and economic
characteristics associated with
agriculture and describe the benefits
and drawbacks of the agricultural
subsistence system.
• Analyze the ways in which the
global agricultural system separates
producers from consumers and
contributes to wealth differences.
• Appraise the ways in which human
intervention in the environment
has made it difficult to separate the
“natural” from the human-influenced
environment.

Think about the last meal you ate. Where did the ingredients come from? If it was a cheeseburger, where did the cow
live and die? Now think about all the food you consume in
a normal week. Can you identify the geographic origin of
all the ingredients? In other words, how much do you know
about the trip your food took to arrive at your plate? How
much you know about where your food comes from would
tell an anthropologist something about the subsistence system used in your community. A subsistence system is the set
of practices used by members of a society to acquire food.
If you are like me and you cannot say much about where
your food comes from, then you are part of an agricultural
society that separates food production from consumption,
a recent development in the history of humans. People who
come from nonagricultural societies have a more direct connection to their food and are likely to know where 100 percent of their food comes from.
Finding food each day is a necessity for every person no
matter where that person lives, but food is not just a matter
of basic survival. Humans assign symbolic meaning to food,
observing cultural norms about what is considered “good”
to eat and applying taboos against the consumption of other
foods. Catholics may avoid meat during Lent, for instance,
while Jewish and Islamic communities forbid the consumption of certain foods such as pork. In addition to these attitudes and preferences, every society has preferred methods
for preparing food and for consuming it with others. The
cultural norms and attitudes surrounding food and eating
are known as foodways. By studying both the subsistence
system used by a society to acquire food and the foodway
associated with consuming it, anthropologists gain insight
into the most important daily tasks in every society.

STUDYING SUBSISTENCE SYSTEMS
Since the need to eat is one of the few true human universals, anthropologists have studied subsistence systems
from a variety of perspectives. One way to think about the
importance of food for human populations is to consider
the number of calories an individual must obtain every day

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

in order to survive. Anthropologists use the term carrying capacity to quantify the number of calories that can be extracted from a particular unit of land to support a human population. In his 1798
publication An Essay on the Principle of Population, Thomas Malthus argued, “the power of population is indefinitely greater than the power in the earth to produce subsistence for man.”1 He suggested
that human populations grow at an exponential rate, meaning the population climbs at a rate that is
constantly increasing. However, the availability of resources in the environment increases at only an
arithmetic rate, which means that left unchecked human populations would soon outstrip the environment’s ability to provide sustenance. Malthus famously argued that war, famine, and disease were
“good” or at least “functional” in the sense that they kept populations from growing too large.

While Malthus presented a grim view of humanity’s future, research suggests that the rate of
human population growth, currently about one percent per year, is actually slowing. It is also not
necessarily true that population growth has an entirely negative impact on human communities.
The Danish economist Ester Boserup, for example, argued that human history reveals a connection
between population growth and cultural innovation, particularly innovation in farming techniques.
Because necessity is the mother of invention, she reasoned, the pressure of having more mouths to
feed could be the dynamic that drives societies to develop new solutions.2
Modern anthropological studies of subsistence systems draw on insights and perspectives from
several different fields, including biology, chemistry, and ecology, as well as a range of ethnographic
techniques. This interdisciplinary perspective allows for cross-cultural comparison of human diets. In
several decades of anthropological research on subsistence systems, anthropologists have observed
that the quest for food affects almost every aspect of daily life. For instance, every person plays a role
in society as a producer, distributor, or consumer of food. In the journey of a fish from the sea to the
plate, for instance, we can see that in some societies, the same person can fill more than one of those

Subsistence

3

roles, while in other societies there is more specialization. In a small fishing village, the same person
might catch the fish, distribute some extra to friends and family, and then consume the bounty that
same day. In a city, the consumer of the fish at a fancy restaurant is not the same person who caught
the fish. In fact, that person almost certainly has no knowledge of who caught, cleaned, distributed,
and prepared the fish he or she is consuming. The web of social connections that we can trace
through subsistence provide a very particular kind of anthropological insight into how societies function at their most basic level.

MODES OF SUBSISTENCE
Like all human systems, a society’s subsistence system is intricately linked to other aspects of
culture such as kinship, politics, and religion. Although we can study these systems in isolation,
it is important to remember that in the real world all aspects of culture overlap in complex ways.
Consider harvest rituals, for example, which are religious ceremonies focused on improving the food
supply. These rituals are shaped by religious beliefs as well as the demands and challenges of obtaining
food. Likewise, subsistence systems are the economic base of every society. Working to put food on
the table is the essential task of every family or household, and this work is the basis of a domestic
economy that interacts with the modes of production and modes of exchange described in the Economics chapter.
When anthropologists first began to examine subsistence systems, they started like all scientists
do, with classification. Early on, anthropologists saw the benefit of grouping similar societies into
types, or categories, based on the range of practices they used in the quest for food. These groupings
allowed for comparisons between cultures. At a basic level, societies can be divided into those that
have an immediate return system for finding food and those that have a delayed return system. The
residents of a small fishing village who eat the fish they catch each day have an immediate return on
their labor. Farmers who must wait several months between the time they plant seeds and the time
they harvest have a delayed return system.
Beyond this basic division, anthropologists recognize four general types of food system known as
modes of subsistence. The four modes of subsistence are foraging, pastoralism, horticulture, and
agriculture. Each mode is defined by the tasks involved in obtaining food as well as the way members

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

of the society are organized socially to accomplish these tasks. Because each mode of subsistence is
tailored to particular ecological conditions, we can think of each culture’s subsistence system as an
adaptation, or a set of survival strategies uniquely developed to suit a particular environment. Because culture shapes the way we view and interact with the environment, different societies can adapt
to similar environments in different ways. Foraging, sometimes known as hunting and gathering,
describes societies that rely primarily on “wild” plant and animal food resources. Pastoralism is a
subsistence system in which people raise herds of domesticated livestock. Horticulture is the smallscale cultivation of crops intended primarily for subsistence. Agriculture, the subsistence system
used in the United States, involves the cultivation of domesticated plants and animals using technologies that allow for intensive use of the land. Can all societies be categorized neatly into one of
these modes? No. In fact, almost every society combines one or more of these strategies into their
subsistence practices. For example, in the United States there are individuals who participate in all
of these subsistence modes, including foraging. When anthropologists analyze a subsistence system,
they look for the dominant mode of subsistence, or the most typical way that members of a society
procure food. So, while some people in the United States grow their own food or hunt wild animals,
the dominant mode of subsistence is agriculture, and people obtain food primarily by purchasing it.

Foraging
“Why should we plant, when there are so many mongongos in the world?”
—/Xashe, !Kung forager3
Foraging is a mode of subsistence defined by its reliance on wild plant and animal food resources
already available in the environment rather than on domesticated species that have been altered by
human intervention. Foragers use a remarkable variety of practices to procure meals. Hunting for
animal protein is central to the foraging lifestyle and foragers capture and consume a wide variety
of animals, from squirrels caught with a bow and arrow or blow dart to buffalo once killed by the
dozens in communal hunts. Fishing for marine resources forms the basis for acquiring protein in
many foraging communities and includes a range of practices from exploiting coastal shellfish and
crab, to harvesting offshore resources such as deep sea fish and marine mammals such as whales and
seals. Augmenting the protein from hunting or fishing, gathered wild plant resources, such as fruits,
nuts, roots, tubers, and berries typically provide a large percentage of the calories that go into any
meal. Gathering requires expert knowledge of where plant resources can be found, when they will be
best to harvest, and how to prepare them for consumption. Foraging is the only immediate return
subsistence system.
Foraging societies tend to have what is called a broad spectrum diet: a diet based on a wide range
of resources. Many of the foods regularly eaten by foragers, such as insects and worms, would not
necessarily be considered edible by many people in the United States. For example, many people do
not know that earthworms are a good source of iron and high-quality protein, roughly equivalent
to eggs, but that is exactly what anthropologists learned by studying the diet of foraging societies
in Venezuela.4 Foragers are scientists of their own ecosystems, having acquired extensive knowledge
of the natural world through experience that allows them to exploit many kinds of food resources.
The Aché, a foraging group living in the subtropical rainforest in Paraguay, eat 33 different kinds of
mammals, more than 15 species of fish, the adult forms of 5 insects, 10 types of larvae, and at least 14
kinds of honey. This is in addition to finding and collecting 40 species of plants.5 The !Kung foragers,

Subsistence

5

who live in the Kalahari Desert in southern Africa, treasure the mongongo nut, which is tasty, high
in protein, and abundant for most of the year, but they also hunt giraffes, six species of antelope, and
many kinds of smaller game like porcupine.6
In general, foraging societies are small, with low population densities of less than 5 people per
square mile. Large families and communities are not necessarily desirable since more mouths to feed
can equate to increased pressure to find food. Another factor that contributes to a lower population
density is the fact that it is more difficult for the young and the elderly to participate in food procurement. Children only gradually acquire the skills necessary to successfully find food and generally do
not make significant contributions to the group until their teenage years. Likewise, elders who can
no longer produce enough food themselves expect to be cared for by others.7
One important hallmark of foraging societies is their egalitarian social structure. Stark differences
in wealth, which characterize many societies, are rare in foraging communities. One reason for this
is that foragers have a different perspective on private property. Foraging societies tend to move
their camps frequently to exploit various resources, so holding on to a lot of personal possessions or
“wealth” is impractical. Foragers also place a high cultural value on generosity. Sharing of food and
other resources is a social norm and a measure of a person’s goodness. Those who resist sharing what
they have with others might be ridiculed, or could even become social outcasts.8 Over the long term,
daily habits of giving and receiving reinforce social equality. This practice is also an important survival
strategy that helps groups get through times of food scarcity.
Though foragers have high levels of social equality, not everyone is treated exactly the same. Gender inequality exists in many communities and develops from the fact that work among foragers is
often divided along gender lines. Some jobs, such as hunting large animals, belong to men whose
success in hunting gives them high levels of respect and prestige. While women do hunt in many
communities and often contribute the majority of the group’s food through gathering, their work
tends not to be as socially prestigious.9 Likewise, elders in foraging communities tend to command
respect and enjoy a higher social status, particularly if they have skills in healing or ritual activities.
Rule-Breaking Foragers
Nomadic lifestyles are the norm for most foragers, but there have been some societies that have
broken this rule and developed large-scale sedentary societies. This was possible in areas with abundant natural resources, most often fish. Historically, fishing formed the foundation of large-scale
foraging societies in Peru, the Pacific Northwest (the Kwakwaka’wakw), and Florida (the Calusa).
These societies all developed advanced fishing technologies that provided enough food surplus that
some people could stop participating in food procurement activities.
The Kwakwaka’wakw of the Pacific Northwest provide an excellent example. In that region, the
salmon that spawn in the rivers are so abundant that they could support sedentary populations of a
size that would normally be associated with intensive agriculture. Because there was a surplus of food,
some members of society were able to pursue other full-time occupations or specializations such as
working as artisans or even becoming “chiefs.” This led to wealth differences and social inequality
that would not normally be found in a foraging community. Conscious of the corrosive effect of
wealth and status differences on their community, the Kwakwaka’wakw developed a tradition of
potlatch, a kind of “extreme gift-giving” to neutralize some of these tensions.

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Assessing the Foraging Lifestyle
In 1651, the English philosopher Thomas Hobbes became one of the first scholars to comment
on foragers, describing their lifestyle as “nasty, brutish, and short.” We now realize that his viewpoint
was colored by ethnocentrism and, more specifically, Eurocentrism. Hobbes, as well as many scholars
that came after him, viewed Western societies as the pinnacle of social evolution and viewed less
technologically advanced societies as deficient, antiquated, or primitive, a perspective that persisted
well into the twentieth century.
In the 1960s, the anthropological perspective on foragers changed when Marshall Sahlins suggested that these communities were “the original affluent society.” He argued that foragers had an
idyllic life, in which only a small percentage of the day was spent “working,” or acquiring resources,
and most of the day was spent in leisure and socializing, leading to stronger community and family
bonds:
Hunter-gatherers consume less energy per capita per year than any other group of human
beings. Yet when you come to examine it the original affluent society was none other than
the hunter’s—in which all the people’s material wants were easily satisfied. To accept that
hunters are affluent is therefore to recognize that the present human condition of man slaving
to bridge the gap between his unlimited wants and his insufficient means is a tragedy of
modern times.10
Today anthropologists recognize that foraging, far from being primitive, is one of the most effective and dynamic subsistence systems humans have ever developed, yet Sahlins’ conception of the
original affluent society is overly romantic. Foraging is a challenging lifestyle; some groups spend
up to 70 hours per week collecting food. The amount of leisure time and relative comfort of the
foraging lifestyle vary significantly based on differences in the availability of food and environmental
conditions.11
Contemporary studies of foraging also recognize that foragers have rarely lived in isolation.
Throughout the world, foragers have lived near farming populations for hundreds or even thousands
of years. Conflicts and competition for resources with non-foraging societies have characterized the
foraging experience and foragers, with their relatively small population size and limited technology,
have often been on the losing end of these confrontations. Government policies containing foragers
to small “reservation” areas or forcing them to settle in towns have had catastrophic effects on foragers, as has the destruction through agricultural and industrial development of the ecosystems on
which many groups once depended. A sad worldwide pattern of exploitation and marginalization is
the reason that many foragers today live in dwindling communities in marginal ecological zones.12
The Built Environment and Domesticated Landscapes
None of us live in a natural environment. Current research on the causes of global climate change
have demonstrated that humans are having a profound effect on the Earth and its ecosystems, but it
would be a mistake to conclude that human effects on the environment are a recent development.
Humans have been making environmental alterations for a long time and we have been engaged
in a process of domesticating the planet for several thousand years. For this reason, no part of the

Subsistence

7

planet can really be considered 100 percent “natural.” When anthropologists study subsistence, they
gain a window into the ways in which cultures have co-evolved with their environments, a field of
study known as historical ecology. Analysis of the ways in which cultures and the environment are
mutually interconnected, demonstrates that there is no way to separate the “natural” world from the
human-influenced world, or what anthropologists refer to as the built environment.
This can be seen by considering the historical ecology of the Nukak, a group of foragers who live
in the Amazon rainforest near the headwaters of the Rio Negro along the southern border between
Colombia and Venezuela and whose subsistence demonstrates the blurry line between foraging and
agriculture and “natural” and “domesticated.” The Nukak are a small linguistic and ethnic group who
are part of the larger culture known as Makú. The Nukak were the last among the Makú to be contacted by the outside world and perhaps owing to this fact, they practice the most “traditional” way
of life. The Nukak were not known to the public at large until 1988, when a group of 41 individuals
came in contact with a school in the rural town of Calamar, in southeastern Colombia.
The Nukak are a highly mobile group of foragers who make an average of between 70 and 80
residential moves a year. The frequency of their moves changes seasonally: infrequent short-distance
moves in the wet season, and more frequent long-distance moves occurring in the dry season. Anthropologist Gustavo Politis, who spent years living with the Nukak, observed that the Nukak will
never occupy the same camp twice, even if they are moving to an area where an old camp is still in
good shape. When they establish a camp, they remove all the light brush and some of the medium-sized trees, leaving a few medium-sized trees and all the large trees intact.
Due to the selective nature of the forest clearing, a habitat, which can most readily be described as
a “wild orchard,” is produced. This wild orchard offers nearly perfect conditions for the germination
and growth of seeds because the large trees provide enough shade to prevent the invasion of vines and
shrubs. As the Nukak use the camp and consume fruit they have gathered, they discard the uneaten
portions, including the seeds. Significantly, the kinds of fruit the Nukak tend to eat in their camps
are the ones that have hard outer seed cases. Once discarded in a Nukak campsite, these seeds have
a higher chance of germinating and growing in the abandoned camp than they do in other parts
of the rainforest. The result is that Nukak territory is peppered with wild orchards that have high
concentrations of edible plants, and the forest reflects a pattern of human intervention long after the
Nukak have departed.13
The Nukak are an important case study in the Amazon for a number of reasons. They are a testament to the ability of small foraging groups to domesticate landscapes in active ways that greatly
increase the productivity of the environment. They do this even though they are not “farmers” and
will not always utilize the resources they help create. In addition, the Nukak demonstrate that no
place in the Amazon can be considered pristine if a group such as the Nukak have ever lived there.
The same can be said for the rest of the planet.
The Domestication of the Dog and Cooperative Hunting
Although the transition from foraging to agriculture is often described as the Agricultural
Revolution, archaeological evidence suggests this change took a long time. The earliest
species humans chose to domesticate were often not staple crops such as wheat, corn,
rice, or cows, but utilitarian species. For instance, bottle gourds were domesticated for use
as water containers before the invention of pottery. Dogs were domesticated as early as
15,000 years ago in eastern Asia from their wild ancestor the wolf. Although it is unlikely
that dogs were an important source of food, they did play a role in subsistence by aiding

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
humans who relied on hunting the Ice Age megafauna such as wooly mammoths. Dogs
played such a critical role in hunting that some archaeologists believe they may have contributed to the eventual extinction of the woolly mammoths.14 Dogs were also valued for
their role as watchdogs capable of protecting the community from predators and invaders.

Pastoralism
“To us, a co-wife is something very good, because there is much work to do. When it rains . . . the
village gets mucky. And it’s you who clears it out. It’s you who . . . looks after the cows. You do the
milking . . . and your husband may have very many cows. That’s a lot of work. . . . So Maasai
aren’t jealous because of all this work.”
—Maiyani, Maasai woman 15
Pastoralism is a subsistence system that relies on herds of domesticated livestock. Over half of the
world’s pastoralists reside in Africa, but there are also large pastoralist populations in Central Asia, Tibet, and arctic Scandinavia and Siberia. The need to supply grazing fields and water for the livestock
requires moving several times a year. For that reason, this subsistence system is sometimes referred to
as nomadic pastoralism. In Africa, for instance, a nomadic lifestyle is an adaptation to the frequent
periods of drought that characterize the region and put stress on the grazing pastures. Pastoralists
may also follow a nomadic lifestyle for other reasons such as avoiding competition and conflict with
neighbors or avoiding government restrictions.
Pastoralists can raise a range of different animals, although most often they raise herd animals such
as cows, goats, sheep, and pigs. In some parts of South America, alpaca and llama have been domesticated for centuries to act as beasts of burden, much like camels, horses, and donkeys are used in Asia
and Africa. Pastoralists who raise alpacas, donkeys, or camels, animals not typically considered food,
demonstrate an important point about the pastoralist subsistence system. The goal of many pastoral-

Subsistence

9

ists is not to produce animals to slaughter for meat, but instead to use other resources such as milk,
which can be transformed into butter, yogurt, and cheese, or products like fur or wool, which can be
sold. Even animal dung is useful as an alternate source of fuel and can be used as an architectural
product to seal the roofs of houses. In some pastoral societies, milk and milk products comprise between 60 and 65 percent of the total caloric intake. However, very few, if any, pastoralist groups
survive by eating only animal products. Trade with neighboring farming communities helps pastoralists obtain a more balanced diet and gives them access to grain and other items they do not produce
on their own.

A community of animal herders has different labor requirements compared to a foraging community. Caring for large numbers of animals and processing their products requires a tremendous
amount of work, chores that are nonexistent in foraging societies. For pastoralists, daily chores related to caring for livestock translate into a social world structured as much around the lives of animals as around the lives of people.
The Maasai, a society of east African pastoralists whose livelihood depends on cows, have been
studied extensively by anthropologists. Among the Maasai, domestic life is focused almost entirely
around tasks and challenges associated with managing the cattle herds. Like many pastoralist communities, the Maasai measure wealth and social status according to the number of animals a person
owns. However, raising cattle requires so much work that no one has the ability to do these jobs
entirely on his or her own. For the Maasai, the solution is to work together in family units organized
around polygynous marriages. A household with multiple wives and large numbers of children will
have more labor power available for raising animals.

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Pastoralism and Gender Dynamics
The example of the Maasai demonstrates the extent to which a subsistence system can structure
gender roles and the division of labor between the sexes. In Maasai society, women do almost all of
the work with the cows, from milking several times each day to clearing the muck the cows produce.
Despite doing much of the daily work with cattle, Maasai women are not permitted to own cattle.
Instead, the cattle belong to the men, and women are given only “milking rights” that allow them to
use the products of the female animals and to assign these animals to their sons. Men make all decisions about slaughtering, selling, and raising the cattle. Lack of cattle ownership means that women
do not have the same opportunities as men to build wealth or gain social status and the woman’s role
in Maasai society is subordinate to man’s. This same pattern is repeated in many pastoralist societies,
with women valued primarily for the daily labor they can provide and for their role as mothers.
While women lack the political and economic power enjoyed by Maasai men, they do exercise
some forms of power within their own households and among other women. They support each
other in the daily hard work of managing both cattle and domestic responsibilities, for instance sharing in childcare, a practice based on the belief that “men care about cattle while women care about
children.”16 Because most marriages are arranged by elders, it is common for women to engage in love
affairs with other men, but women keep each other’s secrets; telling anyone about another woman’s
adultery would be considered an absolute betrayal of solidarity. Women who resist their husband’s
authority by having love affairs are also resisting larger claims of male authority and ownership over
them.17
Pastoralism and Private Property
As discussed previously, foragers tend to have little private property. Obtaining food from the natural environment and living a highly mobile lifestyle does not provide the right conditions for hoarding wealth, while the strong value on sharing present in foraging communities also limits wealth
differences. Pastoralists, in contrast, have a great deal of personal property: most of it in the form of
animals, a kind of “money on legs,” but also in the form of household objects and personal items like
clothing or jewelry that pastoralists can keep more easily than foragers because they do not move as
frequently.
Ownership of the grazing land, water supply, and other resources required for livestock is a trickier matter. Generally, these natural resources are treated as communal property shared by everyone
in the society. Pastoralists may range over hundreds of miles throughout the year, so it would be
highly impractical to “own” any particular plot of land or to try fencing it to exclude outsiders as
is commonly done by agriculturalists. Sharing resources can lead to conflict, however, both within
pastoralist societies and between pastoralists and their neighbors. In an influential essay, Tragedy of
the Commons (1968), Garrett Hardin pointed out that people tend not to respect resources they do
not own. For instance, pastoralists who have a personal interest in raising as many cattle of their own
as possible may not be particularly motivated to preserve grass or water resources in the long term.
Do pastoralists destroy the environments in which they live? Evidence from anthropological studies
of pastoralist communities suggests that pastoralists do have rules that regulate use of land and other
resources and that these restrictions are effective in conserving environmental resources.
The Maasai, for instance, have a complex land-management system that involves rotating pastures
seasonally and geographically to preserve both grass and water. Research conducted in Kenya and

Subsistence

11

Tanzania suggests that these grazing practices improve the health and biodiversity of the ecosystem
because grazing cattle cut down the tall grasses and make habitats for warthogs, Thomson’s gazelle,
and other species. In addition, the large swaths of community land managed by the Maasai stabilize
and support the vast Serengeti ecosystem. Ecologists estimate that if this land were privately owned
and its usage restricted, the population of wildebeest would be reduced by one-third. Since thousands
of tourists visit the Serengeti each year to view wildlife, particularly the migration of the wildebeest,
which is the largest mammal migration in the world, the Maasai’s communal land management is
worth an estimated $83.5 million to the tourist economies of Kenya and Tanzania.18
Despite the sophistication of their land and animal management techniques, pastoralists today
face many pressures. The growth of the tourism industry in many countries has led to increased
demand for private land ownership to support safari centers, wild game parks, and ecolodges. The
steady growth of human populations and intensive agriculture has also led to the widespread encroachment of cities and farms into traditional pastoralist territories. Persistent drought, famine, and
even civil war threaten some pastoralist groups, particularly in central Africa. Meanwhile, pastoralists
continue to experience tense relationships with their agricultural neighbors as both groups compete
for resources, disputes that are intensifying as global warming leads to more intense heat and drought
in many world regions.

Horticulture
“Yams are persons with ears. If we charm they hear.”
—Alo, Trobriand Island farmer19
Have you ever grown a garden in your backyard? How much time did you put into your garden?
How much of your diet did the garden yield? People whose gardens supply the majority of their food
are known as horticulturalists. Horticulture differs in three ways from other kinds of farming. First,
horticulturalists move their farm fields periodically to use locations with the best growing conditions.
For this reason, horticulture is sometimes known as shifting cultivation. Second, horticultural societies use limited mechanical technologies to farm, relying on physical labor from people and animals,
like oxen that may be used to pull a plow, instead of mechanical farm equipment. Finally, horticulture differs from other kinds of farming in its scale and purpose. Most farmers in the United States
sell their crops as a source of income, but in horticultural societies crops are consumed by those who
grow them or are exchanged with others in the community rather than sold for profit.
Horticultural societies are common around the world; this subsistence system feeds hundreds of
thousands of people, primarily in tropical areas of south and central America, Southeast Asia, and
Oceania. A vast array of horticultural crops may be grown by horticulturalists, and farmers use their
specialized knowledge to select crops that have high yield compared to the amount of labor that must
be invested to grow them. A good example is manioc, also known as cassava. Manioc can grow in a
variety of tropical environments and has the distinct advantage of being able to remain in the ground
for long periods without rotting. Compared to corn or wheat, which must be harvested within a
particular window of time to avoid spoiling, manioc is flexible and easier to grow as well as to store or
distribute to others. Bananas, plantains, rice, and yams are additional examples of popular horticultural crops. One thing all these plants have in common, though, is that they lack protein and other
important nutrients. Horticultural societies must supplement their diets by raising animals such as
pigs and chickens or by hunting and fishing.

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Growing crops in the same location for several
seasons leads to depletion of the nutrients in the
soil as well as a concentration of insects and other
pests and plant diseases. In agricultural systems
like the one used in the United States, these problems are addressed through the use of fertilizers,
pesticides, irrigation, and other technologies that
can increase crop yields even in bad conditions.
Horticulturalists respond to these problems by
moving their farm fields to new locations. Often
this means clearing a section of the forest to make
room for a new garden, a task many horticulturalists accomplish by cutting down trees and setting
controlled fires to burn away the undergrowth.
This approach, sometimes referred to as “slashand-burn,” sounds destructive and has often
been criticized, but the ecological impact is complex. Once abandoned, farm fields immediately
begin to return to a forested state; over time, the
quality of the soil is renewed. Farmers often return after several years to reuse a former field, and
this recycling of farmland reduces the amount of
forest that is disturbed. While they may relocate
their farm fields with regularity, horticulturalists
tend not to move their residences, so they rotate
through gardens located within walking distance
of their homes.
Horticulturalists practice multi-cropping,
growing a variety of different plants in gardens that are biodiverse. Growing several different crops
reduces the risk of relying on one kind of food and allows for intercropping, mixing plants in ways
that are advantageous. A well-known and ingenious example of intercropping is the practice of growing beans, corns, and squash together. Native American farmers in the pre-colonial period knew that
together these plants, sometimes called “the three sisters,” were healthier than they were if grown
separately. Rather than completely clearing farmland, horticulturalists often maintain some trees and
even weeds around the garden as a habitat for predators that prey on garden pests. These practices, in
addition to skillful rotation of the farmland itself, make horticultural gardens particularly resilient.
Food as Politics
Because daily life for horticulturalists revolves around care for crops, plants are not simply regarded
as food but also become the basis for social relationships. In the Trobriand Islands, which are located
in the Solomon Sea north of Papua New Guinea, yams are the staple crop. Just as a Maasai pastoralist
gains respect by raising a large herd of animals, Trobriand Island farmers earn their reputations by
having large numbers of yams. However, this is not as easy as it might seem. In Trobriand Island
society every man maintains a yam garden, but he is not permitted to keep his entire crop. Women

Subsistence

13

“own” the yams and men must share what they grow with their daughters, their sisters, and even with
their wives’ family members. Other yams must be given to the chief or saved to exchange on special
occasions such as weddings, funerals, or festivals. With so many obligations, it is not surprising that
the average man would have trouble building an impressive yam pile on his own. Fortunately, just
as men have obligations to others, so too can they expect gifts from their sisters’ husbands and their
friends in the community.
A large pile of yams, displayed proudly in a man’s specially constructed yam house, is an indication of how well he is respected by his family and friends. Maintaining these positive relationships
requires constant work, and men must reciprocate gifts of yams received from others or risk losing
those relationships. Men who are stingy or mean spirited will not receive many yams, and their lack
of social approval will be obvious to everyone who glances at their empty yam houses. The chief has
the largest yam house of all, but also the most obligations. To maintain the goodwill of the people,
he is expected to sponsor feasts with his yam wealth and to support members of the community who
may need yams throughout the year.
So central are yams to Trobriand Island life that yams have traditionally been regarded not as mere
plants, but as living beings with minds of their own. Farmers talk to their yams, using a special tone
and soft voice so as not to alarm the vegetables. Men who have been initiated into the secret practices
of yam magic use incantations or magical charms to affect the growth of the plants, or alternatively
to discourage the growth of a rival’s crop. Yams are believed to have the ability to wander away from
their fields at night unless magic is used to keep them in place. These practices show the close social
and spiritual association between farmers and their crops.
Civilizing Beans
Beans are often associated with gastrointestinal problems, namely flatulence. It turns out
that this is related to the history of the domestication of the bean. Beans, along with maize
and squash, were one of the most important crops domesticated by Native Americans in
the New World. The benefits of eating beans are best understood when viewed in relation
to maize cultivation. From a purely nutritional point of view, beans are a good source of
protein while corn is not. Corn is also deficient in the essential amino acids lysine and
tryptophan. Eating maize and beans together provides more protein for hardworking farmers. In addition, maize and beans have a mutually beneficial relationship in the garden.
Thanks to a symbiotic relationship with a bacteria known as Rhizobium, beans and almost
all legumes fix usable nitrogen in the soil, increasing fertility for other plants grown nearby.
When intercropped, maize benefits from this nitrogen fixing, and beans benefit from being
able to attach their vines to the strong stalks of the maize. Squash, which grows large
leaves that spread widely across the ground, are also beneficial to intercrop with maize
and beans because the leaves reduce pest and weed invasion by providing ground cover.
Despite being nutritious and useful in the garden, beans were domesticated relatively
late. In Mexico, there is evidence of bean domestication around 1000 BC, a thousand
years later than the domestication of corn.20 This is probably because of the gastrointestinal problems that come with eating beans. The flatulence is the result of certain chemicals
found in the wild beans that were ancestral to today’s domesticated species. The lack of
digestibility surely made beans an unappetizing food in early human communities. However, soaking beans before cooking them and then boiling them over direct heat for several
hours reduces these chemicals and makes beans much easier to stomach. The ability to
boil water was the key to bringing beans to the table.

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
Archaeological studies in Central America have revealed that the invention of pottery was the technological breakthrough
needed to boil beans. A particular type of
pottery known as the “culinary shoe pot”
was one of these technological innovations.
The pots are used by placing the “foot” of
the pot in the coals of a fire so heat can be
transmitted through the vessel for long periods of time. Pots of this design have been
found in the archaeological record throughout Central America in sites dating to the
same period as the beginning of bean domestication and pots of similar design continue to be used throughout that region today. This example demonstrates the extent
to which the expansion of the human diet
has been linked to innovations in other areas of culture.

Agriculture
“The adoption of agriculture, supposedly our most decisive step toward a better life, was in many
ways a catastrophe from which we have never recovered.”
—Jared Diamond 21

Subsistence

15

Agriculture is defined as the cultivation of domesticated plants and animals using technologies
such as irrigation, draft animals, mechanization, and inputs such as fertilizers and pesticides that
allow for intensive and continuous use of land resources. About 10,000 years ago, human societies
entered a period of rapid innovation in subsistence technologies that paved the way for the emergence of agriculture. The transition from foraging to farming has been described as the Neolithic
Revolution. Neolithic means “new stone age,” a name referring to the very different looking stone
tools produced during this time period. The Neolithic was characterized by an explosion of new technologies, not all of them made from stone, which were geared toward agricultural tasks, rather than
hunting or processing gathered plant foods. These new tools included scythes for harvesting plants,
and adzes or hoes for tilling the soil. These technological developments began to dramatically improve yields and allow human communities to support larger and larger numbers of people on food
produced in less space. It is important to remember that the invention of agriculture was not necessarily an advance in efficiency, because more work had to go in to producing more food. Instead, it
was an intensification of horticultural strategies. As a subsistence system, agriculture is quite different
from other ways of making a living, and the invention of agriculture had far-ranging effects on the
development of human communities. In analyzing agriculture and its impacts, anthropologists focus
on four important characteristics shared by agricultural communities.
The first characteristic of agriculture is reliance on a few staple crops, foods that form the backbone
of the subsistence system. An example of a staple crop would be rice in China, or potatoes in Ireland.
In agricultural societies, farmers generally grow a surplus of these staple crops, more than they need for
their own tables, which are then sold for profit. The reliance on a single plant species, or mono-cropping, can lead to decreased dietary diversity and carries the risk of malnutrition compared to a more
diverse diet. Other risks include crop failure associated with bad weather conditions or blight, leading
to famine and malnutrition, conditions that are common in agricultural communities.
A second hallmark of agriculture is the link between intensive farming and a rapid increase in
human population density. The archaeological record shows that human communities grew quickly
around the time agriculture was developing, but this raises an interesting question. Did the availability of more food lead to increases in human population? Or, did pressure to provide for a growing
population spur humans to develop better farming techniques? This question has been debated for
many years. Ester Boserup, who studied the emergence of agriculture, concluded that growth in
human populations preceded the development of agriculture, forcing communities to develop innovations in technology. However, the improved productive capabilities of agriculture came at a cost.
People were able to produce more food with agriculture, but only by working harder and investing
more in the maintenance of the land. The life of a farmer involved more daily hours of work compared to the lifestyle of a forager, so agricultural communities had an incentive to have larger families
so that children could help with farm labor. However, the presence of more children also meant
more mouths to feed, increasing the pressure to further expand agricultural production. In this way,
agriculture and population growth became a cycle.
A third characteristic of agriculture is the development of a division of labor, a system in which
individuals in a society begin to specialize in certain roles or tasks. Building houses, for instance,
becomes a full-time job separate from farming. The division of labor was possible because higher
yields from agriculture meant that the quest for food no longer required everyone’s participation.
This feature of agriculture is what has allowed nonagricultural occupations such as scientists, religious
specialists, politicians, lawyers, and academics to emerge and flourish.
The emergence of specialized occupations and an agricultural system geared toward producing
surplus rather than subsistence changed the economics of human communities. The final charac-

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

teristic of agriculture is its tendency to create wealth differences. For anthropologists, agriculture
is a critical factor explaining the origins of social class and wealth inequality. The more complex an
economic system becomes, the more opportunities individuals or factions within the society have to
manipulate the economy for their own benefit. Who do you suppose provided the bulk of the labor
power needed in early agricultural communities? Elites found ways to pass this burden to others.
Agricultural societies were among the first to utilize enslaved and indentured labor.
Although the development of agriculture is generally regarded as a significant technological
achievement that made our contemporary way of life possible, agriculture can also be viewed as a
more ominous development that forced us to invest more time and labor in our food supply while
yielding a lower quality of life.22 Agriculture created conditions that led to the expansion of social
inequality, violent conflict between communities, and environmental degradation. For these reasons,
some scientists like Jared Diamond have argued that the invention of agriculture was humanity’s
worst mistake.
The Origins of Agriculture
Some of the most contested and exciting questions in anthropology center on the origins
of agriculture. How did humans come to adopt an agricultural way of life? What came first,
permanent settlements or agriculture? Did agriculture develop first in places with rich natural resources, or in places where making a living from the land was more difficult? Why did
agriculture arise nearly simultaneously in so many world regions? These questions are primarily investigated by archaeologists, anthropologists who study cultures of the past by recovering the material remains of their settlements. Archaeological evidence suggests that
the transition to agriculture occurred over a long period of time, across many generations.
Lewis Binford, an archaeologist who studied the origins of agriculture, observed that
humans were living in permanent settlements before the end of the last ice age 10,000–
12,000 years ago. He believed that as human populations grew, some communities were
forced into marginal natural environments where it was difficult to get food from foraging,
pastoralism, or horticulture. He argued that the pressure of living in these “tension zones”
led to agricultural innovation.23 Although inventing agriculture might seem like a challenge
for humanity, the cultural anthropologist Leslie White pointed out that by this time in human
history all communities had substantial practical knowledge of the natural world and the
plant and animal species they depended on for survival. “The cultivation of plants required
no new facts or knowledge. Agriculture was simply a new kind of relationship between
man—or more properly, woman—and plants.”24 By moving plants into new environments
and controlling their growth, people were able to ensure a better food supply.
This may explain why domestication arose, but why did it take so long for humans to
develop agriculture? Why did many societies all over the world develop agriculture nearly
simultaneously? One possible answer is found in the climate change that followed the end
of the last ice age. Warming temperatures and shifting environmental zones led to the extinction of the megafauna human hunters had been relying upon such as musk ox, woolly
mammoth and woolly rhinoceros, and giant deer. Many animals once preyed on these
species, such as the cave lion and spotted hyena, but humans may have adapted culturally
by reorienting their diets toward domesticated plant and animal species.
There are some other interesting theories about how and why agriculture developed.
Brian Hayden, an archaeologist specializing in political ecology, the use of resources to
achieve political goals, has suggested that agriculture arose as some members of society

Subsistence
began to accumulate resources in order to sponsor feasts and give gifts designed to influence others. This “feasting theory” suggests that agriculture was not a response to the
necessities of survival, but part of a quest for power among some members of society.25
This model is intriguing because it explains why some of the earliest domesticates such as
chili peppers and avocados are not staple foods and are not even particularly nutritious. In
fact, many of the earliest plants cultivated were not intended to produce food for meals, but
rather to produce ingredients for alcoholic beverages.
For example, the wild ancestor of corn, a plant called teosinte, has an edible “ear” so
small that it would have cost more calories to chew than the nutrition it provided. This led
some archaeologists to theorize that it was in fact the sweetness in the stalk of the plant
that farmers wanted to utilize to ferment a corn-based alcoholic beverage still consumed in
many parts of Central America called chicha. It might have been that only after years of
cultivating the crop for its stalk that farmers found uses for the ear, which later was selectively bred to grow to the sizes we are familiar with today.

THE GLOBAL AGRICULTURE SYSTEM
“We can indeed eliminate the scourge of hunger in our lifetime. We must be the Zero Hunger
generation.”
—José Graziano da Silva, Director General of the Food and Agricultural Organization of the
United Nations 26

17

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Despite agriculture’s tremendous productivity, food shortages, malnutrition, and famines are common around the world. How can this be? Many people assume that the world’s agricultural systems
are not capable of producing enough food for everyone, but this is incorrect. Evidence from agricultural research demonstrates that there is enough worldwide agricultural capacity to feed everyone on
the planet.27 The problem is that this capacity is unevenly distributed. Some countries produce much
more food than they need, and others much less. In addition, distribution systems are inefficient
and much food is lost to waste or spoilage. It is also true that in an agricultural economy food costs
money, and worldwide many people who are starving or undernourished lack food because they
cannot pay for it, not because food itself is unavailable.
Let’s return for a moment to the concept of meals and where our food actually comes from. Walking
down the aisles of our local grocery store, we are surrounded by products that come from far away:
apples from Chile, coffee from Guatemala, beans from India. This is evidence that our economy is organized around what anthropologists refer to as a world system, a complex web through which goods
circulate around the globe. In the world system, complex chains of distribution separate the producers
of goods from the consumers. Agricultural products travel long distances from their points of origin to
reach consumers in the grocery store, passing through many hands along the way. The series of steps a
food like apples or coffee takes from the field to the store is known as a commodity chain.
The commodity chain for agricultural products begins in the farms where plant and animal foods
are produced. Farmers generally do not sell their produce directly to consumers, but instead sell to
large food processors that refine the food into a more useable form. Coffee beans, for instance, must
be roasted before they can be sold. Following processing, food moves to wholesalers who will package
it for sale to retail establishments like grocery stores. As foods move through the commodity chain,

Subsistence

19

they become more valuable. Coffee beans harvested fresh from the field are worth $1.40 per pound
to the farmer, but sell for $10–$20 at Starbucks.28
The fact that food is more valuable at the end of the commodity chain than at the beginning has
several consequences for human communities. The most obvious of these is the reality that farming
is not a particularly lucrative occupation, particularly for small-scale farmers in developing countries.
Though their labor makes profit for others, these farmers see the lowest financial returns. Another
effect of global commodity chains is that food moves very far from its point of origin. For wealthy
people, this means having access to a variety of foods in the grocery store, including things like
strawberries or mangos in the middle of winter, but in order to serve markets in wealthy countries,
food is diverted away from the locales where it is grown. When quinoa, a high-protein grain grown
in Bolivia, became popular with health enthusiasts in wealthy countries, the price of this food more
than tripled. Local populations began to export their quinoa crop rather than eating it, replacing this
nutritious traditional food with white bread and Coca-Cola, which were much cheaper, but contributed to increased rates of obesity and diabetes.29 The global travels of the food supply have also
affected social relations that were once strengthened by participation in food growing and sharing.
Distance and competition have replaced these communal experiences. Many people yearn for more
connection with their food, a sentiment that fuels things like “foodie culture,” farm-to-table restaurants, and farmer’s markets.

CONCLUSION
This chapter began with a consideration of meals, but revealed that each individual meal is part of
a diet generated through a particular subsistence system. Many of our daily experiences, including
our attitudes, skills, and relationships with others, are influenced by our subsistence system. Knowing
that the Earth has been transformed for thousands of years by human subsistence activities, we must
also consider the ways in which our future will be shaped by the present. Are we managing our resources in a sustainable way? How will we continue to feed growing populations in the future? Think
about it next time you sit down to eat a meal.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. A hallmark of agriculture is the separation of food production from food consumption; many
people know almost nothing about where their food has come from. How does this lack of
knowledge affect the food choices people make? How useful are efforts to change food labels
to notify shoppers about the use of farming techniques such as genetic modification or organic
growing for consumers? What other steps could be taken to make people more knowledgeable
about the journey that food takes from farm to table?
2. The global commodity chains that bring food from many countries to grocery stores in the
United States give wealthy consumers a great variety of food choices, but the farmers at the
beginning of the commodity chain earn very little money. What kinds of solutions might help
reduce the concentration of wealth at the end of the commodity chain?
3. Mono-cropping is a feature of industrial food production and has the benefit of producing
staple foods like wheat and corn in vast quantities, but mono-cropping makes our diet less
diverse. Are the effects of agricultural mono-cropping reflected in your own everyday diet?
How many different plant foods do you eat on a regular basis? How difficult would it be for you
to obtain a more diverse diet by shopping in the same places you shop now?

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

GLOSSARY
Agriculture: the cultivation of domesticated plants and animals using technologies that allow for
intensive use of the land.
Broad spectrum diet: a diet based on a wide range of food resources.
Built environment: spaces that are human-made, including cultivated land as well as buildings.
Carrying capacity: a measurement of the number of calories that can be extracted from a particular
unit of land in order to support a human population.
Commodity chain: the series of steps a food takes from location where it is produced to the store
where it is sold to consumers.
Delayed return system: techniques for obtaining food that require an investment of work over a
period of time before the food becomes available for consumption. Farming is a delayed return system due to the passage of time between planting and harvest. The opposite is an immediate return
system in which the food acquired can be immediately consumed. Foraging is an immediate return
system.
Domestic economy: the work associated with obtaining food for a family or household.
Foodways: the cultural norms and attitudes surrounding food and eating.
Foraging: a subsistence system that relies on wild plant and animal food resources. This system is
sometimes called “hunting and gathering.”
Historical ecology: the study of how human cultures have developed over time as a result of interactions with the environment.
Horticulture: a subsistence system based on the small-scale cultivation of crops intended primarily
for the direct consumption of the household or immediate community.
Modes of subsistence: the techniques used by the members of a society to obtain food. Anthropologists classify subsistence into four broad categories: foraging, pastoralism, horticulture, and agriculture.
Mono-cropping: the reliance on a single plant species as a food source. Mono-cropping leads to
decreased dietary diversity and carries the risk of malnutrition compared to a more diverse diet.
Neolithic Revolution: a period of rapid innovation in subsistence technologies that began 10,000
years ago and led to the emergence of agriculture. Neolithic means “new stone age,” a name referring
to the stone tools produced during this time period.
Pastoralism: a subsistence system in which people raise herds of domesticated livestock.
Staple crops: foods that form the backbone of the subsistence system by providing the majority of
the calories a society consumes.
Subsistence system: the set of skills, practices, and technologies used by members of a society to
acquire and distribute food.
World system: a complex economic system through which goods circulate around the globe. The
world system for food is characterized by a separation of the producers of goods from the consumers.

Subsistence

21

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Isaac Shearn earned his PhD in 2014 at the
University of Florida and is an adjunct professor
at the Community College of Baltimore County.
His work focuses on the archaeology and ethnohistory of the Caribbean and South America,
with a focus on public archaeology, developing
inclusive and participatory methods. His ongoing research in Dominica allows him to pursue
his second major passion in life besides archaeology: music. He has played drums for a Dominican reggae band since 2010.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Binford, Lewis. “Post-Pleistocene adaptations.” In New Perspectives in Archeology, edited by Sally Binford
and Lewis Binford, 313–41. New York: Aldine, 1968.
Boserup, Ester. The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian Change Under Population
Pressure. Rutgers, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2005.
Diamond, Jared. “The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race,” Discover, May 1987, http://
discovermagazine.com/1987/may/02-the-worst-mistake-in-the-history-of-the-human-race
Fiedel, Stuart J. “Man’s Best Friend -- Mammoth’s Worst Enemy? A Speculative Essay on the Role of Dogs
in Paleoindian Colonization and Megafaunal Extinction.” World Archaeology 37 (2005): 11–25.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The State of Food Insecurity in the World. Rome:
The United Nations, 2015.
———. “World Hunger Falls to Under 800 Million, Eradication Possible.” World Food Program, May 27,
2015, https://www.wfp.org/news/news-release/world-hunger-falls-under-800-million-eradication-nextgoal-0
Fortune, R. F. Sorcerers of Dobu: The Social Anthropology of the Dobu Islanders of the Western Pacific. London:
G. Routledge and Sons, 1963 [1932].
Hardin, Garrett. “Tragedy of the Commons.” Science 162 no. 3859 (1968): 1243–1248.
Hawkes, Kristen and James F. O’Connell. “Affluent Hunters? Some Comments in Light of the Alyawara
Case.” American Anthropologist 83(1981): 622–626.
Hawkes, Kristen, Kim Hill and James F. O’Connell. “Why Hunters Gather: Optimal Foraging and the
Aché of Eastern Paraguay.” American Ethnologist 9 (1982):379–398.
Hayden, Brian. “The Proof is in the Pudding: Feasting and the Origins of Domestication.” Current
Anthropology 50 (2009):597–601, 708–9.
Lee, Richard B. The !Kung San: Men, Women, and Work in a Foraging Society. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1979.
———. “What Hunters Do for a Living, or, How to Make Out on Scarce Resources.” In Man the Hunter,
edited by Richard Lee and Irven DeVore. Chicago: Aldine, 1968.
Lee, Richard B. and Irven DeVore, editors. Man the Hunter. New York: Aldine, 1968.
Llewellyn-Davies, Melissa. “Two Contexts of Solidarity.” In Women United, Women Divided: Comparative
Studies of Ten Contemporary Cultures, edited by Patricia Caplan and Janet M. Bujra. Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press 1979.
Malthus, Thomas. An Essay on the Principle of Population. London: J. Johnson, 1798.
Nelson, Fred. “Natural Conservationists? Evaluating the Impact of Pastoralist Land Use Practices on
Tanzania’s Wildlife Economy.” Pastoralism: Research, Policy and Practice 2012.

22

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Paoletti, Maurizio G., E. Buscardo, D.J. Vanderjagt, A. Pastuszyn, L. Pizzoferrato, Y.S. Huang, L.T.
Chuang, M. Millon, H. Cerda, F. Torres, and R.H. Glew. “Nutrient Content of Earthworms Consumed
by Ye’Kuana Amerindians of the Alto Orinoco of Venezuela.” Proceedings of the Royal Society: Biological
Sciences 270 (2003): 249–257.
Politis, Gustavo. Nukak: Ethnoarchaeology of an Amazonian People. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press,
2007.
Rosenberg, Harriet G. “Complaint Discourse, Aging, and Caregiving Among the !Kung San of Botswana.”
In The Cultural Context of Aging, edited by Jay Sokolovsky, 19–41. New York: Bergin and Garvey, 1990.
Sahlins, Marshall. “The Original Affluent Society.” In Stone Age Economics, edited by Marshall Sahlins,
1–39. London: Tavistock, 1972.
Wallace, Melanie and Sanford Low. Maasai Women, Film, Produced by Michael Ambrosino. Watertown:
CT: Documentary Educational Resources, 1980.
White, Leslie. The Evolution of Culture: The Development of Civilization to the Fall of Rome. New York:
McGraw Hill, 1959.

NOTES
1. Thomas Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population (London: J. Johnson, 1798), 4.
2. Ester Boserup, The Conditions of Agricultural Growth: The Economics of Agrarian Change Under Population Pressure (Rutgers,
NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2005).
3. Richard B. Lee, “What Hunters Do for a Living, or, How to Make Out on Scarce Resources,” in Man the Hunter, ed.
Richard Lee and Irven DeVore (Chicago: Aldine, 1968), 33.
4. Maurizio G.Paoletti, E. Buscardo, DJ Vanderjagt, A Pastuszyn, L Pizzoferrato, YS Huang, et al., “Nutrient Content of
Earthworms Consumed by Ye’Kuana Amerindians of the Alto Orinoco of Venezuela,” Proceedings of the Royal Society: Biological Sciences 270 (2003): 249–257.
5. Kristen Hawkes, Kim Hill and James F. O’Connell, “Why Hunters Gather: Optimal Foraging and the Aché of Eastern
Paraguay,” American Ethnologist 9 (1982):379–398.
6. Richard Lee, The !Kung San: Men, Women, and Work in a Foraging Society (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979).
7. For more information about intergenerational dynamics among foragers see Kathryn Keith “Childhood Learning and the
Distribution of Knowledge in Foraging Societies,” Archaeological Papers of the American Anthropological Association 15 (2005):
27–40 and Harriet G. Rosenberg, “Complaint Discourse, Aging, and Caregiving among the !Kung San of Botswana,” in The
Cultural Context of Aging, ed. Jay Sokolovsky (New York: Bergin and Garvey, 1990)19–41. The quotation is from Rosenberg
page 29.
8. For a discussion of generosity and sharing in foraging communities see Lorna Marshall, “Sharing, Talking, and Giving:
Relief of Social Tensions among !Kung Bushmen,” Africa: Journal of the International African Institute
31(1961):231–249 and Lester Hiatt, “Traditional Attitudes to Land Resources,” in Aboriginal Sites, Rites and Resource Development, ed. R. M. Berndt (Perth: University of Western Australia Press. 1982) 13–26.
9. Richard B. Lee and Irven DeVore, eds. Man the Hunter (New York: Aldine, 1968).
10. Marshall Sahlins, “The Original Affluent Society,” in Stone Age Economics, ed. Marshall Sahlins (London: Tavistock, 1972)
1–39.
11. Kristen Hawkes and James F. O’Connell, “Affluent Hunters? Some Comments in Light of the Alyawara Case,” American
Anthropologist 83(1981): 622–626.
12. See for example Robert J. Gordon, The Bushman Myth: The Making of a Namibian Underclass (Boulder, CO: Westview
Press, 2000).
13. Gustavo Politis, Nukak: Ethnoarchaeology of an Amazonian People (Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2007).
14. Stuart J. Fiedel, “Man’s Best Friend -- Mammoth’s Worst Enemy? A Speculative Essay on the Role of Dogs in Paleoindian
Colonization and Megafaunal Extinction,” World Archaeology 37 (2005): 11–25.
15. Melanie Wallace and Sanford Low, Maasai Women, Film, Produced by Michael Ambrosino (1980, Watertown: CT: Documentary Educational Resources).
16. Melissa Llewellyn-Davies, “Two Contexts of Solidarity,” in Women United, Women Divided: Comparative Studies of Ten
Contemporary Cultures, ed. Patricia Caplan and Janet M. Bujra (Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press 1979), 208.
17. Ibid., 234.
18. Fred Nelson, “Natural Conservationists? Evaluating the Impact of Pastoralist Land Use Practices on Tanzania’s Wildlife
Economy,” Pastoralism: Research, Policy and Practice 2012.
19. R. F. Fortune, Sorcerers of Dobu: The Social Anthropology of the Dobu Islanders of the Western Pacific (London: G. Routledge
and Sons, 1963 [1932]),107–109.

Subsistence

23

20. For more information about the archaeological evidence for the timing of bean domestication, see Michael Blake, John E.
Clark, Barbara Voorhies, George Michaels, Michael W. Love, Mary E. Pye, Arthur A. Demarest, and Barbara Arroyo, “Radiocarbon Chronology for the Late Archaic and Formative Periods on the Pacific Coast of Southeastern Mesoamerica,” Ancient
Mesoamerica 6 (1995):161–183. Another useful source is Lawrence Kaplan and Thomas F. Lynch, “Phaseolus (Fabaceae)
in Archaeology: AMS Radiocarbon Dates and their Significance for Pre-Columbian Agriculture,” Economic Botany 53 no.
3(1999): 261–272. There is also interesting linguistic evidence that the word for bean entered the Mayan language around
3400 BC. For more information, see Cecil H Brown, “Prehistoric Chronology of the Common Bean in the New World: The
Linguistic Evidence.” American Anthropologist 108 no.3 (2006): 507–516
23. Lewis Binford, “Post-Pleistocene Adaptations,” in New Perspectives in Archeology, ed. Sally and Lewis Binford, 313–41
(New York: Aldine, 1968).
24. Leslie White, The Evolution of Culture: The Development of Civilization to the Fall of Rome (New York: McGraw Hill,
1959), 284.
25. Brian Hayden, “The Proof is in the Pudding: Feasting and the Origins of Domestication,” Current Anthropology 50
(2009):597–601, 708–9.
21. Jared Diamond, “The Worst Mistake in the History of the Human Race,” Discover, May 1987, http://discover
magazine.com/1987/may/02-the-worst-mistake-in-the-history-of-the-human-race
22. See for example Marshall Sahlins’ argument in Stone Age Economics (Chicago: Aldine Atherton, 1972).
26. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, “World Hunger Falls to Under 800 Million, Eradication
Possible,” May 27, 2015, accessed May 10, 2015, https://www.wfp.org/news/news-release/world-hunger-falls-under-800million-eradication-next-goal-0
27. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, The State of Food Insecurity in the World (Rome: FAO, 2015)
28. Information about the current prices paid to coffee farmers is available from the International Coffee Organization: http://
www.ico.org/coffee_prices.asp
29. This phenomenon has been observed in many countries. For an ethnographic analysis of the health effects of the decline of
traditional foods in Guatemala, see Emily Yates-Doerr, The Weight of Obesity: Hunger and Global Health in Postwar Guatemala
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2015).

Economics
Sarah Lyon, University of Kentucky

sarah.lyon@uky.edu
http://anthropology.as.uky.edu/users/smlyon3

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Define economic anthropology and
identify ways in which economic
anthropology differs from the field of
Economics.
• Describe the characteristics of the
three modes of production: domestic
production, tributary production, and
capitalist production.
• Compare reciprocity, redistribution,
and market modes of exchange.
• Assess the significance of general
purpose money for economic
exchange.
• Evaluate the ways in which
commodities become personally and
socially meaningful.
• Use a political economy perspective
to assess examples of global
economic inequality and structural
violence.

One of the hallmarks of the human species is our flexibility: culture enables humans to thrive in extreme artic
and desert environments, to make our homes in cities and
rural settings alike. Yet amidst this great diversity there are
also universals. For example, all humans, like all organisms,
must eat. We all must make our living in the world, whether
we do so through foraging, farming, or factory work. At
its heart, economic anthropology is a study of livelihoods:
how humans work to obtain the material necessities such as
food, clothing, and shelter that sustain our lives. Across time
and space, different societies have organized their economic
lives in radically different ways. Economic anthropologists
explore this diversity, focusing on how people produce,
exchange, and consume material objects and the role that
immaterial things such as labor, services, and knowledge
play in our efforts to secure our livelihood.1 As humans, we
all have the same basic needs, but understanding how and
why we meet those needs—in often shared but sometimes
unique ways—is what shapes the field of economic anthropology.
Economic anthropology is always in dialogue (whether
implicitly or explicitly) with the discipline of economics.2
However, there are several important differences between
the two disciplines. Perhaps most importantly, economic
anthropology encompasses the production, exchange, consumption, meaning, and uses of both material objects and
immaterial services, whereas contemporary economics focuses primarily on market exchanges. In addition, economic
anthropologists dispute the idea that all individual thoughts,
choices, and behaviors can be understood through a narrow
lens of rational, self-interested decision-making. When asking why people choose to buy a new shirt rather than shoes,
anthropologists, and increasingly economists, look beyond
the motives of Homo economicus to determine how social,
cultural, political, and institutional forces shape humans’
everyday decisions.3
As a discipline, economics studies the decisions made by
people and businesses and how these decisions interact in

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
http://www.perspectivesanthro.org/

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

the marketplace. Economists’ models generally rest on several assumptions: that people know what
they want, that their economic choices express these wants, and that their wants are defined by their
culture. Economics is a normative theory because it specifies how people should act if they want to
make efficient economic decisions. In contrast, anthropology is a largely descriptive social science;
we analyze what people actually do and why they do it. Economic anthropologists do not necessarily
assume that people know what they want (or why they want it) or that they are free to act on their
own individual desires.
Rather than simply focusing on market exchanges and individual decision-making, anthropologists consider three distinct phases of economic activity: production, exchange, and consumption.
Production involves transforming nature and raw materials into the material goods that are useful
and/or necessary for humans. Exchange involves how these goods are distributed among people.
Finally, consumption refers to how we use these material goods: for example, by eating food or constructing homes out of bricks. This chapter explores each of these dimensions of economic life in
detail, concluding with an overview of how anthropologists understand and challenge the economic
inequalities that structure everyday life in the twenty-first century.

MODES OF PRODUCTION
A key concept in anthropological studies of economic life is the mode of production, or the
social relations through which human labor is used to transform energy from nature using tools,
skills, organization, and knowledge. This concept originated with anthropologist Eric Wolf, who was
strongly influenced by the social theorist Karl Marx. Marx argued that human consciousness is not
determined by our cosmologies or beliefs but instead by our most basic human activity: work. Wolf
identified three distinct modes of production in human history: domestic (kin-ordered), tributary,
and capitalist.4 Domestic or kin-ordered production organizes work on the basis of family relations
and does not necessarily involve formal social domination, or the control of and power over other
people. However, power and authority may be exerted over specific groups based on age and gender.
In the tributary mode of production, the primary producer pays tribute in the form of material goods
or labor to another individual or group of individuals who controls production through political,
religious, or military force. The third mode, capitalism, is the one most familiar to us. The capitalist
mode of production has three central features: (1) private property is owned by members of the capitalist class; (2) workers sell their labor power to the capitalists in order to survive; and (3) surpluses
of wealth are produced, and these surpluses are either kept as profit or reinvested in production in
order to generate further surplus. As we will see in the next section, Modes of Exchange, capitalism
also links markets to trade and money in very unique ways. First, though, we will take a closer look
at each of the three modes of production.

Domestic Production
The domestic, or kin-ordered, mode of production characterizes the lives of foragers and smallscale subsistence farmers with social structures that are more egalitarian than those characterizing
the other modes of production (though these structures are still shaped by age- and gender-based
forms of inequality). In the domestic mode of production, labor is organized on the basis of kinship
relations (which is why this form of production is also known as kin-ordered). In southern Mexico

Economics

3

and parts of Central America, many indigenous people primarily make their living through smallscale subsistence maize farming. Subsistence farmers produce food for their family’s own consumption (rather than to sell). In this family production system, the men generally clear the fields and the
whole family works together to plant the seeds. Until the plants sprout, the children spend their days
in the fields protecting the newly planted crops. The men then weed the crops and harvest the corn
cobs, and, finally, the women work to dry the corn and remove the kernels from the cobs for storage.
Over the course of the year mothers and daughters typically grind the corn by hand using a metate,
or grinding stone (or, if they are lucky, they might have access to a mechanical grinder). Ultimately,
the corn is used to make the daily tortillas the family consumes at each meal. This example demonstrates how the domestic mode of production organizes labor and daily activities within families according to age and gender.

Foraging societies are also characterized by (1) the collective ownership of the primary means of
production, (2) lower rates of social domination, and (3) sharing. For example, the Dobe Ju/’hoansi
(also known as the !Kung), a society of approximately 45,000 people living in the Kalahari Desert
of Botswana and Namibia, typically live in small groups consisting of siblings of both sexes, their
spouses, and children. They all live in a single camp and move together for part of the year. Typically
women collect plant foods and men hunt for meat. These resources are pooled within family groups
and distributed within wider kin networks when necessary. However, women will also kill animals
when the opportunity presents itself, and men spend time collecting plant foods, even when hunting.

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

As discussed in the Marriage and Family chapter, kinship relations are determined by culture, not
biology. Interestingly, in addition to genealogical kinship, the Dobe Ju/’hoansi recognize kinship
relations on the basis of gender-linked names; there are relatively few names, and in this society the
possession of common names trumps genealogical ties. This means that an individual would call
anyone with his father’s name “father.” The Dobe Ju/’hoansi have a third kinship system that is based
on the principle that an older person determines the kinship terms that will be used in relation with
another individual (so, for example, an elderly woman may refer to a young male as her nephew or
grandson, thus creating a kin relationship). The effect of these three simultaneous kinship systems is
that virtually everyone is kin in Ju/’hoansi society—those who are biologically related and those who
are not. This successfully expands the range of individuals with whom products of labor, such as meat
from a kill, must be shared.5 These beliefs and the behaviors they inspire reinforce key elements of
the domestic mode of production: collective ownership, low levels of social domination, and sharing.

Tributary Production
The tributary mode of production is found in social systems divided into classes of rulers and subjects. Subjects, typically farmers and/or herders, produce for themselves and their families, but they
also give a proportion of their goods or labor to their rulers as tribute. The tributary mode of production characterizes a variety of precapitalist, state-level societies found in Europe, Asia, Africa, and
the Americas. These societies share several common features: (1) the dominant units of production
are communities organized around kinship relations; (2) the state’s society depends on the local communities, and the tribute collected is used by the ruling class rather than exchanged or reinvested;
(3) relationships between producers and rulers are often conflictual; and (4) production is controlled
politically rather than through the direct control of the means of production. Some historic tributary
systems, such as those found in feudal Europe and medieval Japan, were loosely organized, whereas
others, such as the pre-contact Inca Empire and imperial China, were tightly managed.
In the Chinese imperial system, rulers not only demanded tribute in the form of material goods
but also organized large-scale production and state-organized projects such as irrigation, roads, and
flood control. In addition to accumulating agricultural surpluses, imperial officials also controlled
large industrial and commercial enterprises, acquiring necessary products, such as salt, porcelain,
or bricks, through nonmarket mechanisms. The rulers of most tributary systems were determined
through descent and/or military and political service. However, the 1,000-year imperial Chinese system (CE 960–1911) was unique in that new members were accepted based on their performance in
examinations that any male could take, even males of low status.6 Despite this exception, the Chinese
imperial system exhibits many hallmarks of the tributary mode of production, including the political
control of production and the collection of tribute to support state projects and the ruling classes.

Capitalist Production
The capitalist mode of production is the most recent. While many of us may find it difficult to
conceive of an alternative to capitalism, it has in fact only existed for a mere fraction of human history, first originating with the North American and western European industrial revolution during
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Capitalism is distinguished from the other two modes
of production as an economic system based on private property owned by a capitalist class. In the
domestic and tributary modes of production, workers typically own their means of production (for

Economics

5

example, the land they farm). However, in the capitalist mode of production, workers typically do
not own the factories they work in or the businesses they work for, and so they sell their labor power
to other people, the capitalists, in order to survive. By keeping wages low, capitalists are able to sell
the products of the workers’ labor for more than it costs to produce the products. This enables capitalists, or those who own the means of production, to generate a surplus that is either kept as profit or
reinvested in production with the goal of generating additional surplus. Therefore, an important distinguishing feature of the capitalist mode of production is that workers are separated from the means
of production (for example, from the factories they work in or the businesses they work for), whereas
in the domestic and tributary modes workers are not separated from the means of production (they
own their own land or they have free access to hunting and foraging grounds). In the domestic and
tributary modes of production, workers also retain control over the goods they produce (or a portion
of them), and they control their own labor, deciding when and when not to work.7 However, this
is not true within capitalism. A factory worker does not own the widget that she helps build in a
factory, and she cannot decide when she would like to show up at work each day.
Economic anthropologists stress that people and communities are differentially integrated into the
capitalist mode of production. For example, some subsistence farmers may also produce a small crop
of agricultural commodities in order to earn cash income to pay for necessities, such as machetes or
farm tools, that they cannot make themselves. Many of us have had “informal” jobs tending a neighbor’s children or mowing someone’s lawn. Informal work such as this, where one does not work on
a full-time, contracted basis, is especially important in developing countries around the world where
informal employment comprises one-half to three-quarters of nonagricultural employment.8
Even in our own capitalist society, many of us regularly produce and exchange goods and services
outside of the so-called formal marketplace: baking zucchini bread for a cousin who shares her vegetable garden’s produce, for example, or buying fair-trade chocolate from a cooperative grocery store.
We might spend Sundays volunteering in a church’s nursery, or perhaps moonlighting as a server for
a friend’s catering business, working “under the table” for cash. Each of these examples highlights
how even in advanced capitalist societies, we engage in diverse economic practices every day. If, as
some suggest, economic anthropology is at its heart a search for alternatives to capitalism, it is useful
to explore the many diverse economies that are thriving alongside capitalist modes of production and
exchange.9
Fair-Trade Coffee Farmers: 21st Century Peasants
Small-scale, semi-subsistence farmers make up the largest single group of people on the planet
today. Once known as peasants, these people pose an interesting conundrum to economic anthropologists because they live their lives both inside and outside of global capitalism and state societies.
These farmers primarily use their own labor to grow the food their families eat. They might also
produce some type of commodity for sale. For example, many of the indigenous corn farmers in
southern Mexico and Central America discussed earlier also produce small amounts of coffee that
they sell in order to earn money to buy school supplies for their children, building supplies for their
homes, clothing, and other things that they cannot produce themselves.
There are between 20 and 25 million small farmers growing coffee in more than 50 countries
around the world. A portion of these small coffee farmers are organized into cooperatives in order
to collectively sell their coffee as fair-trade certified. Fair trade is a trading partnership, based on
dialogue, transparency, and respect, that seeks greater equity in international trade. According to

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Fairtrade International, fair trade supports farmers and workers to combat poverty and strengthen
their livelihoods by establishing a minimum price for as many fair-trade products as possible; providing, on top of stable prices, a fair-trade premium; improving the terms of trade for farmers by
providing access to information, clear contracts with pre-payments, access to markets and financing;
and promoting better living wages and working conditions.10 In order to certify their coffee, small
farmers must belong to democratically run producers’ associations in which participation is open to
all eligible growers, regardless of ethnicity, gender, religion, or political affiliation.
To better understand how indigenous farmers practice kin-organized subsistence maize production while simultaneously producing an agricultural commodity for global markets, I conducted
long-term research in a highland Guatemala community.11 In 1977 a small number of Tz’utujil Maya
coffee farmers formed a cooperative, La Voz Que Clama en el Desierto (A Voice Crying Out in the
Wilderness), with the goal of securing higher prices for their agricultural products and escaping the
severe poverty they struggled against on a daily basis. Since the early 1990s the group has produced
high-quality organic and fair-trade certified coffee for the U.S. market.
The farmers work tirelessly to ensure that their families have sufficient corn to eat and that their
coffee meets the cooperative’s high standards of quality. The members of La Voz refer to their coffee
trees as their “children” who they have lovingly tended for decades. High-quality, organic coffee production is time consuming and arduous—it requires almost daily attention. During the coffee harvest between December and March, wives, husbands, and children work together to pick the coffee
cherries by hand as they ripen and carry them to the wet mill each afternoon.

Economics

7

While these farmers are producing a product for the global market, it is not strictly a capitalist
mode of production. They own their own land and they sell the fruits of their labor for guaranteed
prices. They also work cooperatively with one another, pooling and exchanging their labor, in order
to guarantee the smooth functioning of their organization. This cooperation, while essential, is hard
work. Because the fair-trade system does not rely on anonymous market exchanges, members of La
Voz must also dedicate time to nurturing their relationships with the coffee importers, roasters, advocates, and consumers who support all their hard work through promotion and purchases. This means
attending receptions when buyers visit, dressing up in traditional clothing to pick coffee on film for
marketing materials, and putting up with questions from nosy anthropologists.
Because the coffee farmers also produce much of the food their families consume, they enjoy a
great deal of flexibility. In times of hardship, they can redirect their labor to other activities by intensifying corn production, migrating in search of wage labor, or planting other crops. Their ultimate
goal is to maintain the family’s economic autonomy, which is rooted in ownership of the means of
production—in this case, their land. A close examination of these farmers’ lives reveals that they are
not relics of a precapitalist system. Instead, their economic activity is uniquely adapted to the contemporary global economy in order to ensure their long-term survival.
Salaula in Zambia: The Informal Economy
The informal economy includes a diverse range of activities that are unregulated (and untaxed) by
the state: rickshaw pullers in Calcutta, street vendors in Mexico City, and scrap-metal recyclers in
Lexington, Kentucky, are all considered informal workers. Informal economies include people who
are informally self-employed and those working informally for other people’s enterprises. In some
parts of the world the informal economy is a significant source of income and revenue. In Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, the informal economy generates nearly 40 percent as much revenue as that
included in the “official” gross domestic product.12 Consequently, the informal economy is of great
interest to economic anthropologists. However, the term “informal economy” is critiqued by some
scholars since often what we refer to as informal economies are actually quite formal and organized,
even though this organization is not regulated by the state and may be based on an internal logic that
makes the most sense to those who participate in the exchanges.
Karen Hansen provides an in-depth look at the lives of vendors in the salaula, the secondhand
clothing markets in Zambia in southern Africa.13 Salaula, a term that literally means “to rummage
through a pile,” is an unusual industry that begins in many of our own homes. In today’s era of fast
fashion in which Americans buy more than 20 billion garments each year (that’s 68 garments per
person!), many of us regularly bag up our gently used, unfashionable clothing and drop it off at a
nearby Goodwill shop.14 Only about half of these donated clothes actually end up in charity thrift
stores. The rest are sold to one of the nearly 300 firms that specialize in the global clothing recycling
business. The textile recycling firms sort the clothing by grades; the higher-quality items are sent to
Central America, and the lowest grades go to African and Asian countries. In Sub-Saharan Africa
an estimated 50 percent of purchased clothing consists of these secondhand imports, referred to by
some consumers as “dead man’s clothes” because of the belief that they come from the deceased.15
In Zambia the secondhand clothes are imported in bulk by 40 wholesale firms that, in turn, sell the
clothes to salaula traders. The traders sell the clothes out of their homes and in large public markets.
Typically the people working as salaula traders have either never had formal-sector jobs or have lost
their jobs in the public or private sector. Often they start selling in order to accumulate money for

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

other activities or as a sideline business. Hansen found that there were slightly more female sellers and
that women were more likely to be single heads of households. Successful salaula trading requires
business acumen and practical skills. Flourishing traders cultivate their consumer knowledge, develop sales strategies, and experiment with display and pricing. While salaula trading has relatively
low barriers to entry (one simply has to purchase a bale of clothing from a wholesale importer in
order to get started), in this informal market scale is important: salaula moves best when traders have
a lot of it on offer. Traders also have to understand the local cultural politics in order to successfully
earn a living in this sector. For example, salaula is different from used clothing from people someone
knows. In fact, secondhand clothing with folds and wrinkles from the bale is often the most desirable
because it is easily identifiable as “genuine” salaula.16

The global salaula commodity chain presents an interesting example of how material goods can
flow in and out of capitalist modes of production and exchange. For example, I might buy a dress
that was produced in a factory to give (not sell!) to my young niece. After wearing the dress for several months, Maddie will probably outgrow it, and her Mom will drop it off at the nearby Goodwill
shop. There is a 50 percent chance that the dress will be sold by the charity to a clothing recycler who
will export it to Zambia or a nearby country. From there the dress will end up in a bale of clothing
that is purchased by a salaula trader in Lusaka. At this point the dress enters the informal economy
as the salaula markets are unregulated and untaxed. A consumer might buy the dress and realize that
it does not quite fit her own daughter. She might then take it to her neighbor, who works informally
as a tailor, for alternations. Rather than paying her neighbor for the work on the dress, the consumer
might instead arrange to reciprocate at a later date by cleaning the tailor’s home. This single item of

Economics

9

clothing that has traveled the globe and moved in and out of formal and informal markets highlights
how diverse our economic lives really are, a theme that we will return to at the end of this chapter.

MODES OF EXCHANGE
There are three distinct ways to integrate economic and social relations and distribute material
goods. Contemporary economics only studies the first, market exchange. Most economic models
are unable to explain the second two, reciprocity and redistribution, because they have different underlying logics. Economic anthropology, on the other hand, provides rich and nuanced perspective
into how diverse modes of exchange shape, and are shaped by, everyday life across space and time.
Anthropologists understand market exchange to be a form of trade that today most commonly involves general purpose money, bargaining, and supply and demand price mechanisms. In contrast,
reciprocity involves the exchange of goods and services and is rooted in a mutual sense of obligation
and identity. Anthropologists have identified three distinct types of reciprocity, which we will explore
shortly: generalized, balanced, and negative.17 Finally, redistribution occurs when an authority of
some type (a temple priest, a chief, or even an institution such as the Internal Revenue Service) collects economic contributions from all community members and then redistributes these back in the
form of goods and services. Redistribution requires centralized social organization, even if at a small
scale (for example, within the foraging societies discussed above). As we will see, various modes of
exchange can and do coexist, even within capitalism.

Reciprocity
While early economic anthropology often seemed focused on detailed investigations of seemingly
exotic economic practices, anthropologists such as Bronislaw Malinowski and Marcel Mauss used
ethnographic research and findings to critique Western, capitalist economic systems. Today, many
follow in this tradition and some would agree with Keith Hart’s statement that economic anthropology “at its best has always been a search for an alternative to capitalism.”18 Mauss, a French anthropologist, was one of the first scholars to provide an in-depth exploration of reciprocity and the
role that gifts play in cultural systems around the world.19 Mauss asked why humans feel obliged to
reciprocate when they receive a gift. His answer was that giving and reciprocating gifts, whether these
are material objects or our time, creates links between the people involved.20
Over the past century, anthropologists have devoted considerable attention to the topic of reciprocity. It is an attractive one because of the seemingly moral nature of gifts: many of us hope that
humans are not solely self-interested, antisocial economic actors. Gifts are about social relations, not
just about the gifts themselves; as we will see, giving a gift that contains a bit of oneself builds a social relationship with the person who receives it.21 Studying reciprocity gives anthropologists unique
insights into the moral economy, or the processes through which customs, cultural values, beliefs,
and social coercion influence our economic behavior. The economy can be understood as a symbolic
reflection of the cultural order and the sense of right and wrong that people adhere to within that
cultural order.22 This means that economic behavior is a unique cultural practice, one that varies
across time and space.

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Generalized Reciprocity
Consider a young child. Friends and family members probably purchase numerous gifts for the
child, small and large. People give freely of their time: changing diapers, cooking meals, driving the
child to soccer practice, and tucking the child in at night. These myriad gifts of toys and time are
not written down; we do not keep a running tally of everything we give our children. However, as
children grow older they begin to reciprocate these gifts: mowing an elderly grandmother’s yard,
cooking dinner for a parent who has to work late, or buying an expensive gift for an older sibling.
When we gift without reckoning the exact value of the gift or expecting a specific thing in return
we are practicing generalized reciprocity. This form of reciprocity occurs within the closest social
relationships where exchange happens so frequently that monitoring the value of each item or service
given and received would be impossible, and to do so would lead to tension and quite possibly the
eventual dissolution of the relationship.
However, generalized reciprocity is not necessarily limited to households. In my own suburban
Kentucky neighborhood we engage in many forms of generalized reciprocity. For example, we regularly cook and deliver meals for our neighbors who have a new baby, a sick parent, or recently
deceased relative. Similarly, at Halloween we give out handfuls of candy (sometimes spending $50 or
more in the process). I do not keep a close tally of which kid received which candy bar, nor do my
young daughters pay close attention to which houses gave more or less desirable candy this year. In
other cultures, generalized reciprocity is the norm rather than the exception. Recall the Dobe Ju/’hoansi foragers who live in the Kalahari Desert: they have a flexible and overlapping kinship system
which ensures that the products of their hunting and gathering are shared widely across the entire
community. This generalized reciprocity reinforces the solidarity of the group; however, it also means
that Dobe Ju/’hoansi have very few individual possessions and generosity is a prized personality trait.
Balanced Reciprocity
Unlike generalized reciprocity, balanced reciprocity is more of a direct exchange in which something is traded or given with the expectation that something of equal value will be returned within
a specific time period. This form of reciprocity involves three distinct stages: the gift must be given,
it has to be received, and a reciprocal gift has to be returned. A key aspect of balanced reciprocity
is that without reciprocation within an appropriate time frame, the exchange system will falter and
the social relationship might end. Balanced reciprocity generally occurs at a social level more distant
than the family, but it usually occurs among people who know each other. In other words, complete
strangers would be unlikely to engage in balanced reciprocity because they would not be able to trust
the person to reciprocate within an acceptable period of time.
The Kula ring system of exchange found in the Trobriand Islands in the South Pacific is one
example of balanced reciprocity. A Kula ring involves the ceremonial exchange of shell and bead
necklaces (soulava) for shell arm bands (mwali) between trading partners living on different islands.
The arm bands and necklaces constantly circulate and only have symbolic value, meaning they bring
the temporary owner honor and prestige but cannot be bought or sold for money. Malinowski was
the first anthropologist to study the Kula ring, and he found that although participants did not profit
materially from the exchange, it served several important functions in Trobriand society.23 Because
participants formed relationships with trading participants on other islands, the Kula ring helped
solidify alliances among tribes, and overseas partners became allies in a land of danger and insecurity.

Economics

11

Along with arm bands and necklaces, Kula participants were also engaging in more mundane forms
of trade, bartering from one island to another. Additionally, songs, customs, and cultural influences
also traveled along the Kula route. Finally, although ownership of the arm bands and necklaces was
always temporary (for eventually participants are expected to gift the items to other partners in the
ring), Kula participants took great pride and pleasure in the items they received. The Kula ring exhibits all the hallmarks of balanced reciprocity: necklaces are traded for armbands with the expectation
that objects of equal value will be returned within a specific time period.
The Work of Reciprocity at Christmas
How many of us give and receive gifts during the holiday season? Christmas is undeniably a religious celebration, yet while nine in ten Americans say they celebrate Christmas, about half view it
to be more of a secular holiday. Perhaps this is why eight in ten non-Christians in the United States
now celebrate Christmas.24 How and why has this one date in the liturgical calendar come to be so
central to U.S. culture and what does gift giving have to do with it? In 1865, Christmas was declared
a national holiday; just 25 years later, Ladies’ Home Journal was already complaining that the holiday
had become overly commercialized.25 A recent survey of U.S. citizens found that we continue to be
frustrated with the commercialization of the season: one-third say they dislike the materialism of
the holidays, one-fifth are unhappy with the expenses of the season, and one in ten dislikes holiday
shopping in crowded malls and stores.26
When asked what they like most about the holiday season, 70 percent of U.S. residents say spending time with family and friends. This raises the question of how and why reciprocal gift giving has
become so central to the social relationships we hope to nurture at Christmas. The anthropologist

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

James Carrier argues that the affectionate giving at the heart of modern Christmas is in fact a celebration of personal social relations. 27 Among our family members and closest friends this gift giving is
generalized and more about the expression of sentiment. When we exchange gifts with those outside
this small circle it tends to be more balanced, and we expect some form of equivalent reciprocation. If
I spend $50 on a lavish gift for a friend, my feelings will undoubtedly be hurt when she reciprocates
with a $5 gift card to Starbucks.
Christmas shopping is arduous–we probably all know someone who heads to the stores at midnight
on Black Friday to get a jumpstart on their consumption. Throughout the month of December we
complain about how crowded the stores are and how tired we are of wrapping presents. Let’s face
it: Christmas is a lot of work! Recall how the reciprocity of the Kula ring served many functions in
addition to the simple exchange of symbolic arm bands and shell necklaces. Similarly, Christmas gift
giving is about more than exchanging commodities. In order to cement our social relationships we
buy and wrap gifts (even figuratively by placing a giant red bow on oversize items like a new bicycle)
in order to symbolically transform the impersonal commodities that populate our everyday lives into
meaningful gifts. The ritual of shopping, wrapping, giving, and receiving proves to us that we can create a sphere of love and intimacy alongside the world of anonymous, monetary exchange. The ritualistic exchange of gifts is accompanied by other traditions, such as the circulation of holiday cards that
have no economic or practical value, but instead are used to reinforce social relationships. When we
view Christmas through a moral economy lens, we come to understand how our economic behavior is
shaped by our historical customs, cultural values, beliefs, and even our need to maintain appearances.
Christmas is hard work, but with any luck we will reap the rewards of strong relational bonds.28
Negative Reciprocity
Unlike balanced and generalized reciprocity, negative reciprocity is an attempt to get something
for nothing. It is the most impersonal of the three forms of reciprocity and it commonly exists among
people who do not know each other well because close relationships are incompatible with attempts
to take advantage of other people. Gambling is a good example of negative reciprocity, and some
would argue that market exchange, in which one participant aims to buy low while the other aims to
sell high, can also be a form of negative reciprocity.
The emails always begin with a friendly salutation: “Dear Beloved Friend, I know this message will
come to you as surprised but permit me of my desire to go into business relationship with you.” The
introduction is often followed by a long involved story of deaths and unexpected inheritances: “I am
Miss Naomi Surugaba, a daughter to late Al-badari Surugaba of Libya whom was murdered during
the recent civil war in Libya in March 2011 . . . my late Father came to Cotonou Benin republic
with USD 4,200,000.00 (US$4.2M) which he deposited in a Bank here . . . for safe keeping. I am
here seeking for an avenue to transfer the fund to you . . . . Please I will offer you 20% of the total
sum for your assistance . . . .”29 The emails are crafted to invoke a sense of balanced reciprocity: the
authors tell us how trustworthy and esteemed we are and offer to give us a percentage of the money
in exchange for our assistance. However, most savvy recipients immediately recognize that these
scams are in fact a form of negative reciprocity since they know they will never actually receive the
promised money and, in fact, will probably lose money if they give their bank account information
to their correspondent.
The anthropologist Daniel Smith studied the motives and practices of Nigerian email scammers
who are responsible for approximately one-fifth of these types of emails that flood Western inboxes.30

Economics

13

He found that 419 scams, as they are known in Nigeria (after the section of the criminal code outlawing fraud), emerged in the largest African state (Nigeria has more than 130 million residents, nearly
70 percent of whom live below the poverty line) in the late 1990s when there were few legitimate
economic opportunities for the large number of educated young people who had the English skills
and technological expertise necessary for successful scams. Smith spoke with some of the Nigerians
sending these emails and found that they dreamed of a big payoff someday. They reportedly felt bad
for people who were duped, but said that if Americans were greedy enough to fall for it they got what
they deserved.
The typical email correspondence always emphasizes the urgency, confidentiality, and reciprocity
of the proposed arrangement. Smith argues that the 419 scams mimic long-standing cultural practices around kinship and patronage relations. While clearly 419 scammers are practicing negative
reciprocity by trying to get something for nothing (unfortunately we will never receive the 20 percent
of the $4.2 million that Miss Naomi Surugaba promised us), many in the United States continue to
be lured in by the veneer of balanced reciprocity. The FBI receives an estimated 4,000 complaints
about advance fee scams each year, and annual victim losses total over $55 million.31

Redistribution
Redistribution is the accumulation of goods or labor by a particular person or institution for
the purpose of dispersal at a later date. Redistribution is found in all societies. For example, within
households we pool our labor and resources, yet we rarely distribute these outside of our family. For
redistribution to become a central economic process, a society must have a centralized political apparatus to coordinate and enforce the practice.
Redistribution can occur alongside other forms of exchange. For example, in the United States everyone who works in the formal sector pays federal taxes to the Internal Revenue Service. During the
2015 fiscal year the IRS collected $3.3 trillion in federal revenue. It processed 243 million returns,
and 119 million of these resulted in a tax refund. In total, $403.3 billion tax dollars were redistributed by this central political apparatus.32 Even if I did not receive a cash refund from the IRS, I still
benefited from the redistribution in the form of federal services and infrastructure.
Sometimes economic practices that appear to be merely reciprocal gift exchanges are revealed
to be forms of redistribution after closer inspection. The potlatch system of the Native American
groups living in the United States and Canadian northwestern coastal area was long understood as
an example of functional gift giving. Traditionally, two groups of clans would perform highly ritualized exchanges of food, blankets, and ritual objects. The system produced status and prestige among
participants: by giving away more goods than another person, a chief could build his reputation and
gain new respect within the community. After contact with settlers, the excessive gift giving during
potlatches escalated to the point that early anthropologists described it as a “war of property.”33
Later anthropological studies of the potlatch revealed that rather than wasting, burning, or giving
away their property to display their wealth, the groups were actually giving away goods that other
groups could use and then waiting for a later potlatch when they would receive things not available
in their own region. This was important because the availability of food hunted, fished, and foraged
by native communities could be highly variable. The anthropologist Stuart Piddocke found that
the potlatch primarily served a livelihood function by ensuring the redistribution of goods between
groups with surpluses and those with deficits.34

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Markets
The third way that societies distribute goods and services is through market exchange. Markets
are social institutions with prices or exchange equivalencies. Markets do not necessarily have to be
localized in a geographic place (e.g., a marketplace), but they cannot exist without institutions to
govern the exchanges. Market and reciprocal exchange appear to share similar features: one person
gives something and the other receives something. A key distinction between the two is that market
exchanges are regulated by supply and demand mechanisms. The forces of supply and demand can
create risk for people living in societies that largely distribute goods through market exchange. If we
lose our jobs, we may not be able to buy food for our families. In contrast, if a member of a Dobe
Ju/’hoansi community is hurt and unable to gather foods today, she will continue to eat as a result of
generalized reciprocal exchanges.
Market exchanges are based on transactions, or changes in the status of a good or service between
people, such as a sale. While market exchange is generally less personal than reciprocal exchange, personalized transactions between people who have a relationship that endures beyond a single exchange
do exist. Atomized transactions are impersonal ones between people who have no relationship with
each other beyond the short term of the exchange. These are generally short-run, closed-ended transactions with few implications for the future. In contrast, personalized transactions occur between
people who have a relationship that endures past the exchange and might include both social and
economic elements. The transactors are embedded in networks of social relations and might even
have knowledge of the other’s personality, family, or personal circumstances that helps them trust
that the exchange will be satisfactory. Economic exchanges within families, for example when a child
begins to work for a family business, are extreme examples of personalized market exchange.
To better understand the differences between transactions between relative strangers and those
that are more personalized, consider the different options one has for a haircut: a person can stop by
a chain salon such as Great Clips and leave twenty minutes later after spending $15 to have his hair
trimmed by someone he has never met before, or he can develop an ongoing relationship with a hair
stylist or barber he regularly visits. These appointments may last an hour or even longer, and he and
his stylist probably chat about each other’s lives, the weather, or politics. At Christmas he may even
bring a small gift or give an extra tip. He trusts his stylist to cut his hair the way he likes it because of
their long history of personalized transactions.
Maine Lobster Markets
To better understand the nature of market transactions, anthropologist James Acheson studied
the economic lives of Maine fishermen and lobster dealers.35 The lobster market is highly sensitive
to supply and demand: catch volumes and prices change radically over the course of the year. For
example, during the winter months, lobster catches are typically low because the animals are inactive
and fishermen are reluctant to go out into the cold and stormy seas for small catches. Beginning in
April, lobsters become more active and, as the water warms, they migrate toward shore and catch volumes increase. In May prices fall dramatically; supply is high but there are relatively few tourists and
demand is low. In June and July catch volume decreases again when lobsters molt and are difficult to
catch, but demand increases due to the large influx of tourists, which, in turn, leads to higher prices.
In the fall, after the tourists have left, catch volume increases again as a new class of recently molted

Economics

15

lobsters become available to the fishermen. In other words, catch and price are inversely related: when
the catch is lowest, the price is highest, and when the catch is highest, the price is lowest.
The fishermen generally sell their lobsters to wholesalers and have very little idea where the lobsters
go, how many hands they pass through on their way to the consumer, how prices are set, or why
they vary over the course of the year. In other words, from the fisherman’s point of view the process
is shrouded in fog, mystery, and rumor. Acheson found that in order to manage the inherent risk
posed by this variable market, fishermen form long-term, personalized economic relationships with
particular dealers. The dealers’ goal is to ensure a large, steady supply of lobsters for as low a price as
possible. In order to do so, they make contracts with fishermen to always buy all of the lobster they
have to sell no matter how glutted the market might be. In exchange, the fishermen agree to sell their
catches for the going rate and forfeit the right to bargain over price. The dealers provide added incentives to the fishermen: for example, they will allow fishermen to use their dock at no cost and supply
them with gasoline, diesel fuel, paint, buoys, and gloves at cost or with only a small markup. They
also often provide interest-free loans to their fishermen for boats, equipment, and traps. In sum, the
Maine fishermen and the dealers have, over time, developed highly personalized exchange relations
in order to manage the risky lobster market. While these market exchanges last over many seasons
and rely on a certain degree of trust, neither the fishermen nor the dealers would characterize the
relationship as reciprocal—they are buying and selling lobster, not exchanging gifts.

Money
While general purpose money is not a prerequisite for market exchanges, most commercial transactions today do involve the exchange of money. In our own society, and in most parts of the world,
general purpose money can be exchanged for all manner of goods and services. General purpose
money serves as a medium of exchange, a tool for storing wealth, and as a way to assign interchangeable values. It reflects our ideas about the generalized interchangeability of all things—it makes products and services from all over the world commensurable in terms of a single metric. In so doing, it
increases opportunities for unequal exchange.36 As we will see, different societies have attempted to
challenge this notion of interchangeability and the inequalities it can foster in different ways.
Tiv Spheres of Exchange
Prior to colonialism, the Tiv people in Nigeria had an economic system governed by a moral hierarchy of values that challenged the idea that all objects can be made commensurable through general
purpose money. The anthropologists Paul and Laura Bohannan developed the theory of spheres of
exchange after recognizing that the Tiv had three distinct economic arenas and that each arena had its
own form of money.37 The subsistence sphere included locally produced foods (yams, grains, and vegetables), chickens, goats, and household utensils. The second sphere encompassed slaves, cattle, white
cloth, and metal bars. Finally, the third, most prestigious sphere was limited to marriageable females.
Excluded completely from the Tiv spheres of exchange were labor (because it was always reciprocally
exchanged) and land (which was not owned per se, but rather communally held within families).
The Tiv were able to convert their wealth upwards through the spheres of exchange. For example,
a Tiv man could trade a portion of his yam harvest for slaves that, in turn, could be given as bridewealth for a marriageable female. However, it was considered immoral to convert wealth downwards:
no honorable man would exchange slaves or brass rods for food.38 The Bohannans found that this

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

moral economy quickly collapsed when it was incorporated into the contemporary realm of general
purpose money. When items in any of the three spheres could be exchanged for general purpose
money, the Tiv could no longer maintain separate categories of exchangeable items. The Bohannans
concluded that the moral meanings of money—in other words, how exchange is culturally conceived—can have very significant material implications for people’s everyday lives.39
Local Currency Systems: Ithaca HOURS
While we may take our general purpose currency for granted, as the Tiv example demonstrates,
money is profoundly symbolic and political. Money is not only the measure of value but also the
purpose of much of our activity, and money shapes economic relations by creating inequalities and
obliterating qualitative differences.40 In other words, I might pay a babysitter $50 to watch my children for the evening, and I might spend $50 on a new sweater the next day. While these two expenses
are commensurable through general purpose money, qualitatively they are in fact radically different
in terms of the sentiment I attach to each (and I would not ever try to pay my babysitter in sweaters).
Some communities explicitly acknowledge the political and symbolic components of money and
develop complementary currency systems with the goal of maximizing transactions in a geographically bounded area, such as within a single city. The goal is to encourage people to connect more directly with each other than they might do when shopping in corporate stores using general purpose
money.41 For example, the city of Ithaca, New York, promotes its local economy and community
self-reliance through the use of Ithaca HOURS.42 More than 900 participants accept Ithaca HOURS
for goods and services, and some local employers and employees even pay or receive partial wages in
the complementary currency. The currency has been in circulation since 1991, and the system was
incorporated as a nonprofit organization in 1998. Today it is administered by a board of elected
volunteers. Ithaca HOURS circulate in denominations of two, one, one-half, one-fourth, one-eighth,
and one-tenth HOURS ($20, $10, $5, $2.50, $1.25, and $1, respectively). The HOURS are put
into circulation through “disbursements” given to registered organization members, through small
interest-free loans to local businesses, and through grants to community organizations. The name
“HOURS” evokes the principle of labor exchange and the idea that a unit of time is equal for everyone.43
The anthropologist Faidra Papavasiliou studied the impact of the Ithaca HOURS currency
system. She found that while the complementary currency does not necessarily create full
economic equality, it does create deeper connections among community members and local
businesses, helping to demystify and personalize
exchange (much as we saw with the lobstermen
and dealers).44 The Ithaca HOURS system also
offers important networking opportunities for locally owned businesses and, because it provides zero
interest business loans, it serves as a form of security against economic crisis.45 Finally, the Ithaca
HOURS complementary currency system encourages community members to shop at locally owned
businesses. As we will see in the next section, where we choose to shop and what we choose to buy
forms a large part of our lives and cultural identity. The HOURS system demonstrates a relatively
successful approach to challenging the inequalities fostered by general purpose money.

Economics

17

CONSUMPTION AND GLOBAL CAPITALISM
Consumption refers to the process of buying, eating, or using a resource, food, commodity, or
service. Anthropologists understand consumption more specifically as the forms of behavior that
connect our economic activity with the cultural symbols that give our lives meaning.46 People’s consumption patterns are a large part of their lives, and economic anthropologists explore why, how, and
when people consume what they do. The answers to these questions lie in people’s ideologies and
identities as members of a social group; each culture is different and each consumes in its own way.
Consumption is always social even when it addresses physical needs. For example, all humans need
to eat, but people around the world have radically different ideas of what foods and flavors are most
desirable and appropriate.
We use our material possessions to meet our needs (for example, we wear clothing to protect us
from the environment), regulate our social lives, and affirm the rightful order of things.47 Anthropologists understand that the commodities we buy are not just good for eating or shelter, they are
good for thinking: in acquiring and possessing particular goods, people make visible and stable the
categories of culture.48 For example, consumption helps us establish and defend differences among
people and occasions: I might wear a specific t-shirt and cap to a baseball game with friends in order
to distinguish myself as a fan of a particular team. In the process, I make myself easily identifiable
within the larger fan community. However, I probably would not wear this same outfit to a job interview because it would be inappropriate for the occasion.
Economic anthropologists are also interested in why objects become status symbols and how these
come to be experienced as an aspect of the self.49 Objects have a “social life” during which they may
pass through various statuses: a silver cake server begins its life as a commodity for sale in a store. 50
However, imagine that someone’s great-grandmother used that server to cut the cake at her wedding,
and it became a cherished family heirloom passed down from one generation to the next. Unfortunately, the server ended up in the hands of a cousin who did not feel a sentimental attachment to this
object. She sold it to a gold and silver broker for currency and it was transformed into an anonymous
commodity. That broker in turn sold it to a dealer who melted it down, turning the once cherished
cake server back into a raw material.

Transforming Barbie Dolls
We have already learned about the hard work that Americans devote to converting impersonal
commodities into sentimental gifts at Christmastime with the goal of nourishing their closest social
bonds. Consumers in capitalist systems continuously attempt to reshape the meaning of the commodities that businesses brand, package, and market to us.51 The anthropologist Elizabeth Chin
conducted ethnographic research among young African American children in a poor neighborhood
of New Haven, Connecticut, exploring the intersection of consumption, inequality, and cultural
identity.
Chin specifically looked at “ethnically correct” Barbie dolls, arguing that while they may represent some progress in comparison to the past when only white Barbies were sold, they also reinforce
outdated understandings of biological race and ethnicity. Rather than dismantling race and class
boundaries, the “ethnic” dolls create segregated toy shelves that in fact mirror the segregation that
young black children experience in their schools and neighborhoods.

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

The young black girls that Chin researched were unable to afford these $20 brand-name dolls
and typically played with less expensive, generic Barbie dolls that were white.52 The girls used their
imaginations and worked to transform their dolls by giving them hairstyles like their own, braiding
and curling the dolls’ long straight hair in order to integrate the dolls into their own worlds.53 A quick
perusal of the Internet reveals numerous tutorials and blogs devoted to black Barbie hairstyling,
demonstrating that the young New Haven girls are not the only ones working to transform these
store-bought commodities in socially meaningful ways.54

Consumption in the Developing World
Consumption provides us with a window into globalization, which we will learn more about in
the Globalization chapter. Over the past several decades, as global capitalism expanded its reach into
developing countries around the world, many people fretted that the growing influx of Western
products would lead to cultural homogeneity and even cultural imperialism. Some argued that with
every McDonald’s constructed, the values and beliefs of the West were being imposed on non-Western societies. However, anthropologists have systematically challenged this thesis by providing a more
sophisticated understanding of local cultural contexts. They demonstrate that people do not become
Westernized simply by buying Western commodities, any more than I become somehow more Japanese after eating at my favorite neighborhood hibachi restaurant. In fact, anthropological research
shows that Western commodities can sometimes lead to a resurgence of local identities and an affirmation of local processes over global patterns.
The Children Cry for Bread
The anthropologist Mary Wesimantel researched how families adapt to changing economic circumstances, including the introduction of Western products into their indigenous community of
Zumbagua, Ecuador. Once subsistence barley farmers, men from Zumbagua began to migrate to
cities in search of work while the women stayed home to care for the children and continue to farm
barley for home consumption. The men periodically returned home, bringing cash earnings and urban luxuries such as bread. The children associated this bread with modernity and city life, and they
preferred to eat it rather than the traditional staple food of toasted ground barley, grown and cooked
by their mothers. The children “cried” for the bread their fathers brought home. Yet, their mothers
resisted their pleas and continued to feed them grains from their own fields because barley consumption was considered a core component of indigenous identity.55 This example illustrates the complex
negotiations that emerge within families and communities when they are increasingly integrated into
a global economy and exposed to Western goods.
Consumption, Status, and Recognition among the Elite in China
In other parts of the world, the consumption of Western goods can be used to cement social and
economic status within local networks. John Osburg studied the “new elite” in China, the class of
entrepreneurs who have successfully navigated the recent transitions in the Chinese economy since
the early 1990s when private businesses and foreign investment began to steadily expand their reach
in this communist country.56 Osburg found that the new elite do not constitute a coherent class
defined by income level or occupation. Instead, they occupy an unstable and contested category and

Economics

19

consequently rely on the consumption of Western-style goods and services in order to stabilize their
identities.
Osburg argues that the whole point of elite consumption in Chengdu, China, is to make one’s
economic, social, and cultural capital as transparent and legible as possible to the widest audience
in order to let everyone know one is wealthy and well connected. Consequently, the Chengdu elite
favor easily recognizable and pricey brand names. However, consumption is not simply an arena of
status display. Instead, Osburg shows how it is a form of social practice through which relationships
with other elites are forged: the shared consumption of conventional luxury objects like liquor and
tobacco solidifies relationships among the privileged.57

Commodities and Global Capitalism
In his 1967 speech “A Christmas Sermon on Peace,” the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. reminded us that all life is interrelated:
We are all caught in an inescapable network of mutuality, tied into a single garment of
destiny. . . Did you ever stop to think that you can’t leave for your job in the morning without
being dependent on most of the world? You get up in the morning and reach over for the
sponge, and that’s handed to you by a Pacific Islander. You reach for a bar of soap, given to
you at the hands of a Frenchman. And then you go into the kitchen to drink your coffee for
the morning, and that’s poured into your cup by a South American. . . And before you finish
eating breakfast in the morning, you’ve depended on more than half the world.58
King’s words are even truer today than they were in the late 1960s. Due to the intensification of
global capitalism, the vast majority of the commodities we buy and the food we consume come to
us from distant places; while such global supply chains are not new, they have become increasingly
dense in an age of container shipping and overnight air deliveries.
Recall that a commodity is any good that is produced for sale or exchange for other goods. However, commodities are more than just a means to acquire general purpose money. They also embody
social relations of production, the identities of businesses, and particular geographic locales. Many
economic anthropologists today study global flows through the lens of a concrete substance that
makes a circuit through various locales, exploring the social lives of agrifood commodities such as
mutton, coffee, sushi, and sugar.59 In following these commodities along their supply chains, anthropologists highlight not only relations of production but also the power of ideas, images, and noneconomic actors. These studies of specific commodities are a powerful method to show how capitalism
has grown, spread, and penetrated agrarian societies around the world.60
Darjeeling Tea
The anthropologist Sarah Besky researched Darjeeling tea production in India to better understand how consumer desires are mapped onto distant locations.61 In India, tea plantation owners are
attempting to reinvent their product for 21st century markets through the use of fair-trade certification (discussed earlier in this chapter) and Geographical Indication Status (GI). GI is an international property-rights system, regulated by the World Trade Organization, that legally protects the
rights of people in certain places to produce certain commodities. For example, bourbon must come

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

from Kentucky, Mezcal can only be produced in certain parts of Mexico, and sparkling wine can
only be called champagne if it originated in France. Similarly, in order to legally be sold as “Darjeeling tea,” the tea leaves must come from the Darjeeling district of the Indian state of West Bengal.
Besky explores how the meaning of Darjeeling tea is created through three interrelated processes:
(1) extensive marketing campaigns aimed at educating consumers about the unique Darjeeling taste,
(2) the application of international law to define the geographic borders within which Darjeeling tea
can be produced, and (3) the introduction of tea plantation-based tourism. What the Darjeeling label
hides is the fact that tea plantations are highly unequal systems with economic relationships that date
back to the colonial era: workers depend upon plantation owners not just for money but also for
food, medical care, schools, and housing. Even when we pay more for Darjeeling tea, the premium
price is not always returned to the workers in the form of higher wages. Besky’s research shows how
capitalism and market exchange shapes the daily lives of people around the world. The final section of
this chapter explores the ways in which economic anthropologists understand and question structural
inequalities in the world today.

POLITICAL ECONOMY: UNDERSTANDING INEQUALITY
Humans are fundamentally social, and our culture is always shared and patterned: we live our lives
in groups. However, not all groups serve the needs of their members, and some people have more
power than others, meaning they can make the weak consent through threats and coercion. Within all
societies there are classes of people defined by the kinds of property they own and/or the kinds of work
they engage in.62 Beginning in the 1960s, an increasing number of anthropologists began to study the
world around them through the lens of political economy. This approach recognizes that the economy is central to everyday life but contextualizes economic relations within state structures, political

Economics

21

processes, social structures, and cultural values.63 Some political economic anthropologists focus on
how societies and markets have historically evolved while others ask how individuals deal with the
forces that oppress them, focusing on historical legacies of social domination and marginalization. 64
Karl Marx famously wrote, “Men make their own history, but they do not make it as they please;
they do not make it under self-selected circumstances, but under circumstances existing already,
given and transmitted from the past.”65 In other words, while humans are inherently creative, our
possibilities are limited by the structural realities of our everyday lives.
Consider a typical college student. Is this student happy with the courses her department or college is offering? Are there courses that she needs to graduate that are not being offered yet? She is free
to choose among the listed courses, but she cannot choose which courses are available. This depends
on factors beyond her control as a student: who is available to teach which topics or what the administration has decided is important enough to offer. So, her agency and ability to choose is highly
constrained by the structures in place. In the same way, political economies constrain people’s choices
and define the terms by which we must live. Importantly, it is not simply structures that determine
our choices and actions; these are also shaped by our community.
Just as our college student may come to think of the requirements she has to fulfill for her degree
as just the way it is (even if she does not want to take that theory course!), people come to think of
their available choices in everyday life as simply the natural order of things. However, the degree of
agency one has depends on the amount of power one has and the degree to which one understands
the structural dimensions of one’s life. This focus on power and structural relations parallels an anthropological understanding of culture as a holistic system: economic relations never exist by themselves, apart from social and political institutions.

Structural Violence and the Politics of Aid in Haiti
Anthropologists interested in understanding economic inequalities often research forms of structural violence present in the communities where they work.66 Structural violence is a form of violence in which a social structure or institution harms people by preventing them from meeting their
basic needs. In other words, how political and economic forces structure risk for various forms of
suffering within a population. Structural violence can include things like infectious disease, hunger,
and violence (torture, rape, crime, etc.).
In the United States we tend to focus on individuals and personal experiences. A popular narrative
holds that if you work hard enough you can “pull yourself up by your bootstraps” in this country of
immigrants and economic opportunity. The converse of this ideology is victim blaming: the logic
is that if people are poor it is their own fault.67 However, studying structural violence helps us understand that for some people there simply is no getting ahead and all one can hope for is survival.
The conditions of everyday life in Haiti, which only worsened after the 2010 earthquake, are a
good example of how structural violence limits individual opportunities. Haiti is the most unequal
country in Latin America and the Caribbean: the richest 20 percent of its population holds more
than 64 percent of its total wealth, while the poorest 20 percent hold barely one percent. The starkest contrast is between the urban and rural areas: almost 70 percent of Haiti’s rural households are
chronically poor (vs. 20 percent in cities), meaning they survive on less than $2 a day and lack access
to basic goods and services.68 Haiti suffers from widespread unemployment and underemployment,
and more than two-thirds of people in the labor force do not have formal jobs. The population is not
well educated, and more than 40 percent of the population over the age of 15 is illiterate.69 According

22

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

to the World Food Programme, more than 100,000 Haitian children under the age of five suffer from
acute malnutrition and one in three children is stunted (or irreversibly short for their age). Only 50
percent of households have access to safe water, and only 25 percent have adequate sanitation.70
On January 12, 2010, a devastating 7.0 magnitude earthquake struck this highly unequal and
impoverished nation, killing more than 160,000 people and displacing close to 1.5 million more.
Because the earthquake’s epicenter was near the capital city, the National Palace and the majority of
Haiti’s governmental offices were almost completely destroyed. The government lost an estimated 17
percent of its workforce. Other vital infrastructure, such as hospitals, communication systems, and
roads, was also damaged, making it harder to respond to immediate needs after the quake.71
The world responded with one of its most generous outpourings of aid in recent history. By
March 1, 2010, half of all U.S. citizens had donated a combined total of $1 billion for the relief
effort (worldwide $2.2 billion was raised), and on March 31, 2010 international agencies pledged
$5.3 billion over the next 18 months.72 The anthropologist Mark Schuller studied the aftermath of
the earthquake and the politics of humanitarianism in Haiti. He found that little of this aid ever
reached Haiti’s most vulnerable people, the 1.5 million people living in the IDP (internally displaced
persons) camps. Less than one percent of the aid actually was given to the Haitian government. The
largest single recipient was the U.S. military (33 percent), and the majority of the aid was dispersed
to foreign-run non-governmental organizations (NGOs) working in Haiti.
Because so little of this aid reached the people on the ground who needed it most, seven months following the disaster 40 percent of the IDP camps did not have access to water, and 30 percent did not
have toilets of any kind. Only ten percent of families in the camps had a tent and the rest slept under
tarps or bedsheets. Only 20 percent of the camps had education, health care, or mental health facilities
on-site.73 Schuller argues that this failure constitutes a violation of the Haitian IDP’s human rights,
and it is linked to a long history of exploitative relations between Haiti and the rest of the world.
Haiti is the second oldest republic in the Western Hemisphere (after the United States), having
declared its independence from France in 1804. Years later, in order to earn diplomatic recognition
from the French government, Haiti agreed to pay financial reparations to the powerful nation from
1825 to 1947. In order to do so, Haiti was forced to take out large loans from U.S. and European
banks at high interest rates. During the twentieth century, the country suffered at the hands of brutal dictatorships, and its foreign debts continued to increase. Schuller argues that the world system
continually applied pressure to Haiti, draining its resources and forcing it into the debt bondage
that kept it from developing. In the process, this system contributed to the very surplus that allowed
powerful Western nations to develop.74
When the earthquake struck, Haiti’s economy already revolved around international aid and foreign remittances sent by migrants (which represented approximately 25 percent of the gross domestic
product).75 Haiti had become a republic of NGOs that attract the nation’s most educated, talented
workers (because they can pay significantly higher wages than the national government, for example).
Schuller argues that the NGOs constitute a form of “trickle-down imperialism” as they reproduce the
world system.76 The relief money funneled through these organizations ended up supporting a new
elite class rather than the impoverished multitudes that so desperately need the assistance.

CONCLUSION
Anthropologists have identified forms of structural inequality in countless places around the
world. As we will learn in the Public Anthropology chapter, anthropology can be a powerful tool for

Economics

23

addressing the pressing social issues of our times. When anthropological research is presented in an
accessible and easily understood form, it can effectively encourage meaningful public conversations
about questions such as how to best disperse relief aid after natural disasters.
One of economic anthropology’s most important lessons is that multiple forms of economic production and exchange structure our daily lives and social relationships. As we have seen throughout
this chapter, people simultaneously participate in both market and reciprocal exchanges on a regular
basis. For example, I may buy lunch for a friend today with the idea that she will return the favor next
week when she cooks me supper. Building on this anthropological idea of economic diversity, some
scholars argue that in order to address the economic inequalities surrounding us we should collectively work to construct a community economy, or a space for economic decision-making that recognizes and negotiates our interdependence with other humans, other species, and our environment.
J. K. Gibson-Graham, Jenny Cameron, and Stephen Healy argue that in the process of recognizing
and negotiating this interdependence, we become a community.77
At the heart of the community economies framework is an understanding of economic diversity
that parallels anthropological perspectives. The economic iceberg is a visual that nicely illustrates
this diversity.78 Above the waterline are economic activities that are visible in mainstream economic
accounts, things like formal wage labor and shopping for groceries in a supermarket. Below the waterline we find the wide range of people, places, and activities that contribute to our well-being. This
conceptual tool helps us to explore interrelationships that cannot be captured through mechanical
market feedback loops.79
The most prevalent form of labor around the world is the unpaid work that is conducted within
the household, the family, and the neighborhood or wider community. When we include these activities in our understanding of the diverse economy, we also reposition many people who may see
themselves (or are labeled by others) as unemployed or economically inactive subjects.80 When we
highlight these different kinds of labor and forms of compensation we expand the scope of economic
identities that fall outside the narrow range valued by market production and exchange (employer,
employee, or entrepreneur).81 Recognizing our mutual connections and the surplus possibilities in
our own community is an important first step toward building an alternative economy, one that privileges community spheres rather than market spheres and supports equality over inequality. This also
resonates with one of economic anthropology’s central goals: searching for alternatives to the exploitative capitalist relations that structure the daily lives of so many people around the world today. 82

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Why are the economic activities of people like the fair trade coffee farmers described in this
chapter challenging to characterize? What benefits do the coffee farmers hope to achieve by
participating in a fair trade cooperative? Why would participating in the global economy
actually make these farming families more independent?
2. This chapter includes several examples of the ways in which economic production, consumption,
and exchange link our lives to those of people in other parts of the world. Thinking about your
own daily economic activities, how is your lifestyle dependent on people in other places? In
what ways might your consumption choices be connected to global economic inequality?
3. General purpose money is used for most transactions in our society. How is the act of
purchasing an object with money different from trading or gift-giving in terms of the social

24

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

and personal connections involved? Would an alternative like the Ithaca HOURS system be
beneficial to your community?
4. The Barbie doll is a product that represents rigid cultural ideas about race, but Elizabeth Chin
discovered in her research that girls who play with these dolls transform the dolls’ appearance
and racial identity. What are some other examples of products that people purchase and modify
as a form of personal expression or social commentary?

GLOSSARY
Balanced reciprocity: the exchange of something with the expectation that something of equal value
will be returned within a specific time period.
Consumption: the process of buying, eating, or using a resource, food, commodity, or service.
Generalized reciprocity: giving without expecting a specific thing in return.
General purpose money: a medium of exchange that can be used in all economic transactions.
Homo economicus: a term used to describe a person who would make rational decisions in ways
predicted by economic theories.
Means of production: the resources used to produce goods in a society such as land for farming or
factories.
Mode of production: the social relations through which human labor is used to transform energy
from nature using tools, skills, organization, and knowledge.
Negative reciprocity: an attempt to get something for nothing; exchange in which both parties try
to take advantage of the other.
Political economy: an approach in anthropology that investigates the historical evolution of economic relationships as well as the contemporary political processes and social structures that contribute to differences in income and wealth.
Redistribution: the accumulation of goods or labor by a particular person or institution for the
purpose of dispersal at a later date.
Structural violence: a form of violence in which a social structure or institution harms people by
preventing them from meeting their basic needs.
Subsistence farmers: people who raise plants and animals for their own consumption, but not for
sale to others.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Sarah Lyon is an Associate Professor of Anthropology at the University
of Kentucky. Her work is situated at the juncture of development studies, economic anthropology and food studies. She is particularly interested in how alternative food networks such as fair trade work to create
and sustain diverse economies in the United States and Latin America.

Economics

25

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Acheson, James. The Lobster Gangs of Maine. Lebanon, NH: University Press of New England, 1988.
Besky, Sarah. The Darjeeling Distinction: Labor and Justice on Fair-Trade Tea Plantations in India. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 2014.
Bohannan, Paul and Laura Bohannan. Tiv Economy. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1968.
Carrier, James. Gifts and Commodities: Exchange and Western Capitalism Since 1700. New York: Routledge,
1995.
Chin, Elizabeth. Purchasing Power: Black Kids and American Consumer Culture. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2001.
Gibson-Graham, J. K., Jenny Cameron, and Stephen Healy. Take Back the Economy: An Ethical Guide for
Transforming Our Communities. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2013.
Hansen, Karen. Salaula: The World of Secondhand Clothing and Zambia. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2000.
Hart, Keith. “Money in Twentieth Century Anthropology.” In A Handbook of Economic Anthropology, edited
by James Carrier. Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2012.
King, Martin Luther Jr. “A Christmas Sermon on Peace, December 24, 1967,” http://thekingcenter.org/
archive/document/christmas-sermon.
Lyon, Sarah. Coffee and Community: Maya Farmers and Fair Trade Markets. Boulder: University Press of
Colorado, 2011.
Marx, Karl. “The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon.” In The Marx-Engels Reader, edited by Robert C.
Tucker. New York: W. W. Norton, 1978[1852].
Mauss, Marcel. The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies. London: Routledge,
1990[1925].
Osburg, John. Anxious Wealth: Money and Morality Among China’s New Rich. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 2013.
Papavasiliou, Faidra. “Fair Money, Fair Trade: Tracing Alternative Consumption in a Local Currency
Economy.” In Fair Trade and Social Justice: Global Ethnographies, edited by Sarah Lyon and Mark
Moberg. New York: New York University Press, 2010.
Piddocke, Stuart. “The Potlatch System of the Southern Kwakiutl: A New Perspective,” Southwestern Journal
of Anthropology 21 (1965).
Schuller, Mark. “Haiti’s Disaster after the Disaster: the IDP Camps and Cholera,” Journal of Humanitarian
Assistance, December 10, 2013. https://sites.tufts.edu/jha/archives/869
———. Killing with Kindness: Haiti, International Aid, and NGOs. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University
Press, 2012.
Smith, Daniel. A Culture of Corruption: Everyday Deception and Popular Discontent in Nigeria. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007.
Wesimantel, Mary. Food, Gender, and Poverty in the Ecuadorian Andes. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 1988.
Wolf, Eric. Europe and the People without History. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982.

NOTES
1. James Carrier, “Introduction,” in A Handbook of Economic Anthropology, ed. James Carrier (Northampton, MA: Edward
Elgar, 2012), 4.
2. Richard Wilk and Lisa Cliggett, Economies and Cultures: Foundations of Economic Anthropology (Boulder, CO: Westview
Press, 2007), 37.
3. Carol Tarvis,“How Homo Economicus Went Extinct,” Wall Street Journal, May 15, 2015, http://www.wsj.com/articles/
how-homo-economicus-went-extinct-1431721255
4. Eric Wolf, Europe and the People without History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982).
5. Richard Lee, The Dobe Ju/’hoansi (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing, 2013). See also, Thomas Patterson, “Distribution
and Redistribution,” in A Handbook of Economic Anthropology, ed. James Carrier (Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2012).
6. Hill Gates, China’s Motor: A Thousand Years of Petty Capitalism (New York: Cornell University Press, 1996).

26

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

7. Thomas Patterson, “Distribution and Redistribution,” in A Handbook of Economic Anthropology, ed. James Carrier
(Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2012), 204.
8. Martha Alter Chen, “The Informal Economy in Comparative Perspective,” in A Handbook of Economic Anthropology, ed.
James Carrier (Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2012), 493.
9. Keith Hart, “Money in Twentieth Century Anthropology,” in A Handbook of Economic Anthropology, ed. James Carrier
(Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar, 2012).
10. See www.fairtrade.net for more information.
11. Sarah Lyon, Coffee and Community: Maya Farmers and Fair Trade Markets (Boulder: University Press of Colorado, 2011).
12. Friedrich Schneider, Andreas Buehn, and Claudio E. Montenegro, “Shadow Economies from All Over the World: New
Estimates for 162 Countries from 1999 to 2007,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5356, July 2010. https://
openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/3928/WPS5356.pdf?sequence=1.
13. Karen Hansen, Salaula: The World of Secondhand Clothing and Zambia (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000).
14. Elizabeth Cline, Overdressed: The Shockingly High Cost of Cheap Fashion (New York: Portfolio, 2013).
15. Robyn Curnow and Teo Kermeliotis, “Is Your Old T-Shirt Hurting African Economies?” CNN, April 12, 2013, http://
www.cnn.com/2013/04/12/business/second-hand-clothes-africa/.
16. Karen Hansen, Salaula.
17. Marshall Sahlins, Stone Age Economics (Chicago: Aldine, 1972).
18. Keith Hart, “Money in Twentieth Century Anthropology,” 179.
19. Marcel Mauss, The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies (London: Routledge, 1990[1925]).
20. Richard Wilk and Lisa Cliggett, Economies and Cultures: Foundations of Economic Anthropology, 158.
21. Ibid.,162.
22. Ibid.,120.
23. Bronislaw Malinowski, Argonauts of the Western Pacific (New York: Dutton, 1961[1922]).
24. Pew Research Center, “Celebrating Christmas and the Holidays Then and Now,” December 18, 2013. http://www.pewforum.org/2013/12/18/celebrating-christmas-and-the-holidays-then-and-now/.
25. James Carrier, Gifts and Commodities: Exchange and Western Capitalism since 1700 (New York: Routledge, 1995), 189
26. Pew Research Center, “Celebrating Christmas and the Holidays Then and Now.”
27. James Carrier, Gifts and Commodities.
28. Ibid., 178.
29. Erika Eichelberger, “What I Learned Hanging out with Nigerian Email Scammers,” Mother Jones, March 20, 2014. http://
www.motherjones.com/politics/2014/03/what-i-learned-from-nigerian-scammers.
30. Daniel Smith, A Culture of Corruption: Everyday Deception and Popular Discontent in Nigeria (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 2007).
31. Erika Eichelberger, “What I Learned Hanging out with Nigerian Email Scammers.”
32. Internal Revenue Service, 2015 Data Book (Washington D.C. Internal Revenue Service, 2016).
33. Richard Wilk and Lisa Cliggett, Economies and Cultures,156.
34. Stuart Piddocke, “The Potlatch System of the Southern Kwakiutl: A New Perspective,” Southwestern Journal of Anthropology 21 (1965).
35. James Acheson, The Lobster Gangs of Maine (Lebanon, NH: University Press of New England, 1988).
36. Alf Hornborg, “Learning from the Tiv: Why a Sustainable Economy Would Have to Be ‘Multicentric,’” Culture and
Agriculture 29 (2007): 64.
37. Paul Bohannan and Laura Bohannan, Tiv Economy (Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1968).
38. Paul Bohannan, “Some Principles of Exchange and Investment among the Tiv,” American Anthropologist 57 (1955): 65.
39. Ibid., 64.
40. Faidra Papavasiliou, “Fair Money, Fair Trade: Tracing Alternative Consumption in a Local Currency Economy,” in Fair
Trade and Social Justice: Global Ethnographies, ed. Sarah Lyon and Mark Moberg (New York: New York University Press, 2010).
41. J. K. Gibson-Graham, Jenny Cameron, and Stephen Healy, Take Back the Economy: An Ethical Guide for Transforming Our
Communities (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2013).
42. For more information, see http://ithacahours.info/
43. Faidra Papavasiliou, “Fair Money, Fair Trade: Tracing Alternative Consumption in a Local Currency Economy.”
44. Ibid.
45. Ibid., 216.
46. Rudi Colloredo-Mansfeld, “Consumption: From Cultural Theory to the Ethnography of Capitalism,” in Handbook of
Sociocultural Anthropology, ed. James Carrier and Deborah Gewertz (New York: Berg Publishers, 2013), 319.
47. Ibid.
48. Mary Douglas and Baron Isherwood, A World of Goods: Toward an Anthropology of Consumption (New York: Basic Books,
1979).
49. Colloredo-Mansfeld, “Consumption: From Cultural Theory to the Ethnography of Capitalism.”

Economics

27

50. Arjun Appadurai, The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1986).
51. Colloredo-Mansfeld, “Consumption: From Cultural Theory to the Ethnography of Capitalism,” 329.
52. See for instance, http://www.target.com/p/barbie-endless-curls-african-american-barbie-doll/-/A-15203859
53. Elizabeth Chin, Purchasing Power: Black Kids and American Consumer Culture (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2001).
54. For example, https://playbarbies.wordpress.com/2011/06/02/custom-rotini-or-halo-hair/
55. Mary Wesimantel, Food, Gender, and Poverty in the Ecuadorian Andes (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
1988).
56. John Osburg, Anxious Wealth: Money and Morality among China’s New Rich (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,
2013).
57. Ibid., 121.
58. Martin Luther King, Jr., A Christmas Sermon on Peace, December 24, 1967, http://thekingcenter.org/archive/document/
christmas-sermon.
59. Some examples of this literature include Deborah Gewertz and Frederick Errington, Cheap Meat: Flap Food Nations in
the Pacific Islands (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2010); Sarah Lyon, Coffee and Community: Maya Farmers and Fair
Trade Markets (Boulder: University Press of Colorado, 2011); Theodore Bestor, Tsukiji: The Fish Market at the Center of the
World (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004) and Sidney Mintz, Sweetness and Power: The Place of Sugar in Modern
History (New York: Penguin, 1985).
60. Colloredo-Mansfeld, “Consumption: From Cultural Theory to the Ethnography of Capitalism,” 326.
61. Sarah Besky, The Darjeeling Distinction: Labor and Justice on Fair-Trade Tea Plantations in India (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2014).
62. Wilk and Cliggett, Economies and Cultures: Foundations of Economic Anthropology, 84, 95.
63. Josiah Heyman, “Political Economy,” in Handbook of Sociocultural Anthropology, ed. James Carrier and Deborah Gewertz
(New York: Berg Publishers, 2013), 89.
64. The historical evolution of societies and markets is explored by Eric Wolf in Europe and the People without History (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982). The legacies of social domination and marginalization are discussed by Philippe
Bourgois in In Search of Respect: Selling Crack in El Barrio (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995).
65. Karl Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon, in The Marx-Engels Reader, 2nd Edition, ed. Robert C. Tucker
(New York: W. W. Norton, 1978[1852]).
66. Johan Galtung, “Violence, Peace, and Peace Research,” Journal of Peace Research 6 no. 3(1969): 167–191.
67. See Max Weber’s work The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism available at http://xroads.virginia.edu/~HYPER/
WEBER/cover.html
68. “Living Conditions in Haiti’s Capital Improve, but Rural Communities Remain Very Poor,” World Bank, July 11, 2014.
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2014/07/11/while-living-conditions-in-port-au-prince-are-improving-haiticountryside-remains-very-poor.
69. “CIA Factbook: Haiti,” https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ha.html.
70. “Ten Facts about Hunger in Haiti,” https://www.wfp.org/stories/10-facts-about-hunger-haiti.
71. Mark Schuller, “Haiti’s Disaster after the Disaster: the IDP Camps and Cholera,” Journal of Humanitarian Assistance,
December 10, 2013. https://sites.tufts.edu/jha/archives/869
72. Ibid.
73. Ibid.
74. Mark Schuller, Killing with Kindness: Haiti, International Aid, and NGOs (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press,
2012).
75. Terry Buss, Haiti in the Balance: Why Foreign Aid has Failed and What We Can Do about It (Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institute, 2008).
76. Mark Schuller, Killing with Kindness.
77. J. K. Gibson-Graham, Jenny Cameron, and Stephen Healy, Take Back the Economy: An Ethical Guide for Transforming Our
Communities (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2013), xix.
78. Byrne, Ken, “Iceberg Image,” http://www.communityeconomies.org/Home/Key-Ideas.
79. Gibson-Graham, Cameron, and Healy, Take Back the Economy, 11.
80. J. K. Gibson-Graham, A Postcapitalist Politics (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2006), 62–63.
81. Ibid., 65.
82. Keith Hart, “Money in Twentieth Century Anthropology.”

Political Anthropology: A
Cross-Cultural Comparison
Paul McDowell, Santa Barbara City College
McDowell@sbcc.edu
paulanthropus@cox.net

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Identify the four levels of sociocultural integration (band, tribe,
chiefdom, and state) and describe
their characteristics.
• Compare systems of leadership
in egalitarian and non-egalitarian
societies.
• Describe systems used in tribes
and chiefdoms to achieve social
integration and encourage
connections between people.
• Assess the benefits and problems
associated with state-level political
organizations.
• Evaluate the extent to which the
Islamic State meets the formal criteria
for a state-level political organization.

All cultures have one element in common: they somehow exercise social control over their own members. Even
small foraging societies such as the Ju/’hoansi or !Kung,
the Inuit (or “Eskimo”) of the Arctic north, and aboriginal
Australians experience disputes that must be contained if
inter-personal conflicts are to be reduced or eliminated. As
societies become more complex, means of control increase
accordingly. The study of these means of control are the
subject of political anthropology.

BASIC CONCEPTS IN POLITICAL
ANTHROPOLOGY
Like the “invisible hand” of the market to which Adam
Smith refers in analyzing the workings of capitalism, two
forces govern the workings of politics: power—the ability
to induce behavior of others in specified ways by means of
coercion or use or threat of physical force—and authority—the ability to induce behavior of others by persuasion.1 Extreme examples of the exercise of power are the
gulags (prison camps) in Stalinist Russia, the death camps in
Nazi-ruled Germany and Eastern Europe, and so-called Supermax prisons such as Pelican Bay in California and the
prison for “enemy combatants” in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
by the United States. In all of these settings, prisoners comply or are punished or executed. At the other extreme are
most forager societies, which typically exercise authority
more often than power. Groups in those societies comply
with the wishes of their most persuasive members.
In actuality, power and authority are points on a continuum and both are present in every society to some degree.
Even Hitler, who exercised absolute power in many ways,
had to hold the Nuremberg rallies to generate popular support for his regime and persuade the German population
that his leadership was the way to national salvation. In the
Soviet Union, leaders had a great deal of coercive and physical power but still felt the need to hold parades and mass

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

rallies on May Day every year to persuade people to remain attached to their vision of a communal
society. At the other end of the political spectrum, societies that tend to use persuasion through
authority also have some forms of coercive power. Among the Inuit, for example, individuals who
flagrantly violated group norms could be punished, including by homicide.2
A related concept in both politics and law is legitimacy: the perception that an individual has
a valid right to leadership. Legitimacy is particularly applicable to complex societies that require
centralized decision-making. Historically, the right to rule has been based on various principles. In
agricultural states such as ancient Mesopotamia, the Aztec, and the Inca, justification for the rule of
particular individuals was based on hereditary succession and typically granted to the eldest son of
the ruler. Even this principle could be uncertain at times, as was the case when the Inca emperor Atahualpa had just defeated his rival and brother Huascar when the Spaniards arrived in Peru in 1533.3
In many cases, supernatural beliefs were invoked to establish legitimacy and justify rule by an elite.
Incan emperors derived their right to rule from the Sun God and Aztec rulers from Huitzilopochtli
(Hummingbird-to-the-Left). European monarchs invoked a divine right to rule that was reinforced
by the Church of England in Britain and by the Roman Catholic Church in other countries prior to
the Reformation. In India, the dominance of the Brahmin elite over the other castes is justified by
karma, cumulative forces created by good and evil deeds in past lives. Secular equivalents also serve to
justify rule by elites; examples include the promise of a worker’s paradise in the former Soviet Union
and racial purity of Aryans in Nazi Germany. In the United States and other democratic forms of
government, legitimacy rests on the consent of the governed in periodic elections (though in the
United States, the incoming president is sworn in using a Christian Bible despite alleged separation
of church and state).
In some societies, dominance by an individual or group is viewed as unacceptable. Christopher
Boehm (1999) developed the concept of reverse dominance to describe societies in which people rejected attempts by any individual to exercise power.4 They achieved this aim using ridicule, criticism,
disobedience, and strong disapproval and could banish extreme offenders. Richard Lee encountered
this phenomenon when he presented the !Kung with whom he had worked over the preceding year
with a fattened ox.5 Rather than praising or thanking him, his hosts ridiculed the beast as scrawny, ill
fed, and probably sick. This behavior is consistent with reverse dominance.
Even in societies that emphasize equality between people, decisions still have to be made. Sometimes particularly persuasive figures such as headmen make them, but persuasive figures who lack
formal power are not free to make decisions without coming to a consensus with their fellows. To
reach such consensus, there must be general agreement. Essentially, then, even if in a backhanded
way, legitimacy characterizes societies that lack institutionalized leadership.
Another set of concepts refers to the reinforcements or consequences for compliance with the
directive and laws of a society. Positive reinforcements are the rewards for compliance; examples include medals, financial incentives, and other forms of public recognition. Negative reinforcements
punish noncompliance through fines, imprisonment, and death sentences. These reinforcements can
be identified in every human society, even among foragers or others who have no written system of
law. Reverse dominance is one form of negative reinforcement.

LEVELS OF SOCIO-CULTURAL INTEGRATION
If cultures of various sizes and configurations are to be compared, there must be some common
basis for defining political organization. In many small communities, the family functions as a po-

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

3

litical unit. As Julian Steward wrote about the Shoshone, a Native American group in the Nevada
basin, “all features of the relatively simple culture were integrated and functioned on a family level.
The family was the reproductive, economic, educational, political, and religious unit.”6 In larger more
complex societies, however, the functions of the family are taken over by larger social institutions.
The resources of the economy, for example, are managed by authority figures outside the family who
demand taxes or other tribute. The educational function of the family may be taken over by schools
constituted under the authority of a government, and the authority structure in the family is likely
to be subsumed under the greater power of the state. Therefore, anthropologists need methods for
assessing political organizations that can be applied to many different kinds of communities. This
concept is called levels of socio-cultural integration.
Elman Service (1975) developed an influential scheme for categorizing the political character of
societies that recognized four levels of socio-cultural integration: band, tribe, chiefdom, and state.7
A band is the smallest unit of political organization, consisting of only a few families and no formal
leadership positions. Tribes have larger populations but are organized around family ties and have
fluid or shifting systems of temporary leadership. Chiefdoms are large political units in which the
chief, who usually is determined by heredity, holds a formal position of power. States are the most
complex form of political organization and are characterized by a central government that has a monopoly over legitimate uses of physical force, a sizeable bureaucracy, a system of formal laws, and a
standing military force.
Each type of political integration can be further categorized as egalitarian, ranked, or stratified.
Band societies and tribal societies generally are considered egalitarian—there is no great difference in
status or power between individuals and there are as many valued status positions in the societies as
there are persons able to fill them. Chiefdoms are ranked societies; there are substantial differences in
the wealth and social status of individuals based on how closely related they are to the chief. In ranked
societies, there are a limited number of positions of power or status, and only a few can occupy them.
State societies are stratified. There are large differences in the wealth, status, and power of individuals
based on unequal access to resources and positions of power. Socio-economic classes, for instance, are
forms of stratification in many state societies.8

EGALITARIAN SOCIETIES
We humans are not equal in all things. The status of women is low relative to the status of men in
many, if not most, societies as we will see. There is also the matter of age. In some societies, the aged
enjoy greater prestige than the young; in others, the aged are subjected to discrimination in employment and other areas. Even in Japan, which has traditionally been known for its respect for elders,
the prestige of the aged is in decline. And we vary in terms of our abilities. Some are more eloquent
or skilled technically than others; some are expert craft persons while others are not; some excel at
conceptual thought, whereas for the rest of us, there is always the For Dummies book series to manage
our computers, software, and other parts of our daily lives such as wine and sex.
In a complex society, it may seem that social classes—differences in wealth and status—are, like
death and taxes, inevitable: that one is born into wealth, poverty, or somewhere in between and has
no say in the matter, at least at the start of life, and that social class is an involuntary position in
society. However, is social class universal? As they say, let’s look at the record, in this case ethnographies. We find that among foragers, there is no advantage to hoarding food; in most climates, it
will rot before one’s eyes. Nor is there much personal property, and leadership, where it exists, is

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

informal. In forager societies, the basic ingredients for social class do not exist. Foragers such as the
!Kung, Inuit, and aboriginal Australians, are egalitarian societies in which there are few differences
between members in wealth, status, and power. Highly skilled and less skilled hunters do not belong
to different strata in the way that the captains of industry do from you and me. The less skilled hunters in egalitarian societies receive a share of the meat and have the right to be heard on important
decisions. Egalitarian societies also lack a government or centralized leadership. Their leaders, known
as headmen or big men, emerge by consensus of the group. Foraging societies are always egalitarian,
but so are many societies that practice horticulture or pastoralism. In terms of political organization,
egalitarian societies can be either bands or tribes.

BAND-LEVEL POLITICAL ORGANIZATION
Societies organized as a band typically comprise foragers who rely on hunting and gathering and
are therefore nomadic, are few in number (rarely exceeding 100 persons), and form small groups consisting of a few families and a shifting population. Bands lack formal leadership. Richard Lee went
so far as to say that the Dobe! Kung had no leaders. To quote one of his informants, “Of course we
have headmen. Each one of us is headman over himself.”9At most, a band’s leader is primus inter pares
or “first among equals” assuming anyone is first at all. Modesty is a valued trait; arrogance and competitiveness are not acceptable in societies characterized by reverse dominance. What leadership there
is in band societies tends to be transient and subject to shifting circumstances. For example, among
the Paiute in North America, “rabbit bosses” coordinated rabbit drives during the hunting season but
played no leadership role otherwise. Some “leaders” are excellent mediators who are called on when
individuals are involved in disputes while others are perceived as skilled shamans or future-seers who
are consulted periodically. There are no formal offices or rules of succession.10
Bands were probably the first political unit to come into existence outside the family itself. There
is some debate in anthropology about how the earliest bands were organized. Elman Service argued
that patrilocal bands organized around groups of related men served as the prototype, reasoning that
groups centered on male family relationships made sense because male cooperation was essential to
hunting.11 M. Kay Martin and Barbara Voorhies pointed out in rebuttal that gathering vegetable
foods, which typically was viewed as women’s work, actually contributed a greater number of calories
in most cultures and thus that matrilocal bands organized around groups of related women would
be closer to the norm.12 Indeed, in societies in which hunting is the primary source of food, such as
the Inuit, women tend to be subordinate to men while men and women tend to have roughly equal
status in societies that mainly gather plants for food.

Law in Band Societies
Within bands of people, disputes are typically resolved informally. There are no formal mediators
or any organizational equivalent of a court of law. A good mediator may emerge—or may not. In
some cultures, duels are employed. Among the Inuit, for example, disputants engage in a duel using
songs in which, drum in hand, they chant insults at each other before an audience. The audience
selects the better chanter and thereby the winner in the dispute.13 The Mbuti of the African Congo
use ridicule; even children berate adults for laziness, quarreling, or selfishness. If ridicule fails, the
Mbuti elders evaluate the dispute carefully, determine the cause, and, in extreme cases, walk to the

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

5

center of the camp and criticize the individuals by name, using humor to soften their criticism—the
group, after all, must get along.14

Warfare in Band Societies
Nevertheless, conflict does sometimes break out into war between bands and, sometimes, within
them. Such warfare is usually sporadic and short-lived since bands do not have formal leadership
structures or enough warriors to sustain conflict for long. Most of the conflict arises from interpersonal arguments. Among the Tiwi of Australia, for example, failure of one band to reciprocate
another band’s wife-giving with one of its own female relative led to abduction of women by the aggrieved band, precipitating a “war” that involved some spear-throwing (many did not shoot straight
and even some of the onlookers were wounded) but mostly violent talk and verbal abuse.15 For the
Dobe !Kung, Lee found 22 cases of homicide by males and other periodic episodes of violence,
mostly in disputes over women—not quite the gentle souls Elizabeth Marshall Thomas depicted in
her Harmless People (1959).16

TRIBAL POLITICAL ORGANIZATION
Whereas bands involve small populations without structure, tribal societies involve at least two
well-defined groups linked together in some way and range in population from about 100 to as
many as 5,000 people. Though their social institutions can be fairly complex, there are no centralized
political structures or offices in the strict sense of those terms. There may be headmen, but there are
no rules of succession and sons do not necessarily succeed their fathers as is the case with chiefdoms.
Tribal leadership roles are open to anyone—in practice, usually men, especially elder men who acquire leadership positions because of their personal abilities and qualities. Leaders in tribes do not
have a means of coercing others or formal powers associated with their positions. Instead, they must
persuade others to take actions they feel are needed. A Yanomami headsman, for instance, said that
he would never issue an order unless he knew it would be obeyed. The headman Kaobawä exercised
influence by example and by making suggestions and warning of consequences of taking or not
taking an action.17
Like bands, tribes are egalitarian societies. Some individuals in a tribe do sometimes accumulate
personal property but not to the extent that other tribe members are deprived. And every (almost
always male) person has the opportunity to become a headman or leader and, like bands, one’s leadership position can be situational. One man may be a good mediator, another an exemplary warrior,
and a third capable of leading a hunt or finding a more ideal area for cultivation or grazing herds.
An example illustrating this kind of leadership is the big man of New Guinea; the term is derived
from the languages of New Guinean tribes (literally meaning “man of influence”). The big man is one
who has acquired followers by doing favors they cannot possibly repay, such as settling their debts
or providing bride-wealth. He might also acquire as many wives as possible to create alliances with
his wives’ families. His wives could work to care for as many pigs as possible, for example, and in
due course, he could sponsor a pig feast that would serve to put more tribe members in his debt and
shame his rivals. It is worth noting that the followers, incapable of repaying the Big Man’s gifts, stand
metaphorically as beggars to him.18
Still, a big man does not have the power of a monarch. His role is not hereditary. His son must
demonstrate his worth and acquire his own following—he must become a big man in his own right.

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Furthermore, there usually are other big men in the village who are his potential rivals. Another man
who proves himself capable of acquiring a following can displace the existing big man. The big man
also has no power to coerce—no army or police force. He cannot prevent a follower from joining
another big man, nor can he force the follower to pay any debt owed. There is no New Guinean
equivalent of a U.S. marshal. Therefore, he can have his way only by diplomacy and persuasion—
which do not always work.19

Tribal Systems of Social Integration
Tribal societies have much larger populations than bands and thus must have mechanisms for creating and maintaining connections between tribe members. The family ties that unite members of a
band are not sufficient to maintain solidarity and cohesion in the larger population of a tribe. Some
of the systems that knit tribes together are based on family (kin) relationships, including various
kinds of marriage and family lineage systems, but there are also ways to foster tribal solidarity outside
of family arrangements through systems that unite members of a tribe by age or gender.
Integration through Age Grades and Age Sets
Tribes use various systems to encourage solidarity or feelings of connectedness between people
who are not related by family ties. These systems, sometimes known as sodalities, unite people across
family groups. In one sense, all societies are divided into age categories. In the U.S. educational system, for instance, children are matched to grades in school according to their age—six-year-olds in
first grade and thirteen-year-olds in eighth grade. Other cultures, however, have established complex
age-based social structures. Many pastoralists in East Africa, for example, have age grades and age
sets. Age sets are named categories to which men of a certain age are assigned at birth. Age grades
are groups of men who are close to one another in age and share similar duties or responsibilities. All
men cycle through each age grade over the course of their lifetimes. As the age sets advance, the men
assume the duties associated with each age grade.
An example of this kind of tribal society is the Tiriki of Kenya. From birth to about fifteen years
of age, boys become members of one of seven named age sets. When the last boy is recruited, that age
set closes and a new one opens. For example, young and adult males who belonged to the “Juma” age
set in 1939 became warriors by 1954. The “Mayima” were already warriors in 1939 and became elder
warriors during that period. In precolonial times, men of the warrior age grade defended the herds of
the Tiriki and conducted raids on other tribes while the elder warriors acquired cattle and houses and
took on wives. There were recurring reports of husbands who were much older than their wives, who
had married early in life, often as young as fifteen or sixteen. As solid citizens of the Tiriki, the elder
warriors also handled decision-making functions of the tribe as a whole; their legislation affected the
entire village while also representing their own kin groups. The other age sets also moved up through
age grades in the fifteen-year period. The elder warriors in 1939, “Nyonje,” became the judicial elders
by 1954. Their function was to resolve disputes that arose between individuals, families, and kin
groups, of which some elders were a part. The “Jiminigayi,” judicial elders in 1939, became ritual
elders in 1954, handling supernatural functions that involved the entire Tiriki community. During
this period, the open age set was “Kabalach.” Its prior members had all grown old or died by 1939
and new boys joined it between 1939 and 1954. Thus, the Tiriki age sets moved in continuous 105-

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

7

year cycles. This age grade and age set system encourages bonds between men of similar ages. Their
loyalty to their families is tempered by their responsibilities to their fellows of the same age.20

Integration through Bachelor Associations and Men’s Houses
Among most, if not all, tribes of New Guinea, the existence of men’s houses serves to cut across
family lineage groups in a village. Perhaps the most fastidious case of male association in New Guinea
is the bachelor association of the Mae-Enga, who live in the northern highlands. In their culture, a
boy becomes conscious of the distance between males and females before he leaves home at age five
to live in the men’s house. Women are regarded as potentially unclean, and strict codes that minimize
male-female relations are enforced. Sanggai festivals reinforce this division. During the festival, every
youth of age 15 or 16 goes into seclusion in the forest and observes additional restrictions, such as
avoiding pigs (which are cared for by women) and avoiding gazing at the ground lest he see female
footprints or pig feces.21 One can see, therefore, that every boy commits his loyalty to the men’s house
early in life even though he remains a member of his birth family. Men’s houses are the center of male
activities. There, they draw up strategies for warfare, conduct ritual activities involving magic and
honoring of ancestral spirits, and plan and rehearse periodic pig feasts.
Integration through Gifts and Feasting
Exchanges and the informal obligations associated with them are primary devices by which bands
and tribes maintain a degree of order and forestall armed conflict, which was viewed as the “state
of nature” for tribal societies by Locke and Hobbes, in the absence of exercises of force by police
or an army. Marcel Mauss, nephew and student of eminent French sociologist Emile Durkheim,
attempted in 1925 to explain gift giving and its attendant obligations cross-culturally in his book,
The Gift: Forms and Functions of Exchange in Archaic Societies. He started with the assumption that
two groups have an imperative to establish a relationship of some kind. There are three options when
they meet for the first time. They could pass each other by and never see each other again. They may
resort to arms with an uncertain outcome. One could wipe the other out or, more likely, win at great
cost of men and property or fight to a draw. The third option is to “come to terms” with each other
by establishing a more or less permanent relationship.22 Exchanging gifts is one way for groups to
establish this relationship.
These gift exchanges are quite different from Western ideas about gifts. In societies that lack a central government, formal law enforcement powers, and collection agents, the gift exchanges are obligatory and have the force of law in the absence of law. Mauss referred to them as “total prestations.”

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Though no Dun and Bradstreet agents would come to collect, the potential for conflict that could
break out at any time reinforced the obligations.23 According to Mauss, the first obligation is to give;
it must be met if a group is to extend social ties to others. The second obligation is to receive; refusal
of a gift constitutes rejection of the offer of friendship as well. Conflicts can arise from the perceived
insult of a rejected offer. The third obligation is to repay. One who fails to make a gift in return will
be seen as in debt—in essence, a beggar. Mauss offered several ethnographic cases that illustrated
these obligations. Every gift conferred power to the giver, expressed by the Polynesian terms mana
(an intangible supernatural force) and hau (among the Maori, the “spirit of the gift,” which must
be returned to its owner).24 Marriage and its associated obligations also can be viewed as a form of
gift-giving as one family “gives” a bride or groom to the other.
Basics of Marriage, Family, and Kinship
Understanding social solidarity in tribal societies requires knowledge of family structures,
which are also known as kinship systems. The romantic view of marriage in today’s mass
media is largely a product of Hollywood movies and romance novels from mass-market
publishers such as Harlequin. In most cultures around the world, marriage is largely a
device that links two families together; this is why arranged marriage is so common from a
cross-cultural perspective. And, as Voltaire admonished, if we are to discuss anything, we
need to define our terms.
Marriage is defined in numerous ways, usually (but not always) involving a tie between a
woman and a man. Same-sex marriage is also common in many cultures. Nuclear families
consist of parents and their children. Extended families consist of three generations or
more of relatives connected by marriage and descent.
In the diagrams below, triangles represent males and circles represent females. Vertical
lines represent a generational link connecting, say, a man with his father. Horizontal lines
above two figures are sibling links; thus, a triangle connected to a circle represents a
brother and sister. Equal signs connect husbands and wives. Sometimes a diagram may
render use of an equal sign unrealistic; in those cases, a horizontal line drawn below the
two figures shows a marriage link.
Most rules of descent generally fall into one of two categories. Bilateral descent (commonly used in the United States) recognizes both the mother’s and the father’s “sides” of
the family while unilineal descent recognizes only one sex-based “side” of the family.
Unilineal descent can be patrilineal, recognizing only relatives through a line of male
ancestors, or matrilineal, recognizing only relatives through a line of female ancestors.
Groups made up of two or more extended families can be connected as larger groups
linked by kinship ties. A lineage consists of individuals who can trace or demonstrate their
descent through a line of males or females to the founding ancestor.
For further discussion of this topic, consult the Family and Marriage chapter.

Integration through Marriage
Most tribal societies’ political organizations involve marriage, which is a logical vehicle for creating
alliances between groups. One of the most well-documented types of marriage alliance is bilateral
cross-cousin marriage in which a man marries his cross-cousin—one he is related to through two
links, his father’s sister and his mother’s brother. These marriages have been documented among the

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

9

Yanomami, an indigenous group living in Venezuela and Brazil. Yanomami villages are typically populated by two or more extended family groups also known as lineages. Disputes and disagreements
are bound to occur, and these tensions can potentially escalate to open conflict or even physical
violence. Bilateral cross-cousin marriage provides a means of linking lineage groups together over
time through the exchange of brides. Because cross-cousin marriage links people together by both
marriage and blood ties (kinship), these unions can reduce tension between the groups or at least
provide an incentive for members of rival lineages to work together.
To get a more detailed picture of how marriages integrate family groups, consider the following
family diagrams. In these diagrams, triangles represent males and circles represent females. Vertical
lines represent a generational link connecting, say, a man to his father. Horizontal lines above two
figures are sibling links; thus, a triangle connected to a circle by a horizontal line represents a brother
and sister. Equal signs connect husbands and wives. In some diagrams in which use of an equal sign
is not realistic, a horizontal line drawn below the two figures shows their marriage link.
Figure 2 depicts the alliance
created by the bilateral crosscousin marriage system. In this
figure, uppercase letters represent males and lowercase letters
represent females, Thus, X refers
to all of the males of Lineage X
and Y refers to all of the males of
Lineage Y; likewise, x refers to all
of the females of Lineage X and
y refers to all of the females of
Lineage Y.
Consider the third generation
in the diagram. X3 has married
y3 (the horizontal line below the
figures), creating an affinal link.
Trace the relationship between
X3 and y3 through their matrilateral links—the links between a mother and her brother. You can see
from the diagram that X3’s mother is x2 and her brother is Y2 and his daughter is y3. Therefore, y3 is
X3’s mother’s brother’s daughter.
Now trace the patrilateral links of this couple—the links between a father and his sister. X3’s father
is X2 and X2’s sister is x2, who married Y2, which makes her daughter y3—his father’s sister’s daughter.
Work your way through the description and diagram until you are comfortable understanding the
connections.
Now do the same thing with Y3 by tracing his matrilateral ties with his wife x3. His mother is x2
and her brother is X2, which makes his mother’s brother’s daughter x3. On the patrilateral, his father
is Y2, and Y2’s sister is y2, who is married to X2 Therefore, their daughter is x3.
This example represents the ideal bilateral cross-cousin marriage: a man marries a woman who
is both his mother’s brother’s daughter and his father’s sister’s daughter. The man’s matrilateral crosscousin and patrilateral cross-cousin are the same woman! Thus, the two lineages have discharged their
obligations to one another in the same generation. Lineage X provides a daughter to lineage Y and
lineage Y reciprocates with a daughter. Each of the lineages therefore retains its potential to reproduce

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

in the next generation. The obligation incurred by lineage Y from taking lineage X’s daughter in
marriage has been repaid by giving a daughter in marriage to lineage X.
This type of marriage is what Robin Fox, following Claude Levi-Strauss, called restricted exchange.25 Notice that only two extended families can engage in this exchange. Society remains relatively simple because it can expand only by splitting off. And, as we will see later, when daughter
villages split off, the two lineages move together.
Not all marriages can conform to this type of exchange. Often, the patrilateral cross-cousin is not
the same person; there may be two or more persons. Furthermore, in some situations, a man can
marry either a matrilateral or a patrilateral cross-cousin but not both. The example of the ideal type
of cross-cousin marriage is used to demonstrate the logical outcome of such unions.
Integration through a Segmentary Lineage
Another type of kin-based integrative mechanism is a segmentary lineage. As previously noted, a
lineage is a group of people who can trace or demonstrate their descent from a founding ancestor
through a line of males or a line of females. A segmentary lineage is a hierarchy of lineages that
contains both close and relatively distant family members. At the base are several minimal lineages
whose members trace their descent from their founder back two or three generations. At the top is
the founder of all of the lineages, and two or more maximal lineages can derive from the founder’s
lineage. Between the maximal and the minimal lineages are several intermediate lineages. For purposes of simplicity, we will discuss only the maximal and minimal lineages.
One characteristic of segmentary lineages is complementary opposition. To illustrate, consider the
chart in Figure 3, which presents two maximal lineages, A and B, each having two minimal lineages:
A1 and A2 for A and B1 and B2 for B.
Suppose A1 starts a feud with A2 over cattle theft. Since A1 and A2 are of the same maximal
lineage, their feud is likely to be contained within that lineage, and B1 and B2 are likely to ignore
the conflict since it is no concern of theirs. Now suppose A2 attacks B1 for cattle theft. In that case,
A1 might unite with A2 to feud with B1, who B2 join in to defend. Thus, the feud would involve
everyone in maximal lineage A against everyone in maximal lineage B. Finally, consider an attack by
an outside tribe against A1. In response, both maximal lineages might rise up and defend A1.
The classic examples of segmentary lineages were described by E. E. Evans-Pritchard (1940) in
his discussion of the Nuer, pastoralists who lived in southern Sudan.26 Paul Bohannan (1989) also
described this system among the Tiv, who were West African pastoralists, and Robert Murphy and
Leonard Kasdan (1959) analyzed the importance of these lineages among the Bedouin of the Middle
East.27 Segmentary lineages often develop in environments in which a tribal society is surrounded by
several other tribal societies. Hostility between the tribes induces their members to retain ties with
their kin and to mobilize them when external conflicts arise. An example of this is ties maintained
between the Nuer and the Dinka. Once a conflict is over, segmentary lineages typically dissolve into
their constituent units. Another attribute of segmentary lineages is local genealogical segmentation,
meaning close lineages dwell near each other, providing a physical reminder of their genealogy.28 A
Bedouin proverb summarizes the philosophy behind segmentary lineages:
I against my brother
I and my brother against my cousin
I, my brother, and my cousin against the world

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

11

Segmentary lineages regulate both warfare and inheritance and property rights. As noted by Sahlins (1961) in studies of the Nuer, tribes in which such lineages occur typically have relatively large
populations of close to 100,000 persons.29

Law in Tribal Societies
Tribal societies generally lack systems of codified law whereby damages, crimes, remedies, and
punishments are specified. Only state-level political systems can determine, usually by writing formal
laws, which behaviors are permissible and which are not (discussed later in this chapter). In tribes,
there are no systems of law enforcement whereby an agency such as the police, the sheriff, or an army
can enforce laws enacted by an appropriate authority. And, as already noted, headman and big men
cannot force their will on others.
In tribal societies, as in all societies, conflicts arise between individuals. Sometimes the issues
are equivalent to crimes—taking of property or commitment of violence—that are not considered
legitimate in a given society. Other issues are civil disagreements—questions of ownership, damage
to property, an accidental death. In tribal societies, the aim is not so much to determine guilt or

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

innocence or to assign criminal or civil responsibility as it is to resolve conflict, which can be accomplished in various ways. The parties might choose to avoid each other. Bands, tribes, and kin groups
often move away from each other geographically, which is much easier for them to do than for people
living in complex societies.
One issue in tribal societies, as in all societies, is guilt or innocence. When no one witnesses
an offense or an account is deemed unreliable, tribal societies sometimes rely on the supernatural.
Oaths, for example, involve calling on a deity to bear witness to the truth of what one says; the oath
given in court is a holdover from this practice. An ordeal is used to determine guilt or innocence by
submitting the accused to dangerous, painful, or risky tests believed to be controlled by supernatural
forces. The poison oracle used by the Azande of the Sudan and the Congo is an ordeal based on their
belief that most misfortunes are induced by witchcraft (in this case, witchcraft refers to ill feeling of
one person toward another). A chicken is force fed a strychnine concoction known as benge just as
the name of the suspect is called out. If the chicken dies, the suspect is deemed guilty and is punished
or goes through reconciliation.30
A more commonly exercised option is to find ways to resolve the dispute. In small groups, an
unresolved question can quickly escalate to violence and disrupt the group. The first step is often
negotiation; the parties attempt to resolve the conflict by direct discussion in hope of arriving at
an agreement. Offenders sometimes make a ritual apology, particularly if they are sensitive to community opinion. In Fiji, for example, offenders make ceremonial apologies called i soro, one of the
meanings of which is “I surrender.” An intermediary speaks, offers a token gift to the offended party,
and asks for forgiveness, and the request is rarely rejected.31
When negotiation or a ritual apology fails, often the next step is to recruit a third party to mediate
a settlement as there is no official who has the power to enforce a settlement. A classic example in the
anthropological literature is the Leopard Skin Chief among the Nuer, who is identified by a leopard
skin wrap around his shoulders. He is not a chief but is a mediator. The position is hereditary, has
religious overtones, and is responsible for the social well-being of the tribal segment. He typically is
called on for serious matters such as murder. The culprit immediately goes to the residence of the
Leopard Skin Chief, who cuts the culprit’s arm until blood flows. If the culprit fears vengeance by the
dead man’s family, he remains at the residence, which is considered a sanctuary, and the Leopard Skin
Chief then acts as a go-between for the families of the perpetrator and the dead man.
The Leopard Skin Chief cannot force the parties to settle and cannot enforce any settlement they
reach. The source of his influence is the desire for the parties to avoid a feud that could escalate into
an ever-widening conflict involving kin descended from different ancestors. He urges the aggrieved
family to accept compensation, usually in the form of cattle. When such an agreement is reached, the
chief collects the 40 to 50 head of cattle and takes them to the dead man’s home, where he performs
various sacrifices of cleansing and atonement.32
This discussion demonstrates the preference most tribal societies have for mediation given the potentially serious consequences of a long-term feud. Even in societies organized as states, mediation is
often preferred. In the agrarian town of Talea, Mexico, for example, even serious crimes are mediated
in the interest of preserving a degree of local harmony. The national authorities often tolerate local
settlements if they maintain the peace.33

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

13

Warfare in Tribal Societies
What happens if mediation fails and the Leopard Skin Chief cannot convince the aggrieved clan
to accept cattle in place of their loved one? War. In tribal societies, wars vary in cause, intensity, and
duration, but they tend to be less deadly than those run by states because of tribes’ relatively small
populations and limited technologies.
Tribes engage in warfare more often than bands, both internally and externally. Among pastoralists, both successful and attempted thefts of cattle frequently spark conflict. Among pre-state societies, pastoralists have a reputation for being the most prone to warfare. However, horticulturalists also
engage in warfare, as the film Dead Birds, which describes warfare among the highland Dani of west
New Guinea (Irian Jaya), attests. Among anthropologists, there is a “protein debate” regarding causes
of warfare. Marvin Harris in a 1974 study of the Yanomami claimed that warfare arose there because
of a protein deficiency associated with a scarcity of game, and Kenneth Good supported that thesis
in finding that the game a Yanomami villager brought in barely supported the village.34 He could
not link this variable to warfare, however. In rebuttal, Napoleon Chagnon linked warfare among the
Yanomami with abduction of women rather than disagreements over hunting territory, and findings
from other cultures have tended to agree with Chagnon’s theory.35
Tribal wars vary in duration. Raids are short-term uses of physical force that are organized and
planned to achieve a limited objective such as acquisition of cattle (pastoralists) or other forms of
wealth and, often, abduction of women, usually from neighboring communities.36 Feuds are longer in duration and represent a state of recurring hostilities between families, lineages, or other kin
groups. In a feud, the responsibility to avenge rests with the entire group, and the murder of any kin
member is considered appropriate because the kin group as a whole is considered responsible for the
transgression. Among the Dani, for example, vengeance is an obligation; spirits are said to dog the
victim’s clan until its members murder someone from the perpetrator’s clan.37

RANKED SOCIETIES AND CHIEFDOMS
Unlike egalitarian societies, ranked societies (sometimes called “rank societies”) involve greater
differentiation between individuals and the kin groups to which they belong. These differences can
be, and often are, inherited, but there are no significant restrictions in these societies on access to
basic resources. All individuals can meet their basic needs. The most important differences between
people of different ranks are based on sumptuary rules—norms that permit persons of higher rank
to enjoy greater social status by wearing distinctive clothing, jewelry, and/or decorations denied those
of lower rank. Every family group or lineage in the community is ranked in a hierarchy of prestige
and power. Furthermore, within families, siblings are ranked by birth order and villages can also be
ranked.
The concept of a ranked society leads us directly to the characteristics of chiefdoms. Unlike the
position of headman in a band, the position of chief is an office—a permanent political status that
demands a successor when the current chief dies. There are, therefore, two concepts of chief: the
man (women rarely, if ever, occupy these posts) and the office. Thus the expression “The king is dead,
long live the king.” With the New Guinean big man, there is no formal succession. Other big men
will be recognized and eventually take the place of one who dies, but there is no rule stipulating that
his eldest son or any son must succeed him. For chiefs, there must be a successor and there are rules
of succession.

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Political chiefdoms usually are accompanied by an economic exchange system known as redistribution in which goods and services flow from the population at large to the central authority
represented by the chief. It then becomes the task of the chief to return the flow of goods in another
form. The chapter on economics provides additional information about redistribution economies.
These political and economic principles are exemplified by the potlatch custom of the Kwakwaka’wakw and other indigenous groups who lived in chiefdom societies along the northwest coast of
North America from the extreme northwest tip of California through the coasts of Oregon, Washington, British Columbia, and southern Alaska. Potlatch ceremonies observed major events such as
births, deaths, marriages of important persons, and installment of a new chief. Families prepared for
the event by collecting food and other valuables such as fish, berries, blankets, animal skins, carved
boxes, and copper. At the potlatch, several ceremonies were held, dances were performed by their
“owners,” and speeches delivered. The new chief was watched very carefully. Members of the society
noted the eloquence of his speech, the grace of his presence, and any mistakes he made, however
egregious or trivial. Next came the distribution of gifts, and again the chief was observed. Was he
generous with his gifts? Was the value of his gifts appropriate to the rank of the recipient or did he
give valuable presents to individuals of relatively low rank? Did his wealth allow him to offer valuable
objects?
The next phase of the potlatch was critical to the chief ’s validation of his position. Visitor after
visitor would arise and give long speeches evaluating the worthiness of this successor to the chieftainship of his father. If his performance had so far met their expectations, if his gifts were appropriate,
the guests’ speeches praised him accordingly. They were less than adulatory if the chief had not performed to their expectations and they deemed the formal eligibility of the successor insufficient. He
had to perform. If he did, then the guests’ praise not only legitimized the new chief in his role, but
also it ensured some measure of peace between villages. Thus, in addition to being a festive event, the
potlatch determined the successor’s legitimacy and served as a form of diplomacy between groups.38
Much has been made among anthropologists of rivalry potlatches in which competitive gifts were
given by rival pretenders to the chieftainship. Philip Drucker argued that competitive potlatches
were a product of sudden demographic changes among the indigenous groups on the northwest
coast.39 When smallpox and other diseases decimated hundreds, many potential successors to the
chieftainship died, leading to situations in which several potential successors might be eligible for
the chieftainship. Thus, competition in potlatch ceremonies became extreme with blankets or copper
repaid with ever-larger piles and competitors who destroyed their own valuables to demonstrate their
wealth. The events became so raucous that the Canadian government outlawed the displays in the
early part of the twentieth century.40 Prior to that time, it had been sufficient for a successor who was
chosen beforehand to present appropriate gifts.41

Kin-Based Integrative Mechanisms: Conical Clans
With the centralization of society, kinship is most likely to continue playing a role, albeit a new
one. Among Northwest Coast Indians, for example, the ranking model has every lineage ranked, one
above the other, siblings ranked in order of birth, and even villages in a ranking scale. Drucker points
out that the further north one goes, the more rigid the ranking scheme is. The most northerly of
these coastal peoples trace their descent matrilineally; indeed, the Haida consist of four clans. Those
further south tend to be patrilineal, and some show characteristics of an ambilineal descent group. It

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

15

is still unclear, for example, whether the Kwakiutl numaym are patrilineal clans or ambilineal descent
groups.
In the accompanying diagram (Figure 4), assuming patrilineal descent, the eldest male within a
given lineage becomes the chief of his district , that is, Chief a in the area of Local Lineage A, which
is the older intermediate lineage (Intermediate Lineage I) relative to the founding clan ancestor.
Chief b is the oldest male in Local Lineage B, which, in turn, is the oldest intermediate lineage (again
Intermediate Lineage I) relative to the founding clan ancestor. Chief c is the oldest male of local
Lineage C descended from the second oldest intermediate lineage ( Intermediate Lineage II) relative
to the founding clan ancestor, and Chief d is the oldest male of Local Lineage D, descended from the
second oldest intermediate Lineage (Intermediate Lineage II) relative to the founding clan ancestor.

Nor does this end the process. Chief a, as head of Local Lineage A, also heads the district of Intermediate Lineage I while Chief c heads Local Lineage C in the district of Intermediate lineage II.
Finally, the entire chiefdom is headed by the eldest male (Chief a) of the entire district governed by
the descendants of the clan ancestor.

Integration through Marriage
Because chiefdoms cannot enforce their power by controlling resources or by having a monopoly
on the use of force, they rely on integrative mechanisms that cut across kinship groups. As with tribal
societies, marriage provides chiefdoms with a framework for encouraging social cohesion. However,
since chiefdoms have more-elaborate status hierarchies than tribes, marriages tend to reinforce ranks.

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

A particular kind of marriage known as matrilateral cross-cousin demonstrates this effect and is
illustrated by the diagram in Figure 4. The figure shows three patrilineages (family lineage groups
based on descent from a common male ancestor) that are labeled A, B, and C. Consider the marriage
between man B2 and woman a2. As you can see, they are linked by B1 (ego’s father) and his sister (a2),
who is married to A1 and bears daughter a2. If you look at other partners, you will notice that all of
the women move to the right: a2 and B2’s daughter, b3, will marry C3 and bear a daughter, c4.

Viewed from the top of a flow diagram, the three lineages marry in a circle and at least three
lineages are needed for this arrangement to work. The Purum of India, for example, practiced matrilateral cross-cousin marriage among seven lineages. Notice that lineage B cannot return the gift of
A’s daughter with one of its own. If A2 married b2, he would be marrying his patrilateral cross-cousin
who is linked to him through A1, his sister a1, and her daughter b2. Therefore, b2 must marry C2 and
lineage B can never repay lineage A for the loss of their daughters—trace their links to find out why.
Since lineage B cannot meet the third of Mauss’ obligations. B is a beggar relative to A. And lineage
C is a beggar relative to lineage B. Paradoxically, lineage A (which gives its daughters to B) owes
lineage C because it obtains its brides from lineage C. In this system, there appears to be an equality
of inequality.

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

17

The patrilineal cross-cousin marriage system also operates in a complex society in highland Burma
known as the Kachin. In that system, the wife-giving lineage is known as mayu and the wife-receiving lineage as dama to the lineage that gave it a wife. Thus, in addition to other mechanisms of
dominance, higher-ranked lineages maintain their superiority by giving daughters to lower-ranked
lineages and reinforce the relations between social classes through the mayu-dama relationship.42
The Kachin are not alone in using interclass marriage to reinforce dominance. The Natchez peoples, a matrilineal society of the Mississippi region of North America, were divided into four classes:
Great Sun chiefs, noble lineages, honored lineages, and inferior “stinkards.” Unlike the Kachin, however, their marriage system was a way to upward mobility. The child of a woman who married a man
of lower status assumed his/her mother’s status. Thus, if a Great Sun woman married a stinkard, the
child would become a Great Sun. If a stinkard man were to marry a Great Sun woman, the child
would become a stinkard. The same relationship obtained between women of noble lineage and
honored lineage and men of lower status. Only two stinkard partners would maintain that stratum,
which was continuously replenished with people in warfare.43
Other societies maintained status in different ways. Brother-sister marriages, for example, were
common in the royal lineages of the Inca, the Ancient Egyptians, and the Hawaiians, which sought
to keep their lineages “pure.” Another, more-common type was patrilateral parallel-cousin marriage in which men married their fathers’ brothers’ daughters. This marriage system, which operated
among many Middle Eastern nomadic societies, including the Rwala Bedouin chiefdoms, consolidated their herds, an important consideration for lineages wishing to maintain their wealth.44

Integration through Secret Societies
Poro and sande secret societies for men and women, respectively, are found in the Mande-speaking peoples of West Africa, particularly in Liberia, Sierra Leone, the Ivory Coast, and Guinea. The
societies are illegal under Guinea’s national laws. Elsewhere, they are legal and membership is universally mandatory under local laws. They function in both political and religious sectors of society. So
how can such societies be secret if all men and women must join? According to Beryl Bellman, who is
a member of a poro association, the standard among the Kpelle of Liberia is an ability to keep secrets.
Members of the community are entrusted with the political and religious responsibilities associated
with the society only after they learn to keep secrets.45 There are two political structures in poros and
sandes: the “secular” and the “sacred.” The secular structure consists of the town chief, neighborhood
and kin group headmen, and elders. The sacred structure (the zo) is composed of a hierarchy of
“priests” of the poro and the sande in the neighborhood, and among the Kpelle the poro and sande
zo take turns dealing with in-town fighting, rapes, homicides, incest, and land disputes. They, like
leopard skin chiefs, play an important role in mediation. The zo of both the poro and sande are held
in great respect and even feared. Some authors have suggested that sacred structure strengthens the
secular political authority because chiefs and landowners occupy the most powerful positions in the
zo.46 Consequently, these chiefdoms seem to have developed formative elements of a stratified society
and a state, as we see in the next section.

STRATIFIED SOCIETIES
Opposite from egalitarian societies in the spectrum of social classes is the stratified society, which
is defined as one in which elites who are a numerical minority control the strategic resources that

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

sustain life. Strategic resources include water for states that depend on irrigation agriculture, land
in agricultural societies, and oil in industrial societies. Capital and products and resources used for
further production are modes of production that rely on oil and other fossil fuels such as natural gas
in industrial societies. (Current political movements call for the substitution of solar and wind power
for fossil fuels.)
Operationally, stratification is, as the term implies, a social structure that involves two or more
largely mutually exclusive populations. An extreme example is the caste system of traditional Indian
society, which draws its legitimacy from Hinduism. In caste systems, membership is determined by
birth and remains fixed for life, and social mobility—moving from one social class to another—is not
an option. Nor can persons of different castes marry; that is, they are endogamous. Although efforts
have been made to abolish castes since India achieved independence in 1947, they still predominate
in rural areas.
India’s caste system consists of four varna, pure castes, and one collectively known as Dalit and
sometimes as Harijan—in English, “untouchables,” reflecting the notion that for any varna caste
member to touch or even see a Dalit pollutes them. The topmost varna caste is the Brahmin or
priestly caste. It is composed of priests, governmental officials and bureaucrats at all levels, and other
professionals. The next highest is the Kshatriya, the warrior caste, which includes soldiers and other
military personnel and the police and their equivalents. Next are the Vaishyas, who are craftsmen and
merchants, followed by the Sudras (pronounced “shudra”), who are peasants and menial workers.
Metaphorically, they represent the parts of Manu, who is said to have given rise to the human race
through dismemberment. The head corresponds to Brahmin, the arms to Kshatriya, the thighs to
Vaishya, and the feet to the Sudra.
There are also a variety of subcastes in India. The most important are the hundreds, if not thousands, of occupational subcastes known as jatis. Wheelwrights, ironworkers, landed peasants, landless
farmworkers, tailors of various types, and barbers all belong to different jatis. Like the broader castes,
jatis are endogamous and one is born into them. They form the basis of the jajmani relationship,
which involves the provider of a particular service, the jajman, and the recipient of the service, the
kamin. Training is involved in these occupations but one cannot change vocations. Furthermore, the
relationship between the jajman and the kamin is determined by previous generations. If I were to
provide you, my kamin, with haircutting services, it would be because my father cut your father’s
hair. In other words, you would be stuck with me regardless of how poor a barber I might be. This
system represents another example of an economy as an instituted process, an economy embedded
in society.47
Similar restrictions apply to those excluded from the varna castes, the “untouchables” or Dalit.
Under the worst restrictions, Dalits were thought to pollute other castes. If the shadow of a Dalit fell
on a Brahmin, the Brahmin immediately went home to bathe. Thus, at various times and locations,
the untouchables were also unseeable, able to come out only at night.48 Dalits were born into jobs
considered polluting to other castes, particularly work involving dead animals, such as butchering
(Hinduism discourages consumption of meat so the clients were Muslims, Christians, and believers
of other religions), skinning, tanning, and shoemaking with leather. Contact between an upper caste
person and a person of any lower caste, even if “pure,” was also considered polluting and was strictly
forbidden.
The theological basis of caste relations is karma—the belief that one’s caste in this life is the cumulative product of one’s acts in past lives, which extends to all beings, from minerals to animals to
gods. Therefore, though soul class mobility is nonexistent during a lifetime, it is possible between

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

19

lifetimes. Brahmins justified their station by claiming that they must have done good in their past
lives. However, there are indications that the untouchable Dalits and other lower castes are not convinced of their legitimation.49
Although India’s system is the most extreme, it not the only caste system. In Japan, a caste known
as Burakumin is similar in status to Dalits. Though they are no different in physical appearance from
other Japanese people, the Burakumin people have been forced to live in ghettos for centuries. They
descend from people who worked in the leather tanning industry, a low-status occupation, and still
work in leather industries such as shoemaking. Marriage between Burakumin and other Japanese
people is restricted, and their children are excluded from public schools.50
Some degree of social mobility characterizes all societies, but even so-called open-class societies
are not as mobile as one might think. In the United States, for example, actual movement up the
social latter is rare despite Horatio Alger and rags-to-riches myths. Stories of individuals “making
it” through hard work ignore the majority of individuals whose hard work does not pay off or who
actually experience downward mobility. Indeed, the Occupy Movement, which began in 2011, recognizes a dichotomy in American society of the 1 percent (millionaires and billionaires) versus the
99 percent (everyone else), and self-styled socialist Bernie Sanders made this the catch phrase of his
campaign for the Democratic Party’s presidential nomination. In India (a closed-class society), on
the other hand, there are exceptions to the caste system. In Rajasthan, for example, those who own or
control most of the land are not of the warrior caste as one might expect; they are of the lowest caste
and their tenants and laborers are Brahmins.51

STATE LEVEL OF POLITICAL ORGANIZATION
The state is the most formal of the four levels of political organization under study here. In states,
political power is centralized in a government that exercises a monopoly over the legitimate use of
force.52 It is important to understand that the exercise of force constitutes a last resort; one hallmark
of a weak state is frequent use of physical force to maintain order. States develop in societies with
large, often ethnically diverse populations—hundreds of thousands or more—and are characterized
by complex economies that can be driven by command or by the market, social stratification, and an
intensive agricultural or industrial base.
Several characteristics accompany a monopoly over use of legitimate force in a state. First, like
tribes and chiefdoms, states occupy a more or less clearly defined territory or land defined by boundaries that separate it from other political entities that may or not be states (exceptions are associated
with the Islamic State and are addressed later). Ancient Egypt was a state bounded on the west by
desert and possibly forager or tribal nomadic peoples. Mesopotamia was a series of city-states competing for territory with other city-states.
Heads of state can be individuals designated as kings, emperors, or monarchs under other names
or can be democratically elected, in fact or in name—military dictators, for example, are often called
presidents. Usually, states establish some board or group of councilors (e.g., the cabinet in the United
States and the politburo in the former Soviet Union.) Often, such councils are supplemented with
one or two legislative assemblies. The Roman Empire had a senate (which originated as a body of
councilors) and as many as four assemblies that combined patrician (elite) and plebian (general
population) influences. Today, nearly all of the world’s countries have some sort of an assembly, but
many rubber-stamp the executive’s decisions (or play an obstructionist role, as in the U.S. Congress
during the Obama administration).

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

States also have an administrative bureaucracy that handles public functions provided for by executive orders and/or legislation. Formally, the administrative offices are typically arranged in a hierarchy and the top offices delegate specific functions to lower ones. Similar hierarchies are established for
the personnel in a branch. In general, agricultural societies tend to rely on inter-personal relations in
the administrative structure while industrial states rely on rational hierarchical structures.53
An additional state power is taxation—a system of redistribution in which all citizens are required
to participate. This power is exercised in various ways. Examples include the mitá or labor tax of
the Inca, the tributary systems of Mesopotamia, and monetary taxes familiar to us today and to numerous subjects throughout the history of the state. Control over others’ resources is an influential
mechanism undergirding the power of the state.
A less tangible but no less powerful characteristic of states is their ideologies, which are designed
to reinforce the right of powerholders to rule. Ideologies can manifest in philosophical forms, such
as the divine right of kings in pre-industrial Europe, karma and the caste system in India, consent
of the governed in the United States, and the metaphorical family in Imperial China. More often,
ideologies are less indirect and less perceptible as propaganda. We might watch the Super Bowl or
follow the latest antics of the Kardashians, oblivious to the notion that both are diversions from the
reality of power in this society. Young Americans, for example, may be drawn to military service to
fight in Iraq by patriotic ideologies just as their parents or grandparents were drawn to service during
the Vietnam War. In a multitude of ways across many cultures, Plato’s parable of the shadows in the
cave—that watchers misperceive shadows as reality—has served to reinforce political ideologies.
Finally, there is delegation of the state’s coercive power. The state’s need to use coercive power betrays an important weakness—subjects and citizens often refuse to recognize the powerholders’ right
to rule. Even when the legitimacy of power is not questioned, the use and/or threat of force serves to
maintain the state, and that function is delegated to agencies such as the police to maintain internal
order and to the military to defend the state against real and perceived enemies and, in many cases, to
expand the state’s territory. Current examples include a lack of accountability for the killing of black
men and women by police officers; the killing of Michael Brown by Darren Wilson in Ferguson,
Missouri, is a defining example.

State and Nation
Though state and nation are often used interchangeably, they are not the same thing. A state is a
coercive political institution; a nation is an ethnic population. There currently are about 200 states in
the world, and many of them did not exist before World War II. Meanwhile, there are around 5,000
nations identified by their language, territorial base, history, and political organization.54 Few states
are conterminous with a nation (a nation that wholly comprises the state). Even in Japan, where
millions of the country’s people are of a single ethnicity, there is a significant indigenous minority
known as the Ainu who at one time were a distinct biological population as well as an ethnic group.
Only recently has Japanese society opened its doors to immigrants, mostly from Korea and Taiwan.
The vast majority of states in the world, including the United States, are multi-national.
Some ethnicities/nations have no state of their own. The Kurds, who reside in adjacent areas of
Turkey, Syria, Iraq, and Iran, are one such nation. In the colonial era, the Mande-speaking peoples
ranged across at least four West African countries, and borders between the countries were drawn
without respect to the tribal identities of the people living there. Diasporas, the scattering of a people
of one ethnicity across the globe, are another classic example. The diaspora of Ashkenazi and Sep-

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

21

hardic Jews is well-known. Many others, such as the Chinese, have more recently been forced to flee
their homelands. The current ongoing mass migration of Syrians induced by formation of the Islamic
State and the war in Syria is but the most recent example.

Formation of States
How do states form? One precondition is the presence of a stratified society in which an elite
minority controls life-sustaining strategic resources. Another is increased agricultural productivity
that provides support for a larger population. Neither, however, is a sufficient cause for development
of a state. A group of people who are dissatisfied with conditions in their home region has a motive
to move elsewhere—unless there is nowhere else to go and they are circumscribed. Circumscription
can arise when a region is hemmed in by a geographic feature such as mountain ranges or desert and
when migrants would have to change their subsistence strategies, perhaps having to move from agriculture back to foraging, herding, or horticulture or to adapt to an urban industrialized environment.
The Inca Empire did not colonize on a massive scale beyond northern Chile to the south or into the
Amazon because indigenous people there could simply pick up and move elsewhere. Still, the majority of the Inca population did not have that option. Circumscription also results when a desirable
adjacent region is taken by other states or chiefdoms.55
Who, then, were the original subjects of these states? One short answer is peasants, a term derived
from the French paysan, which means “countryman.” Peasantry entered the anthropological literature
relatively late. In his 800-page tome Anthropology published in 1948, Alfred L. Kroeber defined peasantry in less than a sentence: “part societies with part cultures.”56 Robert Redfield defined peasantry
as a “little tradition” set against a “great tradition” of national state society.57 Louis Fallers argued in
1961 against calling African cultivators “peasants” because they had not lived in the context of a statebased civilization long enough.58
Thus, peasants had been defined in reference to some larger society, usually an empire, a state, or
a civilization. In light of this, Wolf sought to place the definition of peasant on a structural footing.59
Using a funding metaphor, he compared peasants with what he called “primitive cultivators.” Both
primitive cultivators and peasants have to provide for a “caloric fund” by growing food and, by extension, provide for clothing, shelter, and all other necessities of life. Second, both must provide for
a “replacement fund”—not only reserving seeds for next year’s crop but also repairing their houses,
replacing broken pots, and rebuilding fences. And both primitive cultivators and peasants must provide a “ceremonial fund” for rites of passage and fiestas. They differ in that peasants live in states and
primitive cultivators do not. The state exercises domain over peasants’ resources, requiring peasants
to provide a “fund of rent.” That fund appears in many guises, including tribute in kind, monetary
taxes, and forced labor to an empire or lord. In Wolf ’s conception, primitive cultivators are free of
these obligations to the state.60
Subjects of states are not necessarily landed; there is a long history of landless populations. Slavery
has long coexisted with the state, and forced labor without compensation goes back to chiefdoms
such as Kwakwaka’wakw. Long before Portuguese, Spanish, and English seafarers began trading slaves
from the west coast of Africa, Arab groups enslaved people from Africa and Europe.61
For peasants, proletarianization— loss of land—has been a continuous process. One example is
landed gentry in eighteenth century England who found that sheepherding was more profitable than
tribute from peasants and removed the peasants from the land.62 A similar process occurred when
Guatemala’s liberal president privatized the land of Mayan peasants that, until 1877, had been held
communally.63

22

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Law and Order in States
At the level of the state, the law becomes an increasingly formal process. Procedures are more and
more regularly defined, and categories of breaches in civil and criminal law emerge, together with
remedies for those breaches. Early agricultural states formalized legal rules and punishments through
codes, formal courts, police forces, and legal specialists such as lawyers and judges. Mediation could
still be practiced, but it often was supplanted by adjudication in which a judge’s decision was binding on all parties. Decisions could be appealed to a higher authority, but any final decision must be
accepted by all concerned.
The first known system of codified law was enacted under the warrior king Hammurabi in Babylon (present day Iraq). This law was based on standardized procedures for dealing with civil and
criminal offenses, and subsequent decisions were based on precedents (previous decisions). Crimes
became offenses not only against other parties but also against the state. Other states developed
similar codes of law, including China, Southeast Asia, and state-level Aztec and Inca societies. Two
interpretations, which are not necessarily mutually exclusive, have arisen about the political function
of codified systems of law. Fried (1978) argued, based on his analysis of the Hammurabi codes, that
such laws reinforced a system of inequality by protecting the rights of an elite class and keeping
peasants subordinates.64 This is consistent with the theory of a stratified society as already defined.
Another interpretation is that maintenance of social and political order is crucial for agricultural
states since any disruption in the state would lead to neglect of agricultural production that would
be deleterious to all members of the state regardless of their social status. Civil laws ensure, at least in
theory, that all disputing parties receive a hearing—so long as high legal expenses and bureaucratic
logjams do not cancel out the process. Criminal laws, again in theory, ensure the protection of all
citizens from offenses ranging from theft to homicide.
Inevitably, laws fail to achieve their aims. The United States, for example, has one of the highest
crime rates in the industrial world despite having an extensive criminal legal system. The number of
homicides in New York City in 1990 exceeded the number of deaths from colon and breast cancer
and all accidents combined.65 Although the rate of violent crime in the United States declined during
the mid-1990s, it occurred thanks more to the construction of more prisons per capita (in California)
than of schools. Nationwide, there currently are more than one million prisoners in state and federal
correctional institutions, one of the highest national rates in the industrial world.66 Since the 1990s,
little has changed in terms of imprisonment in the United States. Funds continue to go to prisons
rather than schools, affecting the education of minority communities and expanding “slave labor”
in prisons, according to Michelle Alexander who, in 2012, called the current system the school-toprison pipeline.67

Warfare in States
Warfare occurs in all human societies but at no other level of political organization is it as widespread as in states. Indeed, warfare was integral to the formation of the agricultural state. As governing elites accumulated more resources, warfare became a major means of increasing their surpluses.68
And as the wealth of states became a target of nomadic pastoralists, the primary motivation for
warfare shifted from control of resources to control of neighboring populations.69
A further shift came with the advent of industrial society when industrial technologies driven by
fossil fuels allowed states to invade distant countries. A primary motivation for these wars was to

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

23

establish economic and political hegemony over foreign populations. World War I, World War II,
and lesser wars of the past century have driven various countries to develop ever more sophisticated
and deadly technologies, including wireless communication devices for remote warfare, tanks, stealth
aircraft, nuclear weapons, and unmanned aircraft called drones, which have been used in conflicts
in the Middle East and Afghanistan. Competition among nations has led to the emergence of the
United States as the most militarily powerful nation in the world.
The expansion of warfare by societies organized as states has not come without cost. Every nation-state has involved civilians in its military adventures, and almost everyone has been involved in
those wars in some way—if not as militarily, then as member of the civilian workforce in military
industries. World War II created an unprecedented armament industry in the United States, Britain,
Germany, and Japan, among others, and the aerospace industry underwent expansion in the so-called
Cold War that followed. Today, one can scarcely overlook the role of the process of globalization to
explain how the United States, for now an empire, has influenced the peoples of other countries in
the world.

Stability and Duration of States
It should be noted that states have a clear tendency toward instability despite trappings designed
to induce awe in the wider population. Few states have lasted a thousand years. The American state
is more than 240 years old but increases in extreme wealth and poverty, escalating budget and trade
deficits, a war initiated under false pretenses, escalating social problems, and a highly controversial
presidential election suggest growing instability. Jared Diamond’s book Collapse (2004) compared the
decline and fall of Easter Island, Chaco Canyon, and the Maya with contemporary societies such as
the United States, and he found that overtaxing the environment caused the collapse of those three
societies.70 Chalmers Johnson (2004) similarly argued that a state of perpetual war, loss of democratic
institutions, systematic deception by the state, and financial overextension contributed to the decline
of the Roman Empire and will likely contribute to the demise of the United States “with the speed
of FedEx.”71
Why states decline is not difficult to fathom. Extreme disparities in wealth, use of force to keep
populations in line, the stripping of people’s resources (such as the enclosures in England that removed peasants from their land), and the harshness of many laws all should create a general animosity toward the elite in a state.
Yet, until recently (following the election of Donald Trump), no one in the United States was
taking to the streets calling for the president to resign or decrying the government as illegitimate.
In something of a paradox, widespread animosity does not necessarily lead to dissolution of a state
or to an overthrow of the elite. Thomas Frank addressed this issue in What’s the Matter with Kansas?
(2004). Despite the fact that jobs have been shipped abroad, that once-vibrant cities like Wichita
are virtual ghost towns, and that both congress and the state legislature have voted against social
programs time and again, Kansans continue to vote the Republicans whose policies are responsible
for these conditions into office.
Nor is this confined to Kansas or the United States. That slaves tolerated slavery for hundreds of
years (despite periodic revolts such as the one under Nat Turner in 1831), that workers tolerated
extreme conditions in factories and mines long before unionization, that there was no peasant revolt
strong enough to reverse the enclosures in England—all demand an explanation. Frank discusses
reinforcing variables, such as propaganda by televangelists and Rush Limbaugh but offers little expla-

24

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

nation beside them.72 However, recent works have provided new explanations. Days before Donald
Trump won the presidential election on November 8, 2016, sociologist Arlie Russell Hochschild
released a book that partially explains how Trump appealed to the most marginalized populations of
the United States, residents around Lake Charles in southwestern Louisiana. In the book, Strangers
in Their Own Land (2016), Hochschild contends that the predominantly white residents there saw
the federal government providing preferential treatment for blacks, women, and other marginalized
populations under affirmative action programs while putting white working-class individuals further
back in line for governmental assistance. The people Hochschild interviewed were fully aware that a
corporate petroleum company had polluted Lake Charles and hired nonlocal technicians and Filipino
workers to staff local positions, but they nonetheless expressed their intent to vote for a billionaire for
president based on his promise to bring outsourced jobs back to “America” and to make the country
“great again.” Other books, including Thomas Frank’s Listen Liberal (2016), Nancy Isenberg’s White
Trash (2016), and Matt Wray’s Not Quite White: White Trash and the Boundaries of Whiteness (2006),
address the decline of the United States’ political power domestically and worldwide. These books
all link Trump’s successful election to marginalization of lower-class whites and raise questions about
how dissatisfaction with the state finds expression in political processes.

Stratification and the State: Recent Developments
States elsewhere and the stratified societies that sustain them have undergone significant changes
and, in some instances, dramatic transformations in recent years. Consider ISIS, formed in reaction
to the ill-advised U.S. intervention in Iraq in 2003, which will be discussed in greater detail below.
Other states have failed; Somalia has all but dissolved and is beset by piracy, Yemen is highly unstable
due in part to the Saudi invasion, and Syria is being decimated by conflict between the Bashar Assad government and a variety of rebel groups from moderate reform movements to extremist jihadi
groups, al-Nusra and ISIS. Despite Myanmar’s (formerly Burma) partial transition from a militarized
government to an elective one, the Muslim minority there, known as Rohingya, has been subjected
to discrimination and many have been forced to flee to neighboring Bangladesh. Meanwhile, Bangladesh has been unable to enforce safety regulations to foreign investors as witnessed by the collapse
of a clothing factory in 2013 that took the lives of more than 1,100 workers.

ISIS OR THE ISLAMIC STATE: A STATE IN FORMATION?
Around the beginning of 2014, a new state arguably began to form as the Islamic State of Iraq (ISI)
metamorphosed into the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS) and then to simply the Islamic State
(IS) (In the following discussion, I use the terms ISIS and Islamic State interchangeably.). Though
it may be controversial to claim that ISIS has achieved formal political organization as a state, many
of the elements that characterize a state-level organization apply. ISIS has an armed force that has
initially proven successful in one battle after another, resources and revenue (however ill-gotten its
money and assets such as oil may be), an administrative structure, a body of law, and its own banking
system and currency. Despite recent losses of territory, its operations have been extended well beyond
the boundaries of Iraq and Syria, and territorial control is not the only measure of its influence. From
this perspective, the Islamic State is of value for testing our definitions of a state and assessing the
extent to which the characteristics of a state described here apply to this new political formation.

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

25

Though few people worldwide approve ISIS’s activities or ideology, the damage the group has
unleashed is not necessarily inconsistent with a new state in formation. Few, if any, states were conceived without violence in one form or another. The United States was formed by theft of land from
indigenous people, a revolutionary war, and the kidnapping and sale of entire populations from the
region we now know as West Africa into slavery. Most of the founders were slave owners and many,
such as George Washington, obtained their wealth from speculating on stolen land. This history was
replicated in Canada and Australia and, earlier, in the Near East and China. All states, at some point,
have perpetrated what today are defined as crimes. We should think carefully when considering the
Islamic State as an exception to the historical pattern.
The Islamic State, if it is indeed a state, came into being following the American invasion of Iraq.
The process began with the Gulf War in 1991 in which Iraq invaded Kuwait and was expelled by an
alliance led by the United States. Then, in March 2003, the George W. Bush administration chose
to invade Iraq, deposing the regime of Saddam Hussein the following month and occupying the
country; U.S. troops finally withdrew in 2011. Some consider the outcome of the decision to invade
and occupy Iraq a worst-case blowback to a military action—the unintended negative consequence
of waging war against a Third World country creating a Frankenstein’s monster known as ISIS, the
Islamic State, the Islamic Caliphate, and a host of other names.
ISIS is a theocracy organized as a self-styled caliphate that formally came into being on June 29,
2014, the first day of the holy month of Ramadan. Kidnapped journalists were beheaded, the socalled apostates were crucified, and the second city of Iraq, Mosul, fell to a rag-tag group of fighters
numbering fewer than 1,500. The Caliphate of Ibrahim in the person of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi came
to be known around the world.73
What is the Islamic State? Loretta Napoleoni (2014) offers a concise definition differentiating it
from other terrorist and Al Qaeda inspired movements:
Where IS [the Islamic State] does outmatch past armed organizations is in military prowess,
media manipulation, social programs, and, above all, nation building . . . These enhancements
spring from the ability of the Islamic State to adapt to a fast-changing, post-Cold-War
environment.74
In short, the Islamic State began not with advanced weaponry—it has no navy, no air force, no
nuclear missiles—but with the latest communication technology along with the techniques of persuasion via the internet it attempts to create a nation-state based on the Salafist model of the four
caliphs who succeeded the prophet Muhammad in the late seventh century, which is based on strict
interpretation of the Qu’ran.75
So, is ISIS a state in formation?76 First of all, as Abdel Bari Atwan and Malcolm Nance both point
out, ISIS is well organized and staffed by numerous experienced military officials. Many, if not most,
are former Iraqi Ba’athist administrators who were fired after Saddam Hussein was toppled in late
April 2003.77 Second, ISIS has established a banking system based in Mosul with its own currency
of gold, silver, and copper coins. Third, it is well-financed; its assets range from oil to purloined
currency, though it has been strapped for cash recently. Fourth, it has a long-term strategy of ethnic
cleansing in the hope of creating a unitary population of Sunni believers steeped in the Salafist ideological tradition akin to the Saudis’ Wahabi tradition. Fifth, it has a solid strategy for expanding its
forces by recruiting foreign fighters from around the world and educating its young people in the
ways of Salafist Islam. Based on those facts, I argue that the Islamic State is a state in formation.78

26

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Citing the Montevideo Convention of Rights and Duties of States held in 1933, Atwan contends
that there are two types of states: declaratory and constitutive. A declaratory entity has a clearly defined territory, a permanent population, and a government capable of controlling the population,
its territory, and its resources, and it is recognized by other states. A constitutive state has the same
attributes but is not necessarily recognized by other states. ISIS is more like a constitutive state since
it is not recognized by any other states.79 Napoleoni added the concept of a shell state, which she
defined as an “armed organization [that] assembles the socio-economic infrastructure” such as taxation and employment services among others of a state “without the political one. i.e., no territory,
no self-determination.”80

Administrative Apparatus and Functions
The best way to understand ISIS as a formative state is to analyze its administrative apparatus and
the functions of its subdivisions. As Atwan and Nance point out, ISIS is highly centralized with the
caliph—Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, also known as Ibrahim—as representative and, arguably, a descendant of the prophet Muhammad and so constitutes the ultimate authority of the state.81 However,
ISIS’s organization is such that if he or any other authority is killed in war, other trained individuals
can readily take his place. There are two deputies in each of two senior positions, and they make
the final decisions concerning the affairs of ISIS. Reports of the killing of ISIS senior staff members
have tended to overlook this arrangement.82 Decisions are carried out by lower-level deputies in the
administration who are allowed discretion in how those orders are implemented, allowing officials to
use local knowledge to best execute the directives. These attributes—ready replacement of staff and
local decision-making power—provide flexibility to the centralized administrative structure associated with ISIS.83
Baghdadi and his deputies rely on various councils and department committees that form their
“cabinet.” The top level of administration also has a powerful Shura (consultative) council that endorses the Sharia (religious legal) council’s choice of caliph and then provides advice to him. The
Shura council oversees the affairs of state, manages communication, and issues orders to the chain
of command and ensures that they are implemented. The twelve-member Shura council is made up
members selected by Baghdadi and is headed by one of the senior deputies.84
The Sharia council is charged with formulating regulations and administrative routines consistent
with law as spelled out in the Qu’ran and with selecting the caliphs, who are endorsed by the Shura
council. It also oversees all matters related to the administration as a whole and manages the judicial
affairs of the body politic. Although the Western press has emphasized the more draconian penalties categorized as hudd such as amputations for theft and capital punishment by beheadings and
crucifixion, ISIS’s legal system also allows judges to impose less-severe tazeer punishments designed
to publicly shame a miscreant with the aim of reform and rehabilitation. How frequently these two
types of enforcement are used is a statistical question that would require a survey that simply cannot
be conducted at this time.85
What is the relationship of the top administrators and their councils to the regional and local administrative bodies? The story begins with incorporation of those bodies into the state. When a city,
town, or administrative unit is first occupied by ISIS forces, the first order of business in addition
to maintaining the existing police force is to establish a Sharia police force that aims to work toward
the “purity” of the Islamic State. Thus, women are enjoined to wear black robes and to veil and men
are likewise ordered to wear modest clothing. The “moral police” are dispatched to ensure acceptable

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

27

behavior and dress, and both the regular and the moral police (the hisbah) are outfitted with black
uniforms bearing a white Islamic State insignia.86
Several councils handle the main issues of Islamic State polity and society. The innumerable challenges to the Islamic State’s authority are dealt with by the security and intelligence council. Its
functions include growing networks throughout the Islamic State and beyond, maintaining border
controls, imposing punishments on dissidents, and eliminating borders set by treaties such as the
Sykes-Picot agreement of 1916. The military council is charged with defending ISIS’s existing borders, expanding into new areas, and incorporating foreign fighters into the ranks.87 It is also charged
with ethnic cleansing of non-Sunni Muslims, Yazidis, Jews, and Christians to ensure a single ethnic
group to facilitate effective control even though the Qu’ran explicitly accommodates all “people of
the book,” which includes all Christians, Jews, and Muslims.88 Writes Napoleoni:
In particular, cleansing its territory of Shia from its territory offers many advantages for
nation-building, gaining support of local Sunni populations, producing a more homogeneous
population with fewer opportunities for sectarianism, and freeing up resources to offer
fighters the spoils of war.89
Coordinating with the military council is the Islamic State Institution for Public Information,
which is the main source of ISIS information, covering everything from current events to announcements of ISIS polities. Detractors have dubbed it the ministry of propaganda. The public information institute conducts outreach via the media and internet to contact potential recruits from abroad
as foreign fighters and women as wives of fighters.
ISIS also has an economic council that oversees the wealth it has obtained by taking over oil fields
in the region, assimilating local governments and nongovernment banks in regions it has overrun, demanding ransom for captured foreign supporters from allies such as Saudi Arabia (its formal connection has been questioned), and collecting Islamic taxes: jieya from non-Muslim residents and zakat,
taxes that are part of obligatory alms provided for in the Qu’ran, from Muslims who can afford it. The
economic council’s accounting system consists of an annual budget and monthly reports. Analysts
concur that, in Atwan’s words, “this level of bureaucratic process and accountability is indicative of a
large, well-organized, state-like entity.”90
Finally, to sustain ISIS, the Education Council oversees the provision of education and the curriculum, which promote strict Salafist interpretation of the Qu’ran. Several topics are banned from the
curriculum, including the evolutionary model of biology and philosophy. The curriculum includes
training in warfare for boys at sixteen years of age and training in domestic skills for girls.91
The final significant institution under ISIS, the Islamic Service Council, oversees public services
such as maintenance of infrastructures—roads, bridges, electricity lines. In towns and cities under
its control, the council operates a rationing system for consumer goods and discourages traders from
selling to people who do not carry the card with the group’s logo on it. Napoleoni argues that filling
potholes, restoring electricity and phone lines, and providing other public services are important
components in securing the loyalty of residents of territories overrun by ISIS.

Decline or a Change in Strategy?
Over the past two years, there has been a massive emigration of Syrians and Iraqis out of the
region. Why is this occurring? Is the Islamic State in a period of decline or is it adapting its guerilla

28

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

strategy and tactics. During this period, ISIS lost territory in Iraq and Syria. The city of Sinjar, Syria,
fell to the Kurdish Peshmerga army in late 2015, followed by the fall of Tikrit, Anbar, and Fallujah
to the Iraqi army early in 2016. The battle for Mosul in Iraq started October 17, 2016, and ISIS has
been pursuing a scorched-earth defense, including using residents as human shields. As this chapter
was being written, ISIS had been ejected from East Mosul but only after massive property destruction and massacres of its residents by ISIS. Reports from Syria noted that the de facto capital of ISIS,
Raqqa in Syria has been subjected to attacks; one of ISIS’s supply routes passed through Sinjar. In
addition, Aleppo in Syria was destroyed as ISIS competed with other rebel groups and with the Syrian army under Bashar Assad. Aleppo was eventually reclaimed by the Syrian government, but tens
of thousands of the city’s residents were killed or displaced.
Despite recent setbacks, ISIS has so far retained significant territories in Syria and Iraq and gained
control of areas in northern Libya (which it later lost), the Sinai region in Egypt, Afghanistan,
Chechnya, Indonesia, and the Philippines. It has established alliances with Boko Haram in West
Africa and with other groups in Gaza, Lebanon, and Algeria, and ISIS units have been identified in
places as far away as Brazil and Norway. ISIS attacks have occurred in France—twice in Paris and
once in Nice—and in Brussels, Belgium, and future attacks against the United Kingdom, Germany,
and Italy have been threatened. ISIS also claimed responsibility for attacks in the United States
on a nightclub in Orlando, Florida, a staff party in San Bernardino, California, on students and
staff at Ohio State University, and threatened to attack the Macy’s Thanksgiving parade, leading to
exceptionally tight security there. What ISIS lacks in territory, it makes up for with alliances and
operations abroad.
Atwan has noted that ISIS strategists took these potential defeats into account long before they
occurred. The military council has generally avoided defending sites ISIS could not hold and concentrated on theatres they could win or defend. These incidents and countless others appear to be part
of the so-called Snake in the Rocks strategy cited by Napoleoni, which is similar to the strategy used
by China’s Mao Zedong, who concentrated his Communist forces in the countryside rather than in
cities. Ho Chi Minh used a similar strategy in the Vietnam War against France and the United States.
A cardinal rule of the guerrilla strategy, painfully established by drawn-out conflicts in China,
Vietnam, and Cuba, is that one must elicit the support of the people. In this regard, ISIS’s imposition of the Salafist/Wahabi model of Islam is proving problematic. Cockburn provides a laundry list
of constraints associated with strict Salafist Islam, including prohibitions against wearing jeans and
makeup, smoking cigarettes or hubble-bubbles (hookahs), and keeping stores open during times of
prayer. Women are required to wear the abaya (black robe) and veil and are not permitted to gather
in public places, including stores. Men must wear beards, and barbers who agree to shave their beards
off are punished. The punishments for violating these rules are whipping, amputation of limbs, and
beheading.92

Life under ISIS
A cardinal rule of the guerrilla strategy, painfully established by drawn-out conflicts in China,
Vietnam, and Cuba, is that one must elicit the support of the people. In this regard, ISIS’s imposition of the Salafist/Wahabi model of Islam is proving problematic. Cockburn provides a laundry list
of constraints associated with strict Salafist Islam, including prohibitions against wearing jeans and
makeup, smoking cigarettes or hubble-bubbles (hookahs), and keeping stores open during times of
prayer. Women are required to wear the abaya (black robe) and veil and are not permitted, unless

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

29

accompanied by a man, to gather in public places, including stores. Men must wear beards, and
barbers who agree to shave their beards off are punished. The punishments for violating these rules
are whipping, amputation of limbs, and beheading.93
Recent accounts on the retaking of Mosul, first in the eastern district and (as of this writing), parts
of the western district, report both on the fleeing of hundreds of residents from the city and the discovery of mass graves in and around Mosul. Two recent case studies are provided here.
According to Patrick Cockburn, author of Chaos and Caliphate, Hamza is a 33-year-old man from
Fallujah, Iraq, who joined ISIS fighters when they took over the city. He was initially attracted to
ISIS because of his religious beliefs. Two months before he was interviewed by Cockburn, however,
he defected because he was repulsed by initiation rites in which ISIS fighters killed prisoners, some
of whom were people he knew, and the raping of Yazidi women who were forced into sex slavery
as what ISIS called “pagans.” When he balked at executing a Sunni prisoner who had worked with
the Shia Iraqi government (also called “pagans”), he was not punished; instead, he was also offered
sexual services by a Yazidi woman who, as a pagan, was a suitable target for ISIS fighters. The rapes
and executions finally compelled him to leave, and after five days (with help from reliable friends), he
arrived safely to his destination outside ISIS-controlled territory. Hamza recalled that “At the beginning, I thought they were fighting for Allah, but later I discovered they were far from the principles
of Islam…The justice they were calling for when they first arrived in Fallujah turned out to be only
words.”94
New literature has also surfaced that contradicts in part the claims by Napoleoni and Atwan about
life in the ISIS-controlled areas of Iraq and Raqqa. The Raqqa Diaries, authored by “Samer” and
edited by the BBC’s Mike Thomson, shows how daily life is closely monitored in a running diary.
Samer himself was sentenced to forty lashes for speaking out against the beheadings, his father was
killed in an airstrike of a house next door, and his mother, wounded in the same air raid, was hospitalized. He notes the spiraling high costs of food, the restrictions on purchasing a television set,
lest the viewer sees what is going on in the West, and the frequent executions for minor offenses. He
reports the stoning to death of a woman. Even the length of a man’s pants is monitored. In the end,
Samer escaped to northern Syria and contacted the BBC to provide his account.95

Recent Updates
As of late March 2017, the Iraqi invasion of Mosul has resulted in its control of the eastern district
and an attack on western parts of the city. Mass graves have been discovered in and near Mosul, and
there is a massive emigration of its residents. Indeed, this emigration of Syrians and Iraqis that has
occupied the headlines for the past year is in part the product of the ISIS conflict. Raqqa is under
siege and has been bombed for several months, according to recent reports, but remains under ISIS
control. In the meantime, In addition to battles in Syria and Iraq, in which ISIS has lost substantial
ground—Fallujah, Anbar province, Tikrit—ISIS has resorted to terror attacks, not only in Paris,
Nice, Brussels, Orlando, and San Bernardino, but also in other parts of the globe, from Brazil and
Norway to Chechnya in Russia, Mindanao in the Philippines, and even in China. In the past two
days of this writing, ISIS attacks have elicited Afghanistan’s request for U.S. military intervention
against not only the Taliban but also the Islamic State. Finally, a stolen minivan driven by Khalid
Masood ran over a group of pedestrians in front of the British Parliament on March 22, 2017, the
day this text was edited. The ISIS press agency Aamaq claimed the Islamic State’s responsibility for
the attack on March 23; its claim is yet to be verified.

30

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Based on all of this evidence, it is reasonable to conclude that ISIS is well-organized and has at least
some of the attributes of a state. Though there have been setbacks, some quite extensive, the organization has extended its operations and alliances in territories well outside Syria and Iraq. However, it is
also evident that the attempt to impose strict Islamic order is alienating many people despite various
incentives for loyalty in ISIS-captured territory. The desire to impose a strict Wahabi-Salafist model
of Islam on the populations it conquers could thwart its efforts as those societies are not accustomed
to living according to such rules.

CONCLUSION
Citing both state and stateless societies, this chapter has examined levels of socio-cultural integration, types of social class (from none to stratified), and mechanisms of social control exercised
in various forms of political organization from foragers to large, fully developed states. The chapter
offers explanations for these patterns, and additional theories are provided by the works in the bibliography. Still, there are many more questions than answers. Why does socio-economic inequality
arise in the first place? How do states reinforce (or generate) inequality? Societies that have not developed a state have lasted far longer—about 100,000 to 150,000 years longer—than societies that
became states. Will states persist despite the demonstrable disadvantages they present for the majority
of their citizens?
A Chinese curse wishes that you may “live in interesting times.”
These are interesting times indeed.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. In large communities, it can be difficult for people to feel a sense of connection or loyalty to
people outside their immediate families. Choose one of the social-integration techniques used in
tribes and chiefdoms and explain why it can successfully encourage solidarity between people.
Can you identify similar systems for encouraging social integration in your own community?
2. Although state societies are efficient in organizing people and resources, they also are associated
with many disadvantages, such as extreme disparities in wealth, use of force to keep people in
line, and harsh laws. Given these difficulties, why do you think the state has survived? Do you
think human populations can develop alternative political organizations in the future?
3. McDowell presents detailed information about the organization of the Islamic State. Does the
Islamic State meet the seven criteria for a state-level society? Why is it important to understand
whether ISIS is or is not likely to become a state?

GLOSSARY
Affinal: family relationships created through marriage.
Age grades: groups of men who are close to one another in age and share similar duties or responsibilities.
Age sets: named categories to which men of a certain age are assigned at birth.
Band: the smallest unit of political organization, consisting of only a few families and no formal
leadership positions.

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

31

Big man: a form of temporary or situational leadership; influence results from acquiring followers.
Bilateral cross-cousin marriage: a man marries a woman who is both his mother’s brother’s daughter
and his father’s sister’s daughter.
Bilateral descent: kinship (family) systems that recognize both the mother’s and the father’s “sides”
of the family.
Caste system: the division of society into hierarchical levels; one’s position is determined by birth
and remains fixed for life.
Chiefdom: large political units in which the chief, who usually is determined by heredity, holds a
formal position of power.
Circumscription: the enclosure of an area by a geographic feature such as mountain ranges or desert
or by the boundaries of a state.
Codified law: formal legal systems in which damages, crimes, remedies, and punishments are specified.
Egalitarian: societies in which there is no great difference in status or power between individuals and
there are as many valued status positions in the societies as there are persons able to fill them.
Feuds: disputes of long duration characterized by a state of recurring hostilities between families,
lineages, or other kin groups.
Ideologies: ideas designed to reinforce the right of powerholders to rule.
Legitimacy: the perception that an individual has a valid right to leadership.
Lineage: individuals who can trace or demonstrate their descent through a line of males or females
back to a founding ancestor.
Matrilateral cross-cousin marriage: a man marries a woman who is his mother’s brother’s daughter.
Matrilineal: kinship (family) systems that recognize only relatives through a line of female ancestors.
Nation: an ethnic population.
Negative reinforcements: punishments for noncompliance through fines, imprisonment, and death
sentences.
Oaths: the practice of calling on a deity to bear witness to the truth of what one says.
Ordeal: a test used to determine guilt or innocence by submitting the accused to dangerous, painful,
or risky tests believed to be controlled by supernatural forces.
Patrilineal: kinship (family) systems that recognize only relatives through a line of male ancestors.
Peasants: residents of a state who earn a living through farming.
Poro and sande: secret societies for men and women, respectively, found in the Mande-speaking
peoples of West Africa, particularly in Liberia, Sierra Leone, the Ivory Coast, and Guinea.
Positive reinforcements: rewards for compliance; examples include medals, financial incentives, and
other forms of public recognition.
Proletarianization: a process through which farmers are removed from the land and forced to take
wage labor employment.
Raids: short-term uses of physical force organized and planned to achieve a limited objective.
Ranked: societies in which there are substantial differences in the wealth and social status of individuals; there are a limited number of positions of power or status, and only a few can occupy them.

32

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Restricted exchange: a marriage system in which only two extended families can engage in this
exchange.
Reverse dominance: societies in which people reject attempts by any individual to exercise power.
Segmentary lineage: a hierarchy of lineages that contains both close and relatively distant family
members.
Social classes: the division of society into groups based on wealth and status.
Sodality: a system used to encourage solidarity or feelings of connectedness between people who are
not related by family ties.
State: the most complex form of political organization characterized by a central government that
has a monopoly over legitimate uses of physical force, a sizeable bureaucracy, a system of formal laws,
and a standing military force.
Stratified: societies in which there are large differences in the wealth, status, and power of individuals
based on unequal access to resources and positions of power.
Sumptuary rules: norms that permit persons of higher rank to enjoy greater social status by wearing
distinctive clothing, jewelry, and/or decorations denied those of lower rank.
Tribe: political units organized around family ties that have fluid or shifting systems of temporary
leadership.
Unilineal descent: kinship (family) systems that recognize only one sex-based “side” of the family.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Paul McDowell (Ph.D. University of British Columbia, 1974)
examined the transition of the civil-religious hierarchy in a factory and peasant community in Guatemala to a secular town
government and church organization called Accion Catolica. He
is the author of Cultural Anthropology: A Concise Introduction
and Cultures Around the World: An Ethnographic Reader; he has
also read several papers on the political globalization of Guatemala.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alexander, Michelle. The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Color Blindness. New York: The
New Press, 2010.
Atwan, Abdel Bari. Islamic State: The Digital Caliphate. London: Saqi Books, 2015.
Befu, Harumi. Japan: An Anthropological Introduction. San Francisco: Chandler, 1971.
Bellman, Beryl. The Language of Secrecy: Symbols and Metaphors in Poro Ritual. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press, 1984.
Bledsoe, Caroline H. Women and Marriage in Kpelle Society. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1980.
Boehm, Christopher. Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1999.
Bohannan, Paul. Justice and Judgment among the Tiv. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1989.
Butterfield, Fox. 1996. “Study Finds Disparity of Justice for Blacks.” New York Times, February 13: 8A.
Carneiro, Robert. “On the Relationship between Size of Population and Complexity of Social
Organization.” Southwest Journal of Anthropology 23 (1967): 234–243.

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

33

———. “A Theory of the Origin of the State.” Science 169 no. 3947 (1970):733–738.
———. “Chiefdom: Precursor to the State.” In The Transition to Statehood in the New World, edited by
Grant Jones and Grant, and Robert Kautz, 37–75. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Chagnon, Napoleon. Yanomamo. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1997.
Childe, V. Gordon. “The Urban Revolution.” Town Planning Review 21 (1950):3–17.
Clay, J.W. “What’s a Nation?” In Talking about People, edited by William Haviland and R.J. Gordon.
Mountain View, CA: Mayfield, 1996.
Cockburn, Patrick. The Age of Jihad. London: Verso, 2016.
———. Chaos and Caliphate: Jihadis and the West in the Struggle for the Middle East. New York: OR Books,
2016.
Diamond, Jared. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. New York: Viking, 2004.
Drucker, Philip. Indians of the Northwest Coast. New York: Natural History Press, 1955.
Ember, Melvin, and Carol Ember. Cultural Anthropology. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2002.
Evans-Pritchard, Edward E. The Nuer. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1940.
———. Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among the Azande. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976.
Fallers, Louis. “Are African Cultivators to Be Called Peasants?” Current Anthropology 2 no. 2 (1961):
108–110.
Fox, Robin. Kinship and Marriage. Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1967.
Frank, Thomas. What’s the Matter with Kansas? How Conservatives Won the Heart of America. New York:
Metropolitan Books, 2004.
———. Listen Liberal: Or, Whatever Happened To the Party of the People? New York: Metropolitan Books,
2016.
Fried, Morton. The Evolution of Political Society: An Essay in Political Anthropology. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1967.
———. “The State, the Chicken, and the Egg or What Came First?” In Origins of the State, edited by
Ronald Cohen and Elman Service. Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues, 1978.
Good, Kenneth. Into The Heart: One Man’s Pursuit of Love and Knowledge among the Yanomami. Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1997.
Harris, Marvin. Cows, Pigs, Wars, and Witches. New York: Vintage, 1974.
Harris, Marvin, and Orna Johnson. Cultural Anthropology. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 2003.
Hart, C.W.M, Arnold R. Pilling, and Jane Goodale. The Tiwi of North Australia. New York: Holt, Rinehart
and Winston, 1988.
Haviland, William. Cultural Anthropology: The Human Challenge. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2005.
Heider, Karl. The Dugum Dani: A Papuan Culture in the Highlands of West New Guinea. Chicago: Aldine,
1970.
Hochschild, Arlie Russell. Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning of Our Political Divide. New
York: New Press, 2016.
Hoebel, E. Adamson. The Law of Primitive Man. New York: Atheneum, 1968 [1954].
Isenberg, Nancy. White Trash: The 400 Year Untold History of Class in America. New York: Viking, 2016.
Johnson, Chalmers. The Sorrows of Empire: Militarism, Secrecy, and the End of the Republic. New York:
Metropolitan Books, 2004.
Khare, Ravindra. The Untouchable as Himself: Identity and Pragmatism among the Lucknow Chamars. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Koch, Klaus-Friedrich, Soraya Altorki, Andrew Arno and Letitia Hickson. “Ritual Reconciliation and
the Obviation of Grievances: A Comparative Study in the Ethnography of Law.” Ethnology 16 (1977):
269–284.
Kroeber, Alfred L. Anthropology. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World, 1948.
Lancaster, William. The Rwala Bedouin Today. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1997.
Lee, Richard. The Dobe Ju/’ hoansi. New York: Thomson, 2003.
Little, Kenneth. “The Political Function of the Poro, Part 1.” Africa 35 (1965): 349–365.
Long, Bruce. “Reincarnation.” Encyclopedia of Religion, Vol. 12, 265–269. New York: Macmillan, 1987.
Maloney, William. “Dharma.” Encyclopedia of Religion, Vol. 4, 239–332. New York: Macmillan, 1987.
———. “Karma.” Encyclopedia of Religion, Vol. 8, 261–266. New York: Macmillan, 1987.

34

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Martin, M. Kay, and Barbara Voorhies. Female of the Species. New York: Columbia University Press, 1975.
Mauss, Marcel. The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies. London: Routledge, 2001
[1925].
McCants, William. The Isis Apocalypse: The History, Strategy, and Doomsday Vision of the Islamic State. New
York: St. Martins, 2015.
McDowell, Paul V. “Political and Religious Change in a Guatemalan Factory Community.” Ph.D. Diss.,
University of British Columbia, 1974.
———. “The Decline of the Civil-Religious Hierarchy: The Case of Cantel.” NorthSouth: Canadian Journal
of Latin American Studies 35 no. 10 (1980): 17–35.
Meggitt, Mervyn. Blood is their Argument: Warfare among the Mae-Enga. Palo Alto, CA: Mayfield, 1977.
Murphy, Robert F, and Leonard Kasdan. “The Structure of Parallel Cousin Marriage.” American
Anthropologist 61 no. 1 (1959.):17–29.
Nader, Laura. Harmony Ideology: Justice and Control in a Zapotec Mountain Village. Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1991.
Nance, Malcolm. Defeating ISIS: Who They Are, What They Want, What They Believe. New York: Skyhorse
Press, 2016.
Napoleoni, Loretta. The Islamic Phoenix: The Islamic State and the Redrawing of the Middle East. New York:
Seven Stories Press, 2014.
Oliver, Douglas. A Solomon Island Society: Kinship and Leadership among the Siuai of Bougainville.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1955.
Otterbein, Keith. “The Anthropology of War.” In Handbook of Social and Cultural Anthropology, edited by
John Huntington. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1974.
———. The Evolution of War: A Cross-cultural Study. New Haven, CT: Human Relation Area Files, 1989.
Perelman, Michael. The Invention of Capitalism: Classical Political Economy and the Secret History of Primitive
Accumulation. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2000.
Polanyi, Karl. The Great Transformation. New York: Beacon Press, 1944.
Redfield, Robert. The Little Community and Peasant Society and Culture. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1989.
Roberts, Sam. “Fighting the Tide of Bloodshed on Streets Resembling a War Zone.” New York Times,
November 15, 1993: B12.
Sahlins, Marshall. “The Segmentary Lineage: An Organization of Predatory Expansion.” American
Anthropologist 63 (1961):322–343.
Sangree, Walter. “The Bantu Tiriki of Western Kenya.” In Peoples of Africa, edited by James Gibbs. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1965.
Scupin, Raymond. Cultural Anthropology: A Global Perspective. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2012.
Service, Elman. Primitive Social Organization: An Evolutionary Perspective. New York: Random House,
1962.
———. Origins of the State and Civilization: The Process of Cultural Evolution. New York: W.W. Norton,
1975.
———. Profiles of Ethnology. New York: Harper Collins, 1978.
Stavrianos, Leften S. Global Rift. New York: Quill, 1974.
Steward, Julian. The Theory of Culture Change: The Methodology of Multilinear Evolution. Urbana: University
of Illinois Press, 1955.
Strathern, Andrew, and Pamela J. Stewart. Collaborations and Conflict: A Leader through Time. Belmont,
CA: Wadsworth, 1999.
Thomas, Elizabeth Marshall. The Harmless People. New York: Knopf, 1959.
Turnbull, Colin. 1963. The Forest People: A Study of the Pygmies of the Congo. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
———. “The Mbuti Pygmies in the Congo.” In Peoples of Africa, edited by James Gibbs, 279– 318. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1965.
———. The Mbuti Pygmies: Change and Adaptation. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1983.
Weber, Max. The Theory of Social and Economic Organization. New York: Free Press, 1997 [1947].

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

35

White, Douglas. “Rethinking Polygyny, Co-wives, Codes, and Cultural Systems.” Current Anthropology 29
no. 4 (1988): 529–533.
Wray, Matt. Not Quite White: White Trash and the Boundaries of Whiteness. Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 2006.
Wolf, Eric R. “Closed Corporate Communities in Mesoamerica and Central Java.” Southwestern Journal of
Anthropology 13 no. 1 (1957):1–18.
———. Peasants. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966.

NOTES
Portions of this chapter were first published in Cultural Anthropology: A Concise Introduction by Paul McDowell and are reproduced here with permission of Kendall Hunt Publishing company.
1. Morton Fried, The Evolution of Political Society: An Essay in Political Anthropology (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967).
2. E. Adamson Hoebel, The Law of Primitive Man (New York: Atheneum, 1968 [1954]). For a critique of Hoebel see John
Steckley, White Lies about the Inuit (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2007).
3. Elman Service, Origins of the State and Civilization: The Process of Cultural Evolution (New York: W.W. Norton, 1975).
4. Christopher Boehm. Hierarchy in the Forest: The Evolution of Egalitarian Behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1999.
5. Richard Lee, The Dobe Ju/’hoansi (New York: Thomson, 2003).
6. Julian Steward, The Theory of Culture Change: The Methodology of Multilinear Evolution (Urbana: University of Illinois Press,
1955), 54.
7. Elman Service, Origins of the State and Civilization.
8. Morton Fried, The Evolution of Political Society.
9. Richard Lee, The Dobe Ju/’hoansi, 109–111.
10. Julian Steward, The Theory of Culture Change.
11. Elman Service, Primitive Social Organization: An Evolutionary Perspective (New York: Random House, 1962).
12. M. Kay Martin and Barbara Voorhies, Female of the Species (New York: Columbia University Press, 1975).
13. E. Adamson Hoebel, The Law of Primitive Man, 168.
14. See Colin Turnbull, The Forest People: A Study of the Pygmies of the Congo (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1963) and Colin
Turnbull, The Mbuti Pygmies: Change and Adaptation (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1983).
15. C.W. Merton Hart, Arnold R. Pilling, and Jane Goodale. The Tiwi of North Australia (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1988).
16. Richard Lee, The Dobe Ju/’hoansi, 112–118.
17. Napoleon Chagnon, Yanomamo (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1997), 133–137.
18. Marcel Mauss, The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies (London: Routledge, 2001 [1925]).
19. Douglas Oliver, A Solomon Island Society: Kinship and Leadership among the Siuai of Bougainville (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1955). For an account of Ongka, the big man in a Kawelka village, see Andrew Strathern and Pamela J.
Stewart, Collaborations and Conflict: A Leader through Time (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1999).
20. Walter Sangree, “The Bantu Tiriki of Western Kenya,” in Peoples of Africa, James Gibbs, ed. (New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1965), 71. The reader will notice the discrepancies between Sangree’s description of age grades and sets—15 year for
each, totaling a cycle of 105 years—and his chart from which the one shown here is extrapolated to 1994. First, the age grade
“small boys,” is 10 years, not 15. Second, the age grade “ritual elders” is 20 years, not 15. Why this discrepancy exists, Sangree
does not answer. This discrepancy demonstrates the questions raised when ideal types do not match all the ethnographic
information. For example, if the Jiminigayi ranged 15 years in 1939, why did they suddenly expand to a range of 20 years in
1954? By the same token, why did the Sawe age set cover 10 years in 1939 and expand to 15 years in 1954? It is discrepancies
such as this that raise questions and drive further research
21. Mervyn Meggitt, Blood Is Their Argument: Warfare among the Mae-Enga (Palo Alto, CA: Mayfield, 1977) 202–224.
22. Marcel Mauss, The Gift.
23. Ibid.
24. Ibid.
25. Claude Levi-Strauss’ concept is further described in Robin Fox, Kinship and Marriage (Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin,
1967), 182–187.
26. Evans-Pritchard, Edward E. The Nuer. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1940.
27. Paul Bohannan, Justice and Judgment among the Tiv. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1989. And Murphy, Robert F,
and Leonard Kasdan. “The Structure of Parallel Cousin Marriage.” American Anthropologist 61 no. 1 (1959.):17–29.
28. Marshall Sahlins, “The Segmentary Lineage: An Organization of Predatory Expansion.” American Anthropologist 63
(1961):322–343.

36

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

29. Ibid.
30. E.E. Evans-Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles, and Magic among the Azande (Oxford: Oxford University Press,1976).
31. Klaus-Friedrich Koch et al., “Ritual Reconciliation and the Obviation of Grievances: A Comparative Study in the Ethnography of Law.” Ethnology 16 (1977):269–270.
32. E.E. Evans-Pritchard, The Nuer (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1940), 291.
33. Laura Nader, Harmony Ideology: Justice and Control in a Zapotec Mountain Village. (Stanford: Stanford University Press,
1991).
34. Marvin Harris, Cows, Pigs, Wars, and Witches. New York: Vintage, 1974. Good, Kenneth. Into The Heart: One Man’s Pursuit of Love and Knowledge among the Yanomami. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1997.
35. Napoleon Chagnon, Yanomamo, 91–97.
36. Douglas White, “Rethinking Polygyny, Co-wives, Codes, and Cultural Systems,” Current Anthropology 29 no. 4 (1988):
529–533.
37. Karl Heider, The Dugum Dani: A Papuan Culture in the Highlands of West New Guinea (Chicago: Aldine, 1970).
38. Philip Drucker, Indians of the Northwest Coast (New York: Natural History Press, 1955).
39. Ibid.
40. For more information about the reasons for the potlatch ban, see Douglas Cole and Ira Chaiken, An Iron Hand upon the
People: The Law against the Potlatch on the Northwest Coast (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1990). The website of the
U’Mista Cultural Society in Alert Bay, British Columbia, Canada offers more information about potlatch traditions and the
impact of the ban: www.umista.ca.
41. Philip Drucker, Indians of the Northwest Coast.
42. Edmund Leach, cited in Robin Fox, Kinship and Marriage, 215–216.
43. Raymond Scupin, Cultural Anthropology: A Global Perspective (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2012).
44. The information comes from William Lancaster, The Rwala Bedouin Today (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1997)
and Elman Service, Profiles of Ethnology (New York: Harper Collins, 1978).
45. Beryl Bellman, The Language of Secrecy: Symbols and Metaphors in Poro Ritual (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University
Press, 1984).
46. Kenneth Little, “The Political Function of the Poro, Part 1.” Africa 35 (1965):349–365. See also Caroline Bledsoe, Women
and Marriage in Kpelle Society (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1980).
47. Karl Polanyi, The Great Transformation (New York: Beacon Press, 1944).
48. Bruce Long, “Reincarnation,” Encyclopedia of Religion (New York: Macmillan, 1987) and William Maloney, “Dharma,”
Encyclopedia of Religion, Vol. 4 (New York: Macmillan, 1987).
49. Ravindra Khare, The Untouchable as Himself: Identity and Pragmatism among the Lucknow Chamars (New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1984).
50. Harumi Befu, Japan: An Anthropological Introduction (San Francisco: Chandler, 1971).
51. William Haviland, Cultural Anthropology: The Human Challenge.
52. Morton Fried, The Evolution of Political Society: An Essay in Political Anthropology (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967) and
Max Weber, The Theory of Social and Economic Organization (New York: Free Press, 1997 [1947]).
53. For instance, Max Weber, The Theory of Social and Economic Organization.
54. J.W. Clay, “What’s a Nation?” in Talking about People, William Haviland and R.J. Gordon, eds. (Mountain View, CA:
Mayfield), 1996.
55. Robert Carneiro, “A Theory of the Origin of the State.” Science 169 no. 3947 (1970): 733–738 and Robert Carneiro,
“Chiefdom: Precursor to the State,” in The Transition to Statehood in the New World, Grant Jones and Robert Kautz, eds.
37–75. New York: Cambridge University Press.
56. Alfred L. Kroeber, Anthropology (New York: Harcourt, Brace, and World, 1948), 284.
57. Robert Redfield, The Little Community and Peasant Society and Culture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989).
58. Louis Fallers, “Are African Cultivators to Be Called Peasants?” Current Anthropology 2 no. 2 (1961): 108–110.
59. Eric Wolf, Peasants. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966.
60. Ibid.
61. Leften S. Stavrianos, Global Rift (New York: Quill, 1974).
62. Michael Perelman, The Invention of Capitalism: Classical Political Economy and the Secret History of Primitive Accumulation
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2000), 38–59.
63. For more information about land privatization, see Paul V. McDowell, “Political and Religious Change in a Guatemalan
Factory Community.” Ph.D. Diss., University of British Columbia, 1974 and Paul V. McDowell, “The Decline of the Civil-Religious Hierarchy: The Case of Cantel.” NorthSouth: Canadian Journal of Latin American Studies 35 no. 10 (1980):17–35.
64. Morton Fried “The State, the Chicken, and the Egg or What Came First?” In Origins of the State, edited by Ronald Cohen
and Elman Service. Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues, 1978.
65. Sam Roberts, “Fighting the Tide of Bloodshed on Streets Resembling a War Zone.” New York Times, November 15, 1993:
B12.
66. Fox Butterfield, “Study Finds Disparity of Justice for Blacks.” New York Times, Feb. 13, 1996 8A.

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison

37

67. Michelle Alexander, The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Color Blindness. New York: The New Press, 2010.
68. V. Gordon Childe, “The Urban Revolution.” Town Planning Review 21 (1950): 3–17.
69. Keith Otterbein “The Anthropology of War,” in Handbook of Social and Cultural Anthropology, John Huntington, ed.
(Chicago: Rand McNally, 1974) and The Evolution of War: A Cross-cultural Study (New Haven, CT: Human Relation Area
Files, 1989).
70. Jared Diamond, Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed (New York: Viking, 2004).
71. Chalmers Johnson, The Sorrows of Empires: Militarism, Secrecy, and the End of the Republic (New York: Metropolitan Books,
2005), 285.
72. Thomas Frank, What’s the Matter with Kansas? How Conservatives Won the Heart of America (New York: Metropolitan
Books, 2004).
73. See, for instance, an end-times interpretation of ISIS by William McCants, The ISIS Apocalypse: The History, Strategy, and
Doomsday Vision of the Islamic State (New York: St. Martins, 2015); a backgrounder on the crises by Patrick Cockburn, Jihadis
and the West in the Struggle for the Middle East (New York: OR Books, 2016); an update by Patrick Cockburn that details
ISIS’s role in the crisis, Age of Jihad: The Islamic State and the Great War for the Middle East (London: Verso, 2016); and a
comprehensive text on ISIS by Malcolm Nance, Defeating Isis: Who They Are, How They Fight, What They Believe (New York:
Skyhorse Press, 2016).
74. Loretta Napoleoni, The Islamic Phoenix: The Islamic State and the Redrawing of the Middle East. (New York: Seven Stories
Press, 2014), 3.
75. Ibid.
76. For this initial analysis, the ethnographic present is the time period from July 2014 to February 2015.
77. Malcolm Nance, Defeating Isis: Who They Are, How They Fight, What They Believe (New York: Skyhorse Press, 2016). Abdel
Bari Atwan, Islamic State: The Digital Caliphate (London: Saqi Books, 2015), 132–136 and Malcolm Nance, Defeating ISIS:
Who They Are, How They Fight, What They Believe (New York: Skyhorse Press, 2016), 28.
78. The information comes from Abdel Bari Atwan, Islamic State: The Digital Caliphate (London: Saqi Books, 2015), 132–136
and Malcolm Nance, Defeating ISIS: Who They Are, How They Fight, What They Believe (New York: Skyhorse Press, 2016), 28.
79. Abdel Bari Atwan, Islamic State, 3–4.
80. Loretta Napoleoni, The Islamic Phoenix, 124.
81. Malcolm Nance, Defeating Isis: Who They Are, How They Fight, What They Believe (New York: Skyhorse Press, 2016).
82. Abdel Bari Atwan, Islamic State, 131–137; Nance, Defeating Isis, 50–67.
83. Ibid., 132.
84. Ibid., 132.
85. Ibid., 134.
86. Ibid., 133.
87. Ibid., 134–135
88. Ibid., and Patrick Cockburn, Chaos and Caliphate: Jihadis and the West in the Struggle for the Middle East.
89. Loretta Napoleoni, The Islamic Phoenix, 96.
90. Abdel Bari Atwan, Islamic State, 135.
91. Ibid.
92. Patrick Cockburn, Chaos and Caliphate, 397.
93. Ibid.
94. Ibid., 382–386.
95. Samer, The Raqqa Diaries (London: Interlink Publishing Group, 2017).

Family and Marriage
Mary Kay Gilliland, Central Arizona College
maryk.gilliland@centralaz.edu
LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Describe the variety of human
families cross-culturally with
examples.

• Discuss variation in parental rights
and responsibilities.
• Distinguish between matrilineal,
patrilineal, and bilateral kinship
systems.
• Identify the differences between
kinship establish by blood and kinship
established by marriage.
• Evaluate the differences between
dowry and bridewealth as well as
between different types of postmarital residence.
• Recognize patterns of family and
marriage and explain why these
patterns represent rational decisions
within the cultural contexts.

Family and marriage may at first seem to be familiar topics. Families exist in all societies and they are part
of what makes us human. However, societies around the
world demonstrate tremendous variation in cultural understandings of family and marriage. Ideas about how people
are related to each other, what kind of marriage would be
ideal, when people should have children, who should care
for children, and many other family related matters differ
cross-culturally. While the function of families is to fulfill
basic human needs such as providing for children, defining parental roles, regulating sexuality, and passing property
and knowledge between generations, there are many variations or patterns of family life that can meet these needs.
This chapter introduces some of the more common patterns
of family life found around the world. It is important to remember that within any cultural framework variation does
occur. Some variations on the standard pattern fall within
what would be culturally considered the “range of acceptable alternatives.” Other family forms are not entirely accepted, but would still be recognized by most members of
the community as reasonable.

RIGHTS, RESPONSIBILITIES, STATUSES,
AND ROLES IN FAMILIES
Some of the earliest research in cultural anthropology
explored differences in ideas about family. Lewis Henry
Morgan, a lawyer who also conducted early anthropological
studies of Native American cultures, documented the words
used to describe family members in the Iroquois language.1
In the book Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family (1871), he explained that words used to describe family members, such as “mother” or “cousin,” were
important because they indicated the rights and responsibilities associated with particular family members both within
households and the larger community. This can be seen in
the labels we have for family members—titles like father or
aunt—that describe how a person fits into a family as well
as the obligations he or she has to others.
The concepts of status and role are useful for thinking
about the behaviors that are expected of individuals who
Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
http://www.perspectivesanthro.org/

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

occupy various positions in the family. The terms were first used by anthropologist Ralph Linton and
they have since been widely incorporated into social science terminology.2 For anthropologists, a status is any culturally-designated position a person occupies in a particular setting. Within the setting
of a family, many statuses can exist such as “father,” “mother,” “maternal grandparent,” and “younger
brother.” Of course, cultures may define the statuses involved in a family differently. Role is the set of
behaviors expected of an individual who occupies a particular status. A person who has the status of
“mother,” for instance, would generally have the role of caring for her children.
Roles, like statuses, are cultural ideals or expectations and there will be variation in how individuals
meet these expectations. Statuses and roles also change within cultures over time. In the not-so-distant past in the United States, the roles associated with the status of “mother” in a typical Euro-American middle-income family included caring for children and keeping a house; they probably did not
include working for wages outside the home. It was rare for fathers to engage in regular, day-to-day
housekeeping or childcare roles, though they sometimes “helped out,” to use the jargon of the time.
Today, it is much more common for a father to be an equal partner in caring for children or a house
or to sometimes take a primary role in child and house care as a “stay at home father” or as a “single
father.” The concepts of status and role help us think about cultural ideals and what the majority
within a cultural group tends to do. They also help us describe and document culture change. With
respect to family and marriage, these concepts help us compare family systems across cultures.

KINSHIP AND DESCENT
Kinship is the word used to describe culturally recognized ties between members of a family. Kinship includes the terms, or social statuses, used to define family members and the roles or
expected behaviors associated with these statuses. Kinship encompasses relationships formed
through blood connections (consanguineal), such as those created between parents and children,
as well as relationships created through marriage ties (affinal), such as in-laws (see Figure 1).
Kinship can also include “chosen kin,” who have no formal blood or marriage ties, but consider
themselves to be family. Adoptive parents, for instance, are culturally recognized as parents to the
children they raise even though they are not related by blood.

Figure 1: These young Maasai women from Western Tanzania are
affinal kin, who share responsibilities for childcare. Maasai men often
have multiple wives who share domestic responsibilities. Photo used
with permission of Laura Tubelle de González.

While there is quite a bit of variation in families cross-culturally, it is also true that many families
can be categorized into broad types based on what anthropologists call a kinship system. The kinship
system refers to the pattern of culturally recognized relationships between family members. Some
cultures create kinship through only a single parental line or “side” of the family. For instance, families in many parts of the world are defined by patrilineal descent: the paternal line of the family, or
fathers and their children. In other societies, matrilineal descent defines membership in the kinship
group through the maternal line of relationships between mothers and their children. Both kinds of

Family and Marriage

3

kinship are considered unilineal because they involve descent through only one line or side of the
family. It is important to keep in mind that systems of descent define culturally recognized “kin,” but
these rules do not restrict relationships or emotional bonds between people. Mothers in patrilineal
societies have close and loving relationships with their children even though they are not members of
the same patrilineage.3 In the United States, for instance, last names traditionally follow a pattern of
patrilineal descent: children receive last names from their fathers. This does not mean that the bonds
between mothers and children are reduced. Bilateral descent is another way of creating kinship.
Bilateral descent means that families are defined by descent from both the father and the mother’s
sides of the family. In bilateral descent, which is common in the United States, children recognize
both their mother’s and father’s family members as relatives.
As we will see below, the descent groups that are created by these kinship systems provide members with a sense of identity and social support. Kinship groups may also control economic resources
and dictate decisions about where people can live, who they can marry, and what happens to their
property after death. Anthropologists use kinship diagrams to help visualize descent groups and
kinship. Figure 2 is a simple example of a kinship diagram. This diagram has been designed to help
you see the difference between the kinship groups created by a bilateral descent system and a unilineal
system.

Figure 2: This kinship chart illustrates bilateral descent.

Kinship diagrams use a specific person, who by convention is called Ego, as a starting point.
The people shown on the chart are Ego’s relatives. In Figure 2, Ego is in the middle of the
bottom row. Most kinship diagrams use a triangle to represent males and a circle to represent
females. Conventionally, an “equals sign” placed between two individuals indicates a marriage. A
single line, or a hyphen, can be used to indicate a recognized union without marriage such as a
couple living together or engaged and living together, sometimes with children.
Children are linked to their parents by a vertical line that extends down from the equals sign. A
sibling group is represented by a horizontal line that encompasses the group. Usually children are
represented from left to right—oldest to youngest. Other conventions for these charts include
darkening the symbol or drawing a diagonal line through the symbol to indicate that a person is
deceased. A diagonal line may be drawn through the equals sign if a marriage has ended.

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Figure 2 shows a diagram of three generations of a typical bilateral (two sides) kinship group,
focused on parents and children, with aunts, uncles, cousins, grandparents and grandchildren. Note
that everyone in the diagram is related to everyone else in the diagram, even though they may not
interact on a regular basis. The group could potentially be very large, and everyone related through
blood, marriage, or adoption is included.
The next two kinship diagram show how the descent group changes in unilineal kinship systems
like a patrilineal system (father’s line) or a matrilineal system (mother’s line). The roles of the family
members in relationship to one another are also likely to be different because descent is based on
lineage: descent from a common ancestor. In a patrilineal system, children are always members of
their father’s lineage group (Figure 3). In a matrilineal system, children are always members of their
mother’s lineage group (Figure 4). In both cases, individuals remain a part of their birth lineage
throughout their lives, even after marriage. Typically, people must marry someone outside their own
lineage. In figures 3 and 4, the shaded symbols represent people who are in the same lineage. The
unshaded symbols represent people who have married into the lineage.
In general, bilateral kinship is more focused on individuals rather than a single lineage of ancestors
as seen in unlineal descent. Each person in a bilateral system has a slightly different group of relatives. For example, my brother’s relatives through marriage (his in-laws) are included in his kinship
group, but are not included in mine. His wife’s siblings and children are also included in his group,
but not in mine. If we were in a patrilineal or matrilineal system, my brother and I would largely
share the same group of relatives.

Figure 3: This kinship chart shows a patrilineal household with Ego in father’s lineage.

Matrilineages and patrilineages are not just mirror images of each other. They create groups that
behave somewhat differently. Contrary to some popular ideas, matrilineages are not matriarchal.
The terms “matriarchy” and “patriarchy” refer to the power structure in a society. In a patriarchal
society, men have more authority and the ability to make more decisions than do women. A father

Family and Marriage

5

may have the right to make certain decisions for his wife or wives, and for his children, or any other
dependents. In matrilineal societies, men usually still have greater power, but women may be subject
more to the power of their brothers or uncles (relatives through their mother’s side of the family)
rather than their fathers.
Among the matrilineal Hopi, for example, a mothers’ brother is more likely to be a figure of authority than a father. The mother’s brothers have important roles in the lives of their sisters’ children.
These roles include ceremonial obligations and the responsibility to teach the skills that are associated
with men and men’s activities. Men are the keepers of important ritual knowledge so while women
are respected, men are still likely to hold more authority.

Figure 4: This kinship chart shows a matrilineal household with Ego in mother’s lineage.

The Nayar of southern India offer an interesting example of gender roles in a matrilineal
society. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, men and women did not live together after
marriage because the husbands, who were not part of the matrilineage, were not considered
relatives. Women lived for their entire lives in extended family homes with their mothers and
siblings. The male siblings in the household had the social role of father and were important
father figures in the lives of their sisters’ children. The biological fathers of the children had only
a limited role in their lives. Instead, these men were busy raising their own sisters’ children.
Despite the matrilineal focus of the household, Nayar communities were not matriarchies. The
position of power in the household was held by an elder male, often the oldest male sibling.
The consequences of this kind of system are intriguing. Men did not have strong ties to their biological offspring. Marriages were fluid and men and women could have more than one spouse,
but the children always remained with their mothers.4 Cross-culturally it does seem to be the case
that in matrilineal societies women tend to have more freedom to make decisions about sex
and marriage. Children are members of their mother’s kinship group, whether the mother is
married or not, so there is often less concern about the social legitimacy of children or fatherhood.

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Some anthropologists have suggested that marriages are less stable in matrilineal societies than in
patrilineal ones, but this varies as well. Among the matrilineal Iroquois, for example, women owned
the longhouses. Men moved into their wives’ family houses at marriage. If a woman wanted to divorce her husband, she could simply put his belongings outside. In that society, however, men and
women also spent significant time apart. Men were hunters and warriors, often away from the home.
Women were the farmers and tended to the home. This, as much as matrilineality, could have contributed to less formality or disapproval of divorce. There was no concern about the division of property. The longhouse belonged to the mother’s family, and children belonged to their mother’s clan.
Men would always have a home with their sisters and mother, in their own matrilineal longhouse.5
Kinship charts can be useful when doing field research and particularly helpful when documenting changes in families over time. In my own field research, it was easy to document changes that
occurred in a relatively short time, likely linked to urbanization, such as changes in family size, in
prevalence of divorce, and in increased numbers of unmarried adults. These patterns had emerged in
the surveys and interviews I conducted, but they jumped off the pages when I reviewed the kinship
charts. Creating kinship charts was a very helpful technique in my field research. I also used them as
small gifts for the people who helped with my research and they were very much appreciated.

KINSHIP TERMS
Another way to compare ideas about family across cultures is to categorize them based on kinship
terminology: the terms used in a language to describe relatives. George Murdock was one of the first
anthropologists to undertake this kind of comparison and he suggested that the kinship systems of
the world could be placed in six categories based on the kinds of words a society used to describe relatives.6 In some kinship systems, brothers, sisters, and all first cousins call each other brother and sister.
In such a system, not only one’s biological father, but all one’s father’s brothers would be called “father,” and all of one’s mother’s sisters, along with one’s biological mother, would be called
“mother.” Murdock and subsequent anthropologists refer to this as the Hawaiian system because it
was found historically in Hawaii. In Hawaiian kinship terminology there are a smaller number of
kinship terms and they tend to reflect generation and gender while merging nuclear families into a
larger grouping. In other words, you, your brothers and sisters, and cousins would all be called
“child” by your parents and your aunts and uncles.
Other systems are more complicated with different terms for father’s elder brother, younger
brother, grandparents on either side and so on. Each pattern was named for a cultural group in
which this pattern was found. The system that most Americans follow is referred to as the Eskimo
system, a name that comes from the old way of referring to the Inuit, an indigenous people of
the Arctic (Figure 1). Placing cultures into categories based on kinship terminology is no longer a
primary focus of anthropological studies of kinship. Differences in kinship terminology do
provide insight into differences in the way people think about families and the roles people play
within them.
Sometimes the differences in categorizing relatives and in terminology reflect patrilineal
and matrilineal systems of descent. For example, in a patrilineal system, your father’s brothers are
members of your lineage or clan; your mother’s brothers do not belong to the same lineage or
clan and may or may not be counted as relatives. If they are counted, they likely are called
something different from what you would call your father’s brother. Similar differences would be
present in a matrilineal society.

Family and Marriage

7

An Example from Croatia
In many U.S. families, any brother of your mother or father is called “uncle.” In other kinship
systems, however, some uncles and aunts count as members of the family and others do not. In
Croatia, which was historically a patrilineal society, all uncles are recognized by their nephews and
nieces regardless of whether they are brothers of the mother or the father. But, the uncle is called by
a specific name that depends on which side of the family he is on; different roles are associated with
different types of uncles.
A child born into a traditional Croatian family will call his aunts and uncles stric and strina if they
are his father’s brothers and their wives. He will call his mother’s brothers and their wives ujak and
ujna. The words tetka or tetak can be used to refer to anyone who is a sister of either of his parents or
a husband of any of his parents’ sisters. The third category, tetka or tetak, has no reference to “side” of
the family; all are either tetka or tetak.
These terms are not simply words. They reflect ideas about belonging and include expectations of
behavior. Because of the patrilineage, individuals are more likely to live with their father’s extended
family and more likely to inherit from their father’s family, but mothers and children are very close.
Fathers are perceived as authority figures and are owed deference and respect. A father’s brother is
also an authority figure. Mothers, however, are supposed to be nurturing and a mother’s brother is
regarded as having a mother-like role. This is someone who spoils his sister’s children in ways he may
not spoil his own. A young person may turn to a maternal uncle, or mother’s brother in a difficult situation and expects that a maternal uncle will help him and maintain confidentiality. These concepts
are so much a part of the culture that one may refer to a more distant relative or an adult friend as
a “mother’s brother” if that person plays this kind of nurturing role in one’s life. These terms harken
back to an earlier agricultural society in which a typical family, household, and economic unit was a
joint patrilineal and extended family. Children saw their maternal uncles less frequently, usually only
on special occasions. Because brothers are also supposed to be very fond of sisters and protective of
them, those additional associations are attached to the roles of maternal uncles. Both father’s sisters
and mother’s sisters move to their own husbands’ houses at marriage and are seen even less often.
This probably reflects the more generic, blended term for aunts and uncles in both these categories.7
Similar differences are found in Croatian names for other relatives. Side of the family is important,
at least for close relatives. Married couples have different names for in-laws if the in-law is a husband’s
parent or a wife’s parent. Becoming the mother of a married son is higher in social status than becoming the mother of a married daughter. A man’s mother gains authority over a new daughter-in-law,
who usually leaves her own family to live with her husband’s family and work side by side with her
mother-in-law in a house.

An Example from China
In traditional Chinese society, families distinguished terminologically between mother’s side and
father’s side with different names for grandparents as well as aunts, uncles, and in-laws. Siblings used
terms that distinguished between siblings by gender, as we do in English with “brother” and “sister,”
but also had terms to distinguish between older and younger siblings. Intriguingly, however, the
Chinese word for “he/she/it” is a single term, ta with no reference to gender or age. The traditional
Chinese family was an extended patrilineal family, with women moving into the husband’s family
household. In most regions, typically brothers stayed together in adulthood. Children grew up know-

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

ing their fathers’ families, but not their mothers’ families. Some Chinese families still live this way,
but urbanization and changes in housing and economic livelihood have made large extended families
increasingly less practical.

A Navajo Example
In Navajo (or Diné ) society, children are “born for” their father’s families but “born to” their
mother’s families, the clan to which they belong primarily. The term clan refers to a group of people
who have a general notion of common descent that is not attached to a specific ancestor. Some clans
trace their common ancestry to a common mythological ancestor. Because clan membership is so
important to identity and to social expectations in Navajo culture, when people meet they exchange
clan information first to find out how they stand in relationship to each other. People are expected
to marry outside the clans of their mothers or fathers. Individuals have responsibilities to both sides
of the family, but especially to the matrilineal clan. Clans are so large that people may not know
every individual member, and may not even live in the same vicinity as all clan members, but rights
and obligations to any clan members remain strong in people’s thinking and in practical behavior.
I recently had the experience at the community college where I work in Central Arizona of hearing
a young Navajo woman introduce herself in a public setting. She began her address in Navajo, and
then translated. Her introduction included reference to her clan memberships, and she concluded by
saying that these clan ties are part of what makes her a Navajo woman.

An Example from the United States
In many cases, cultures assign “ownership” of a child, or responsibilities for that child anyway, to
some person or group other than the mother. In the United States, if one were to question people
about who is in their families, they would probably start by naming both their parents, though
increasingly single parent families are the norm. Typically, however, children consider themselves
equally related to a mother and a father even if one or both are absent from their life. This makes
sense because most American families organize themselves according to the principles of bilateral
descent, as discussed above, and do not show a preference for one side of their family or the other.
So, on further inquiry, we might discover that there are siblings (distinguished with different words
by gender, but not birth order), and grandparents on either side of the family who count as family
or extended family. Aunts, uncles, and cousins, along with in-laws, round out the typical list of U.S.
family members. It is not uncommon for individuals to know more about one side of the family
than the other, but given the nature of bilateral descent the idea that people on each side of the
family are equally “related” is generally accepted. The notion of bilateral descent is built into legal
understandings of family rights and responsibilities in the United States. In a divorce in most states,
for example, parents are likely to share time somewhat equally with a minor child and to have joint
decision-making and financial responsibility for that child’s needs as part of a parental agreement,
unless one parent is unable or unwilling to participate as an equal.

MARRIAGE AND FAMILY
In a basic biological sense, women give birth and the minimal family unit in most, though not
all societies, is mother and child. Cultures elaborate that basic relationship and build on it to create

Family and Marriage

9

units that are culturally considered central to social life. Families grow through the birth or adoption
of children and through new adult relationships often recognized as marriage. In our own society, it
is only culturally acceptable to be married to one spouse at a time though we may practice what is
sometimes called serial monogamy, or marriage to a succession of spouses one after the other. This
is reinforced by religious systems, and more importantly in U.S. society, by law. Plural marriages are
not allowed; they are illegal although they do exist because they are encouraged under some religions
or ideologies. In the United States, couples are legally allowed to divorce and remarry, but not all
religions cultural groups support this practice.
When anthropologists talk of family structures, we distinguish among several standard family
types any of which can be the typical or preferred family unit in a culture. First is the nuclear
family: parents who are in a culturally-recognized relationship, such as marriage, along with
their minor or dependent children. This family type is also known as a conjugal family. A nonconjugal nuclear family might be a single parent with dependent children, because of the death of
one spouse or divorce or because a marriage never occurred. Next is the extended family: a
family of at least three-generations sharing a household. A stem family is a version of an extended
family that includes an older couple and one of their adult children with a spouse (or spouses) and
children. In situations where one child in a family is designated to inherit, it is more likely that only
the inheriting child will remain with the parents when he or she becomes an adult and marries.
While this is often an oldest male, it is sometimes a different child. In Burma or Myanmar for
example, the youngest daughter was considered the ideal caretaker of elderly parents, and was
generally designated to inherit.8 The other children will “marry out” or find other means to
support themselves.
A joint family is a very large extended family that includes multiple generations. Adult children
of one gender, often the males, remain in the household with their spouses and children and
they have collective rights to family property. Unmarried adult children of both genders may also
remain in the family group. For example, a household could include a set of grandparents, all of
their adult sons with their wives and children, and unmarried adult daughters. A joint family in rare
cases could have dozens of people, such as the traditional zadruga of Croatia, discussed in greater
detail below.
Polygamous families are based on plural marriages in which there are multiple wives or, in
rarer cases, multiple husbands. These families may live in nuclear or extended family households
and they may or may not be close to each other spatially (see discussion of households below). The
terms step family or blended family are used to describe families that develop when adults who
have been widowed or divorced marry again and bring children from previous partnerships
together. These families are common in many countries with high divorce rates. A wonderful
fictional example was The Brady Bunch of 1970s television.

Who Can You Marry?
Cultural expectations define appropriate potential marriage partners. Cultural rules
emphasizing the need to marry within a cultural group are known as endogamy. People are
sometimes expected to marry within religious communities, to marry someone who is ethnically
or racially similar or who comes from a similar economic or educational background. These are
endogamous marriages: marriages within a group. Cultural expectations for marriage outside a
particular group are called exogamy. Many cultures require that individuals marry only outside
their own kinship groups, for instance. In the United States laws prevent marriage between
close relatives such as first cousins. There was a time in the not so distant past, however, when it
was culturally preferred for Europeans, and Euro-Americans to marry first cousins. Royalty and

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

aristocrats were known to betroth their children to relatives, often cousins. Charles Darwin, who
was British, married his first cousin Emma. This was often done to keep property and wealth in the
family.
In some societies, however, a cousin might be a preferred marriage partner. In some Middle
Eastern societies, patrilateral cousin marriage—marrying a male or female cousin on your father’s
side—is preferred. Some cultures prohibit marriage with a cousin who is in your lineage but, prefer
that you marry a cousin who is not in your lineage. For example, if you live in a society that
traces kinship patrilineally, cousins from your father’s brothers or sisters would be forbidden as
marriage partners, but cousins from your mother’s brothers or sisters might be considered excellent
marriage partners.
Arranged marriages were typical in many cultures around the world in the past including in the
United States. Marriages are arranged by families for many reasons: because the families have
something in common, for financial reasons, to match people with others from the “correct” social,
economic or religious group, and for many other reasons. In India today, some people practice a
kind of modified arranged marriage practice that allows the potential spouses to meet and spend
time together before agreeing to a match. The meeting may take place through a mutual friend, a
family member, community matchmaker, or even a Marriage Meet even in which members of the
same community (caste) are invited to gather (see Figure 5). Although arranged marriages still exist
in urban cities such as Mumbai, love matches are increasingly common. In general, as long as the
social requirements are met, love matches may be accepted by the families involved.
Polygamy refers to any marriage
in which there are multiple partners.
There are two kinds of polygamy: polygyny and polyandry. Polygyny refers
to marriages in which there is one husband and multiple wives. In some societies that practice polygyny, the preference is for sororal polygyny, or the
marriage of one man to several sisters.
In such cases, it is sometimes believed
that sisters will get along better as cowives. Polyandry describes marriages
with one wife and multiple husbands.
As with polygyny, fraternal polyandry
is common and involves the marriage
of a woman to a group of brothers.
In some cultures, if a man’s wife dies,
especially if he has no children, or has
young children, it is thought to be best
for him to marry one of his deceased
Figure 5: This advertisement for “Marriage Meet” in Mumbai,
wife’s sisters. A sister, it is believed, is
India welcomes “boys” and “girls” from the community to
a reasonable substitution for the lost
participate in a Marriage Meet, in which young people can
wife and likely a more loving mother to
mingle with and get to know potential spouses in a fun
atmosphere. Photo used with permission of Laura Tubelle de
any children left behind. This practice
González.
might also prevent the need to return
property exchanged at marriage, such

Family and Marriage

11

as dowry (payments made to the groom’s family before marriage), or bridewealth (payments made
to the bride’s family before marriage). The practice of a man marrying the sister of his deceased wife is
called sororate marriage. In the case of a husband’s death, some societies prefer that a woman marry
one of her husband’s brothers, and in some cases this might be preferred even if he already has a wife.
This practice is called levirate marriage. This latter practice is described in the Old Testament.9

Family Size
Cultural rules generally define not only who makes up a family but also how many people should
be in it. In some cultures, larger families are considered ideal. In others, smaller families are preferred.
These ideas are often linked to both practical and ideological considerations. Practical considerations
might include the availability of housing, work patterns, childcare, the economic contribution children make to a family, or the cost of raising children. Ideological considerations include religious
values related to families. In the 1990s, I carried out field research in Croatia, investigating ideas
about families. An overwhelming majority of the people I interviewed believed that the ideal family
would include three children. Most of these families commented that in their own living memories
people preferred as many children as possible so that there would be assistance for farm work. When
I was there, however, large families were no longer regarded as practical. Within the same general
region, families in urban settings overwhelmingly said that one child was ideal. A shortage of housing
was the single most important factor for limiting family size to one child in cities. In both the rural
and urban settings in Croatia, most people were Roman Catholic and may have been ideologically
predisposed to larger families, but practical considerations were more important to both groups when
it came to matters of family size.
During the same period in the 1990s, it was common for families in the United States to say
that the ideal family included two children and preferably one of each gender (anecdotal). This of
course varies based on factors which include, but are not limited to the ethnicity and religion of the
family. In another example, the People’s Republic of China, where I lived and worked, had an official
one-child policy.10 A family that included only one child was not a widespread cultural ideal. Most
families wished for more children, but had to settle for less.

Families, Households and Domestic Groups
A family can be defined as the smallest group of individuals who see themselves as connected to
one another. They are usually part of larger kinship groups, but with whom they may not interact
on a daily basis. Families tend to reside together and share economic opportunities and other rights
and responsibilities. Family rights and responsibilities are a significant part of understanding families
and how they work. In the United States, for example, minor children have a right to be supported
materially by their parents or other legal guardians. Parents have a responsibility to support and nurture their children. Spouses have a right to mutual support from each other and property acquired
during a marriage is considered “common property” in many U.S. states unless specified otherwise by
a pre-nuptial agreement. Some family responsibilities are cultural and not legal. Many such responsibilities are reinforced by religious or other ideological notions.
Family members who reside together are called households. A household may include
larger kinship groups who think of themselves as separate but related families. Households may also
include non-family or kin members, or could even consist exclusively of non-related people who

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

think of themselves as family. Many studies of families cross-culturally have focused on household
groups because it is households that are the location for many of the day-to-day activities of a society.
Households are important social units in any community
Sometimes families or households are spread across several residential units but think of
themselves as a single group for many purposes. In Croatia, because of urban housing
constraints, some extended family households operate across one or more residential spaces. An
older couple and their married children might live in apartments near each other and cooperate on
childcare and cooking as a single household unit. Domestic group is another term that can be
used to describe a household. Domestic groups can describe any group of people who reside
together and share activities pertaining to domestic life including but not limited to childcare,
elder care, cooking and economic support, even if they might not describe themselves as “family.”
Households may include nuclear families, extended families, joint extended families, or even combinations of families that share a residence and other property as well as rights and responsibilities.
In certain regions of Croatia large agricultural households were incredibly numerous. I carried out
research in a region known as Slavonia, which from the seventeenth through the nineteenth centuries
was was near the border of the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires. Families in portions of this
region were referred to as zadruzi (plural) or a zadruga (singular). They sometimes numbered up to
100 members, all related through blood and marriage. But these households were much more than a
nuclear or even a joint extended family. They were more like small towns with specialists within the
household group who did things such as shoe horses or sew. These very large households supported a
military culture where men between sixteen and sixty years old had to be ready for military service.11
A Croatian anthropologist in the 1800s reported that one family was so large that an elderly woman
died and this was not noticed for three days! The local government in this case forced the family to
divide, separating their property and residing in smaller numbers.12

Creating Families: Patterns of Marriage
As described above, families can be created in many different ways. A marriage is a cultural, social,
and legal process that brings two or more individuals together to create a new family unit.
Most cultures have ideas about how marriages should be arranged (whether by families or by the
individuals involved), at what age this should occur, what the married partners should have in
common (including economic status, religion, ethnicity and so on), and what cultural, religious
and legal processes make a marriage valid. In the United States, strong cultural norms suggest that
individuals should marry for love and not for other reasons. It is not unusual, however, for
communities to teach children to follow certain group norms in choosing a marriage partner. Some
religious communities, for example, will not recognize marriages contracted across religious lines.
Some families strongly prefer that their children marry individuals with similar economic,
cultural, or ethnic backgrounds. Because families tend to socialize with other families similar to
themselves, young people are more likely to meet others similar to themselves.

Marriage Exchanges: Dowry and Bridewealth
In many societies, marriages are affirmed with an exchange of property. Thi s is usu ally the case
in places where families have a hand in arranging a marriage. A property exchange recognizes the

Family and Marriage

13

challenges faced by a family that loses a member and by a family that takes on a new member. These
practices also reflect different notions about the value of the new family member.
Dowry payments are known from U.S. and Western European history. A dowry is a gift given by a
bride’s family to either the bride or to the groom’s family at the time of the marriage. In societies that
practice dowry, families often spend many years accumulating the gift. In some villages in the former
Yugoslavia, the dowry was meant to provide for a woman if she became a widow. The dowry was her
share of her family’s property and reflected the tradition that land was usually inherited by a woman’s
brothers. The dowry might include coins, often woven together in a kind of apron and worn on her
wedding day. This form of dowry also represented a statement of wealth, prestige or high status for
both families; her family’s ability to give this kind of wealth, and the prestige of the family who was
acquiring a desirable new bride. Her dowry also could include linens and other useful items to be
used during her years as a wife. In more recent times, dowries have become extravagant, including
things like refrigerators, cars, and houses.
A dowry can also represent the higher status of the groom’s family and its ability to demand a payment for taking on the economic responsibility of a young wife. This was of thinking about dowry is
more typical of societies in which women are less valued than men. A good dowry enables a woman’s
family to marry into a better family. In parts of India, a dowry could sometimes be so large that it
would be paid in installments. Bride burnings, killing a bride, could happen if her family did not
continue to make the agreed upon payments (though there may be other reasons for this awful crime
in individual cases). This of course is illegal, but does sometimes occur.13
Historically, dowry was most common in agricultural societies. Land was the most valuable commodity and usually land stayed in the hands of men. Women who did not marry were sometimes
seen as a burden on their own families because they were not perceived as making an economic contribution and they represented another mouth to feed. A dowry was important for a woman to take
with her into a marriage because the groom’s family had the upper economic hand. It helped ease the
tension of her arrival in the household, especially if the dowry was substantial.
Bridewealth, by contrast, often represents a higher value placed on women and their ability to
work and produce children. Bridewealth is an exchange of valuables given from a man’s family to the
family of his new wife. Bridewealth is common in pastoralist societies in which people make their
living by raising domesticated animals. The Masaai are example of one such group. A cattle-herding culture located in Kenya and Tanzania, the Maasai pay bridewealth based on the desirability of
the woman. Culturally defined attributes such as her age, beauty, virginity, and her ability to work
contribute to a woman’s value. The economic value placed on women does not mean that women in
such societies necessarily have much freedom, but it does sometimes give them some leverage in their
new domestic situations. In rare cases, there might be simultaneous exchanges of dowry and bridewealth. In such cases, often the bridewealth gift was more of a token than a substantial economic
contribution.

Post-Marital Residence
Every culture has ideas about where a newly married couple should live. In the United States and
in Western Europe, it is usually expected that a new couple create a new domestic unit or household.
Ideally they should live together in a place separate from either of their families of orientation: the
families in which they were raised. They are expected to create a new family of procreation: a new
household for raising children. The goal of most couples is to eventually live separately from their

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

original families so that they can focus on their new relationship and be independent. This kind of
residence after marriage is called neolocal residence (new location). Increasingly, many couples establish a residence together before marriage or may skip the formal marriage altogether.
Another common pattern around the world is patrilocal residence (father’s location). This means
that a couple generally resides with the husband’s father’s family after marriage. This is a multi-generational practice. The new husband’s own mother likely moved into the household when she married
his father. Patrilocal residence is common around the world. It creates larger households that can be
useful in farming economies. Today, with increasing urbanization and with the very different kinds
of jobs associated with industrial capitalism, patrilocal residence has become less common.
A less common pattern worldwide is matrilocal residence. In matrilocal residence societies, men
leave their matrilineal families at marriage and move in with their wives’ mothers’ families. Quite a
few Native American groups practiced matrilocal residence, including the Hopi and the Navajo (or
Diné ) in the Southwest, and the Haudenosaunee (or Iroquois) tribes in the Great Lakes region. A
very interesting residence pattern found within matrilineal societies is avunculocal residence (uncle’s
location). It means that a couple will live with the wife’s mother’s brother. In matrilineal societies, in
which important property, knowledge, or social position are linked with men, the preference is to
keep wealth within the matrilineal household. Property and other cultural items are passed not from
biological fathers to sons, but from maternal uncles to nephews. In doing so, property is kept within
the matriline (see Figure 3).
An excellent example of avunculocal residence is found in the Trobriand Islands in Papua New
Guinea. In families where there was position of authority or significant wealth it was common for
a young man to go live with or near his mother’s brother at the time of his marriage. Trobriand Islanders passed important magical knowledge and political positions through the mother’s lineage.
The son of a chief would not become a chief. Instead, the chief ’s maternal nephew would inherit the
position. Trobriand kinship and family life is rich and complicated. Anthropologist Annette Weiner
describes men and women as carrying out complementary roles and both men and women are valued
culturally. This is not a matriarchy, nor is it a true patriarchy.
The avunculocal arrangement is so important that a man or woman without a cross-gender sibling
will adopt one. A woman must have a brother to plant yam gardens for her husband when she marries. A man must have a sister to participate in exchanges of women’s wealth on his behalf to enhance
his position, and also to ensure that his soul is eventually reborn, after death, into the matrilineage.
Family life and the passing of knowledge was changing rapidly in the Trobriand Islands at the end of
Weiner’s work; more people were converting to Christianity, and while belief in magic was not yet
disappearing, Christians could not inherit their uncles’ magic. This is an example of a culture in transition. At the same time, however, Trobriand Islanders valued their traditions, culture, and language,
and were loathe to lose them altogether.14
Patrilocal residence is usually associated with patrilineal descent. Property, knowledge, and positions are inherited through the father’s family or the husband’s father’s family. In the case of patrilocal
residence, it was sometimes difficult for a woman to return to her original family if her marriage
ended due to death or divorce. The latter was often considered socially shaming and in patrilineal
societies women were often blamed for ending the marriage regardless of the actual circumstances.
Matrilocal residence is usually associated with matrilineal descent. Property, knowledge, and positions are inherited through the mother’s family, or the wife’s mother’s family. Matrilineal and matrilocal societies tended to be less concerned with divorce. Men always had a home with their mothers,
aunts, and sisters and might even come and go during a marriage, carrying out responsibilities to

Family and Marriage

15

their maternal relatives and staying with them from time to time. Explaining the differences between
patrilocal and matrilocal residences risks stereotyping. That said, it is likely that those cultures in
which women marry “out” are less likely to value women while those in which men leave their families at marriage are more inclusive of women. This may have something to do with economics and
ideologies, but must be examined in each cultural context.
Bilocal residence (two locations) or ambilocal residence (either location) represent two additional
and related residential patterns. They are essentially the same and mean that a couple may live
with or near either the husband’s or wife’s family after marriage. A striking example comes from the
island of Dobu, a place that is not far from the Trobriand Islands in Papua New Guinea. In Dobu
society, which was traditionally matrilineal and practiced village exogamy, a married couple would
alternate years living in the husband’s village and in the wife’s village.15 In cases of bilocal or
ambilocal residence while a couple has the choice to live with either the husband’s or wife’s family, a
choice is made based on which location is best able to accommodate new members or which
location needs the additional labor that comes from new members. Once the choice of residence
is made, the married couple usually remains in one place.

Inheritance
The inheritance of family property is often a part of cultural values and roles for families. In 1991,
when Croatia was on the verge of war, I remember a woman speaking about her house going to her
eldest son. Her young daughter was sitting with us at the time, and said to her mother in surprise,
“Mama, why not me?” Her mother stroked her head and smiled at her, but was firm when she said
“Because you are female.” It is typical worldwide, particularly in agricultural societies, for men to
inherit family property. The best-known pattern is inheritance by the oldest male. Joint
inheritance by brothers, with the oldest brother nominally in charge of the family, is also fairly
widespread in joint and extended families. As mentioned above, however, other patterns are found,
including property that passes from maternal uncle to maternal nephew in the Trobriand Islands,
and inheritance of the family house and corresponding responsibility to care for the older
generation by the youngest daughter in Burmese families. This is a further reminder that family
organization and expectations are linked to economic systems and to the resources available to
the family. Pattern of family life and marriage do not exist apart from the physical and
economic environment, and other cultural practices.

Same-Sex Marriage
In the United States, Canada as well as other countries, two individuals of the same sex may be
legally married, but in these countries as well as other places, same-sex couples have been creating
households and families for centuries, long before legal recognition. Same-sex marriages are documented, for instance, in the history of Native American groups from the Great Plains. On the Plains,
men who preferred to dress and take on the roles of women were allowed to marry other men. It was
assumed that if one partner gathered plant food and prepared food, the other partner should have
a complementary role like hunting. Androgynous individuals, males who preferred female roles or
dress, and females who took on male roles, were not condemned but regarded as “two-spirits,” a label
that had positive connotations.

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Two-spirits were considered to embody a third gender combining elements of both male and
female. The key to the two-spirit gender identity was behavior: what individuals did in their communities.16 If a person who was born with a male biological sex felt his identity and chosen lifestyle
best matched the social role recognized as female, he could move into a third gender two-spirit
category. Today, Native American groups set their own laws regarding same-sex marriage. Many
recognize two-spirit individuals, and accept marriage of a two-spirit person to a person of the same
biological sex. Although some nations still do not permit same-sex marriage between tribal members, one of the largest tribal nations, the Cherokee legalized same-sex marriages in 2016.

Adoption
Adoption is another way that people form family ties. In the United States, usually it is infants or
minor children who are adopted by a non-parental family member like a grandparent, an aunt or
uncle, or an older sibling, or by a non-family member. This is usually done when a biological parent
is unable or unwilling to raise a child. The decision to give up a child through adoption is a
complicated one, and one that parents do not make easily.
In other societies, adoption is viewed differently. In some Pacific Island societies, children who
are adopted are considered fortunate because they have two sets of parents; children are not given
for adoption because a parent is unwilling or unable to care for them, but rather to honor the
adoptive parents. Martha Ward described a young woman in Pohnpei, Micronesia, who had a
child for her grandmother, to keep her company in her older years. In another case she described a
child who went to dinner at a relative’s house and stayed for a number of years in a kind of
adoptive situation. In such cases, children retain relationships with biological and adoptive family
members, and may even move fluidly between them.17
One of the more unusual forms of adoption is adopted-daughter marriage, or sim pua marriage.
It is found in Taiwan and described by anthropologist Margery Wolf. Wolf worked in Taiwan in
the mid-1900s. At that time, Taiwanese families strongly preferred sons over daughters. Sons stayed
with their families in adulthood, produced the next generation, cared for parents in old age, and
carried on the tradition of ancestor veneration so that one would not become a “wandering ghost”
after death. Daughters were regarded as expensive. People believed that they raised daughters for
someone else. Dowries and weddings for grown daughters were expensive. Families worried that
they would not be able to find suitable husbands for their grown daughters, who would remain a
burden on their natal families in their later years, not producers of children or contributors in any
other way.18
As a result a custom developed of giving up daughters to other families as future daughtersin-law. Mothers would give up their own daughters as infants, only to take in very quickly an
adopted daughter from someone else. Sometimes the future wife was adopted before the family
had a son. It was said that an adopted daughter/daughter-in-law would “lead in a son.” Adopted
daughters were reportedly not treated well. They had to do housework, help with childcare, and
were not given any privileges such as education. They were often older than their eventual
husbands, and had a lower status in the family than their adoptive brothers. There were reports
of an adopted daughter being treated badly by adopted siblings, and then being expected to later
marry one of them. Wolf reports a very low birth rate among couples who were raised as siblings.
Pressure to engage in these kinds of adoptions usually came from a mother-in-law, or the

Family and Marriage

17

husband’s mother, or a grandmother of the infant girl who had decision-making power in the
family because she was the mother of an adult son. Grandmothers saw this kind of arrangement
as advantageous to the family, according to Wolf, because birth mothers were more likely to
beunhappy about losing a baby daughter, and because caring for another child brought in a future
daughter-in-law.19

FAMILIES AND CULTURE CHANGE
Families are adaptive groups that help address common societal concerns related to childrearing, sexual relationships between adults, and gender roles within the household. While there
are norms and ideals, expectations and understandings regarding families in all cultures, there are
also always situations that represent variations on that norm. Sometimes these are areas where we
begin to see culture change. In the United States in the 1960s, young people began to live together
openly outside of marriage as couples. Those relationships were often socially disapproved, but today
it is much more socially acceptable and common for people to live together prior to marriage or
even instead of marriage. Often the couple will also have children before they decide to marry. An
ideological variation that began nearly sixty years ago has led to a widespread culture change in
attitudes toward marriage.
In the Croatian Republic of Yugoslavia in the 1980s, shortly after the death of long-time
leader Josip Broz “Tito,” it was still expected that a young couple would live with a husband’s
family at marriage. At that time, I was engaged in fieldwork that focused on social change. The
socialist government had implemented legislation and social programs to support women moving
out of traditional roles, becoming educated and productive members of the workforce, and
participating in the professional class. There was state-funded daycare and liberal legislation
regarding birth control and abortion among other efforts to improve or change the traditional roles
of women.
In reality, however, marriage and parenthood were still highly valued. Couples often married at
a young age and women tended to still be responsible for all housework. Women themselves
valued keeping a clean house, cooking homemade food from scratch without using prepared foods,
and caring for their families. Most young wives and mothers lived with their husbands’ families.
Traditionally, mothers of sons gained power and respect in the family from their married son and
daughter-in-law. In the past this relationship was sometimes described as a difficult one, with a
daughter-in-law having little say in family and household life. Some of that seemed to persist in
the 1980s. Women living with mothers-in-law did not have a great deal of freedom of choice and
had to prove themselves at home, leaving less time to think about progressing in education or
work.20
In an urban environment, however, housing was in short supply. If a family had two sons and
one was already married and still living with his natal family, the second son might live with the
wife’s family at marriage if that family had the space. In these situations, which were not
considered ideal but still were in the range of acceptable alternatives, young married women found
themselves living with their own mothers rather than a mother-in-law. A mother tended to make life
easier for her own daughter rather than insisting that she do quite so much household work.
Mothers and daughters were more often easy partners in a household. The mother-in-law of a
young man tended not to make his life difficult, but rather to regard him fondly. Women who
lived with their own families after marriage were more likely to be able to continue their education,
take promotions at work, make more of the opportunities that were provided under socialism.

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

In Croatia, government engineered policies alone did not produce changes in family patterns or
gender roles. It was a variety of factors, including economic pressures and housing shortages,
which combined to create an environment in which families changed. It became increasingly
common for couples to live with the wife’s family and eventually to live on their own. Today in
Croatia, women have a great deal of freedom of choice, are likely to live alone with their husbands
or, like in the United States, Canada, and European countries, to live with a partner outside of
marriage. Change occurs in family life when social and cultural conditions also change.

CONCLUSION
The institutions of the family and marriage are found in all societies and are part of cultural
understandings of the way the world should work. In all cultures there are variations that are
acceptable as well as situations in which people cannot quite meet the ideal. How people construct
families varies greatly from one society to another, but there are patterns across cultures that are
linked to economics, religion, and other cultural and environmental factors. The study of families
and marriage is an important part of anthropology because family and household groups play a
central role in defining relationships between people and making society function. While there is
nothing in biology that dictates that a family group be organized in a particular way, our cultural
expectations leads to ideas about families that seem “natural” to us. As cultures change over time,
ideas about family also adapt to new circumstances.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. Why is it important for anthropologists to understand the kinship, descent, and family
relationships that exist in the cultures they study? In what ways can family relationships
structure the lives of individuals?
2. Status and role define the position of people within the family as well as the behaviors they
are expected to perform. What are some of the statuses and roles found in families in your
community? How have these changed over time?
3. In this chapter, Gilliland describes several different patterns of family organization including
nuclear families, extended families, and joint families. While small nuclear families are common in
the United States, larger families are common in many other societies. What do you think are some
of the practical effects of both small and large families on everyday life?

GLOSSARY
Avunculocal: married individuals live with or near an uncle.
Bilateral descent: descent is recognized through both the father and the mother’s sides of the
family.
Bridewealth: payments made to the bride’s family by the groom’s family before marriage.
Clan: a group of people who have a general notion of common descent that is not attached to a
specific biological ancestor.
Descent groups: relationships that provide members with a sense of identity and social support
based on ties of shared ancestry.
Domestic group: a term that can be used to describe a group of people who live together even if
members do not consider themselves to be family.

Family and Marriage

19

Dowry: payments made to the groom’s family by the bride’s family before marriage.
Endogamy: a term describing expectations that individuals must marry within a particular group.
Exogamy: a term describing expectations that individuals must marry outside a particular group.
Extended family: a family of at least three-generations sharing a household.
Family: the smallest group of individuals who see themselves as connected to one another. Family of
orientation: the family in which an individual is raised.
Family of procreation: a new household formed for the purpose of conceiving and raising children.
Household: family members who reside together.
Joint family: a very large extended family that includes multiple generations.
Kinship: term used to describe culturally recognized ties between members of a family, the social
statuses used to define family members, and the expected behaviors associated with these statuses.
Kinship diagrams: charts used by anthropologists to visually represent relationships between
members of a kinship group.
Kinship system: the pattern of culturally recognized relationships between family members.
Kinship terminology: the terms used in a language to describe relatives.
Levirate: the practice of a woman marrying one of her deceased husband’s brothers.
Lineage: term used to describe any form of descent from a common ancestor.
Matriarchal: a society in which women have authority to make decisions.
Matrilineal descent: a kinship group created through the maternal line (mothers and their children).
Matrilocal residence: married individuals live with or near the wife’s mother’s family.
Neolocal residence: newly married individuals establish a household separate from other family
members.
Nuclear family: a parent or parents who are in a culturally-recognized relationship, such as marriage,
along with minor or dependent children.
Patrilateral cousin marriage: the practice of marrying a male or female cousin on the father’s side of
the family.
Patrilineal descent: a kinship group created through the paternal line (fathers and their children).
Patrilocal residence: married individuals live with or near the husband’s father’s family.
Polygamous: families based on plural marriages in which there are multiple wives or, in rarer cases,
multiple husbands.
Polyandry: marriages with one wife and multiple husbands.
Polygyny: marriages in which there is one husband and multiple wives.
Role: the set of behaviors expected of an individual who occupies a particular status.
Serial monogamy: marriage to a succession of spouses one after the other.
Sororate marriage: the practice of a man marrying the sister of his deceased wife.
Status: any culturally-designated position a person occupies in a particular setting.
Stem family: a version of an extended family that includes an older couple and one of their adult
children with a spouse (or spouses) and children.
Unilineal: descent is recognized through only one line or side of the family.

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Mary K. Gilliland, Ph.D. (also published as Mary K.
Gilliland Olsen) earned a B.A. from Bryn Mawr College, with
Honors in Anthropology; and M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in
anthropology from the University of California, San Diego. Her
primary research took place in the former Yugoslavia (1982–4,
1990–1), Croatia (1993, 1995, 1996–7) and with displaced
Bosnians, Croats and Serbs in the United States (2001–3). In
Croatia, Mary Kay was affiliated with the Filozofski Fakultet in
Zagreb, the Ethnographic Museum in Slavonski Brod (Croatia/
Yugoslavia), and with the Institute for Anthropological Research
(Zagreb, Croatia both pre- and post-independence).
She has a continuing affiliation as a member of the editorial board for the Collegium
Antropologicum: The Journal of the Institute for Anthropological Research, and was named a Lifetime
Member of the Croatian Anthropological Society. Mary Kay has also collaborated in projects in
Asia, including People’s Republic of China (primarily Xinjiang, Western China), Mongolia and
Vietnam. Her areas of research interest and publication include culture and social change, gender
and ethnic identity, family, marriage and intergenerational relationships. Primarily a “teaching
anthropologist,” Mary Kay was full-time faculty and Department Chair at Pima Community
College in Tucson, Arizona from 1989–2006. She maintains an ongoing relationship as Associate
Adjunct Professor of Anthropology at the University of Arizona. She has taught at San Diego
Mesa College, University of California, San Diego and the University of Zagreb. Since 2006 she
has held a variety of administrative positions including Academic Dean, Vice President of
Instruction and is currently Vice President of Academic Affairs at Central Arizona College.

Family and Marriage

21

NOTES
1. Lewis Henry Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family (Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1871).
2. Ralph Linton, The Study of Man (New York: D. Appleton-Century Company,1936).
3. In a patrilineal society, children are members of their father’s patrilineage. A mother belongs to her own father’s
patrilineage, while the children belong to their father’s patrilinage.
4. Kathleen Gough, “Variation in Matrilineal Systems,” in D. Schneider and K. Gough, eds., Matrilineal Kinship, Part 2
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1961). See also Kathleen Gough, The Traditional Kinship System of the Nayars
of Malabar (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1954).
5. See for example Merlin Myers, Households and Families of the Longhouse Iroquois at Six Nations Reserve (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 2006).
6. George P. Murdock, Social Structure (New York: MacMillan, 1949).
7. Vera St. Ehrlich, Family in Transition: A Study of 300 Yugoslav Villages. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1966.
See also Gilliland, M. 1986. The Maintenance of Family Values in a Yugoslav Town. Ann Arbor, Michigan: UMI
International.
8. Melford Spiro, Kinship and Marriage in Burma: A Cultural and Psychodynamic Analysis (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1977).
9. Laura Tubelle de González, “Modern Arranged Marriage in Mumbai” Teaching Anthropology: SACC Notes 19 (2015).
http://sacc-dev.americananthro.org/wp-content/uploads/TASN-191-192-spring-fall-20131.pdf.
10.
The one-child policy was introduced in 1979. It was phased out beginning in 2015 and was replaced by a two-child
policy.
11.
See Vera St. Ehrlich, Family in Transition: A Study of 300 Yugoslav Villages. Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1966.
12.
Luka Lukic, Varos: Zbornik za narodi zivot i obicaje juznih slavena. Jugoslavenska akademija znanosti i
umjetnosti. Zagreb. god. 24, str. 32.238, 1919.
13.
There are many news reports about this practice. See for instance Subodh Varnal, “Dowry Death: One Bride Burnt
Every Hour,” The Times of India, January 27, 2012 http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Dowry-death-One-brideburnt-every-hour/articleshow/11644691.cms
14.
Annette B. Weiner, The Trobrianders of Papua New Guinea (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1988).
15.
Reo Fortune, Sorcerers of Dobu (New York: E.P. Dutton and Co., 1932).
16.
See for instance Will Roscoe, Changing Ones: Third and Fourth Genders in Native North America (New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 1998).
17.
Martha Ward, Nest in the Wind: Adventures in Anthropology on a Tropical Island (Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press,
2005).
18.
Margery Wolf, Women and the Family in Rural Taiwan (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 1972).
19.
Ibid.
20.
Olsen, M. K. G., “Authority and Conflict in Slavonian Households: The Effects of Social Environment on IntraHousehold Processes” in The Household Economy: Reconsidering the Domestic Mode of Production, Richard Wilk, ed.,
149-170 (Colorado: Westview Press, 1989).

Race and Ethnicity
Justin D. García, Millersville University of Pennsylvania
jgarcia@millersville.edu

http://www.millersville.edu/socanth/faculty/GARCIA,%20Dr.%20Justin.php

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Define the term reification and explain
how the concept of race has been
reified throughout history.
• Explain why a biological basis for
human race categories does not
exist.
• Discuss what anthropologists mean
when they say that race is a socially
constructed concept and explain how
race has been socially constructed in
the United States and Brazil.
• Identify what is meant by racial
formation, hypodescent, and the onedrop rule.
• Describe how ethnicity is different
from race, how ethnic groups are
different from racial groups, and what
is meant by symbolic ethnicity and
pan-ethnicity.
• Summarize the history of immigration
to the United States, explaining how
different waves of immigrant groups
have been perceived as racially
different and have shifted popular
understandings of “race.”
• Analyze ways in which the racial and
ethnic compositions of professional
sports have shifted over time and how
those shifts resulted from changing
social and cultural circumstances that
drew new groups into sports.

Suppose someone asked you the following open-ended
questions: How would you define the word race as it applies
to groups of human beings? How many human races are
there and what are they? For each of the races you identify, what are the important or key criteria that distinguish
each group (what characteristics or features are unique to
each group that differentiate it from the others)? Discussions about race and racism are often highly emotional and
encompass a wide range of emotions, including discomfort,
fear, defensiveness, anger, and insecurity—why is this such
an emotional topic in society and why do you think it is so
difficult for individuals to discuss race dispassionately?
How would you respond to these questions? I pose these
thought-provoking questions to students enrolled in my
Introduction to Cultural Anthropology course just before
we begin the unit on race and ethnicity in a worksheet
and ask them to answer each question fully to the best of
their ability without doing any outside research. At the
next class, I assign the students to small groups of five to
eight depending on the size of the class and give them a
few minutes to share their responses to the questions with
one another. We then collectively discuss their responses as
a class. Their responses are often very interesting and quite
revealing and generate memorable classroom dialogues.

“DUDE, WHAT ARE YOU?!”
Ordinarily, students select a college major or minor by
carefully considering their personal interests, particular subjects that pique their curiosity, and fields they feel would be
a good basis for future professional careers. Technically, my
decision to major in anthropology and later earn a master’s
degree and doctorate in anthropology was mine alone, but I
tell my friends and students, only partly as a joke, that my
choice of major was made for me to some degree by people
I encountered as a child, teenager, and young adult. Since
middle school, I had noticed that many people—complete
strangers, classmates, coworkers, and friends—seemed to
find my physical appearance confusing or abnormal, often
leading them to ask me questions like “What are you?” and

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

“What’s your race?” Others simply assumed my heritage as if it was self-evident and easily defined
and then interacted with me according to their conclusions.
These subjective determinations varied
wildly from person to person and from
situation to situation. I distinctly recall, for
example, an incident in a souvenir shop at
the beach in Ocean City, Maryland, shortly
after I graduated from high school. A middleaged merchant attempted to persuade me
to purchase a T-shirt that boldly declared
“100% Italian . . . and Proud of It!” with
bubbled letters that spelled “Italian” shaded
green, white, and red. Despite my repeated
efforts to convince the merchant that I was
not of Italian ethnic heritage, he refused to
believe me. On another occasion during
my mid-twenties while I was studying for
my doctoral degree at Temple University,
I was walking down Diamond Street in
North Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, passing
through a predominantly African American
neighborhood. As I passed a group of six male
teenagers socializing on the steps of a row
house, one of them shouted “Hey, honky!
What are you doing in this neighborhood?”
Somewhat startled at being labeled a “honky,”
(something I had never been called before), I
looked at the group and erupted in laughter,
which produced looks of surprise and
disbelief in return. As I proceeded to walk a few more blocks and reached the predominantly Puerto
Rican neighborhood of Lower Kensington, three young women flirtatiously addressed me as papí (an
affectionate Spanish slang term for man). My transformation from “honky” to “papí” in a span of
ten minutes spoke volumes about my life history and social experiences—and sparked my interest in
cultural and physical anthropology.
Throughout my life, my physical appearance has provided me with countless unique and
memorable experiences that have emphasized the significance of race and ethnicity as socially
constructed concepts in America and other societies. My fascination with this subject is therefore
both personal and professional; a lifetime of questions and assumptions from others regarding my
racial and ethnic background have cultivated my interest in these topics. I noticed that my perceived
race or ethnicity, much like beauty, rested in the eye of the beholder as individuals in different
regions of the country (and outside of the United States) often perceived me as having different
specific heritages. For example, as a teenager living in York County, Pennsylvania, senior citizens
and middle-aged individuals usually assumed I was “white,” while younger residents often saw me
as “Puerto Rican” or generically “Hispanic” or “Latino.” When I lived in Philadelphia, locals mostly
assumed I was “Italian American,” but many Puerto Ricans, Mexicans, and Dominicans, in the City
of Brotherly Love often took me for either “Puerto Rican” or “Cuban.”

Race and Ethnicity

3

My experiences in the southwest were a different matter altogether. During my time in Texas, New
Mexico, and Colorado, local residents—regardless of their respective heritages—commonly assumed
I was of Mexican descent. At times, local Mexican Americans addressed me as carnal (pronounced
CAR-nahl), a term often used to imply a strong sense of community among Mexican American
men that is somewhat akin to frequent use of the label “brother” among African American men.
On more occasions than I can count, people assumed that I spoke Spanish. Once, in Los Angeles,
someone from the Spanish-language television network Univisión attempted to interview me about
my thoughts on an immigration bill pending in the California legislature. My West Coast friends
and professional colleagues were surprised to hear that I was usually assumed to be Puerto Rican,
Italian, or simply “white” on the East Coast, and one of my closest friends from graduate school—a
Mexican American woman from northern California—once memorably stated that she would not
“even assume” that I was “half white.”
I have a rather ambiguous physical appearance—a shaved head, brown eyes, and a black mustache
and goatee. Depending on who one asks, I have either a “pasty white” or “somewhat olive” complexion,
and my last name is often the single biggest factor that leads people on the East Coast to conclude
that I am Puerto Rican. My experiences are examples of what sociologists Michael Omi and Howard
Winant (1986) referred to as “racial commonsense”—a deeply entrenched social belief that another
person’s racial or ethnic background is obvious and easily determined from brief glances and can be
used to predict a person’s culture, behavior, and personality. Reality, of course, is far more complex.
One’s racial or ethnic background cannot necessarily be accurately determined based on physical
appearance alone, and an individual’s “race” does not necessarily determine his or her “culture,”
which in turn does not determine “personality.” Yet, these perceptions remain.

IS ANTHROPOLOGY THE “SCIENCE OF RACE?”
Anthropology was sometimes referred to as the “science of race” during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries when physical anthropologists sought a biological basis for categorizing humans
into racial types.1 Since World War II, important research by anthropologists has revealed that racial
categories are socially and culturally defined concepts and that racial labels and their definitions vary
widely around the world. In other words, different countries have different racial categories, and
different ways of classifying their citizens into these categories.2 At the same time, significant genetic
studies conducted by physical anthropologists since the 1970s have revealed that biologically distinct
human races do not exist. Certainly, humans vary in terms of physical and genetic characteristics
such as skin color, hair texture, and eye shape, but those variations cannot be used as criteria to biologically classify racial groups with scientific accuracy. Let us turn our attention to understanding
why humans cannot be scientifically divided into biologically distinct races.

Race: A Discredited Concept in Human Biology
At some point in your life, you have probably been asked to identify your race on a college form,
job application, government or military form, or some other official document. And most likely,
you were required to select from a list of choices rather than given the ability to respond freely.
The frequency with which we are exposed to four or five common racial labels—“white,” “black,”
“Caucasian,” and “Asian,” for example—tends to promote the illusion that racial categories are
natural, objective, and evident divisions. After all, if Justin Timberlake, Jay-Z, and Jackie Chan stood

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

side by side, those common racial labels might seem to make sense. What could be more objective,
more conclusive, than this evidence before our very eyes? By this point, you might be thinking that
anthropologists have gone completely insane in denying biological human races!
Physical anthropologists have identified several important concepts regarding the true nature of
humans’ physical, genetic, and biological variation that have discredited race as a biological concept.
Many of the issues presented in this section are discussed in further detail in Race: Are We So Different, a website created by the American Anthropological Association. The American Anthropological
Association (AAA) launched the website to educate the public about the true nature of human biological and cultural variation and challenge common misperceptions about race. This is an important
endeavor because race is a complicated, often emotionally charged topic, leading many people to rely
on their personal opinions and hearsay when drawing conclusions about people who are different
from them. The website is highly interactive, featuring multimedia illustrations and online quizzes
designed to increase visitors’ knowledge of human variation. I encourage you to explore the website
as you will likely find answers to several of the questions you may still be asking after reading this
chapter.3
Before explaining why distinct biological races do not exist among humans, I must point out
that one of the biggest reasons so many people continue to believe in the existence of biological
human races is that the idea has been intensively reified in literature, the media, and culture for
more than three hundred years. Reification refers to the process in which an inaccurate concept or
idea is so heavily promoted and circulated among people that it begins to take on a life of its own.
Over centuries, the notion of biological human races became engrained—unquestioned, accepted,
and regarded as a concrete “truth.” Studies of human physical and cultural variation from a scientific
and anthropological perspective have allowed us to move beyond reified thinking and toward an
improved understanding of the true complexity of human diversity.
The reification of race has a long history. Especially during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
philosophers and scholars attempted to identify various human races. They perceived “races” as
specific divisions of humans who shared certain physical and biological features that distinguished
them from other groups of humans. This historic notion of race may seem clear-cut and innocent
enough, but it quickly led to problems as social theorists attempted to classify people by race. One
of the most basic difficulties was the actual number of human races: how many were there, who were
they, and what grounds distinguished them? Despite more than three centuries of such effort, no
clear-cut scientific consensus was established for a precise number of human races.
One of the earliest and most influential attempts at producing a racial classification system came
from Swedish botanist Carolus Linnaeus, who argued in Systema Naturae (1735) for the existence of
four human races: Americanus (Native American / American Indian), Europaeus (European), Asiaticus
(East Asian), and Africanus (African). These categories correspond with common racial labels used in
the United States for census and demographic purposes today. However, in 1795, German physician
and anthropologist Johann Blumenbach suggested that there were five races, which he labeled as
Caucasian (white), Mongolian (yellow or East Asian), Ethiopian (black or African), American (red or
American Indian), Malayan (brown or Pacific Islander). Importantly, Blumenbach listed the races
in this exact order, which he believed reflected their natural historical descent from the “primeval”
Caucasian original to “extreme varieties.”4 Although he was a committed abolitionist, Blumenbach
nevertheless felt that his “Caucasian” race (named after the Caucasus Mountains of Central Asia,
where he believed humans had originated) represented the original variety of humankind from which
the other races had degenerated.

Race and Ethnicity

5

By the early twentieth century, many social philosophers and scholars had accepted
the idea of three human races: the so-called
Caucasoid, Negroid, and Mongoloid groups
that corresponded with regions of Europe,
sub-Saharan Africa, and East Asia, respectively. However, the three-race theory faced
serious criticism given that numerous peoples
from several geographic regions were omitted
from the classification, including Australian
Aborigines, Asian Indians, American Indians,
and inhabitants of the South Pacific Islands.
Those groups could not be easily pigeonholed
into racial categories regardless of how loosely
the categories were defined. Australian Aborigines, for example, often have dark complexions (a trait they appeared to share with
Africans) but reddish or blondish hair (a trait
shared with northern Europeans). Likewise,
many Indians living on the Asian subcontinent have complexions that are as dark or
darker than those of many Africans and African Americans. Because of these seeming
contradictions, some academics began to
argue in favor of larger numbers of human
races—five, nine, twenty, sixty, and more.5
During the 1920s and 1930s, some scholars asserted that Europeans were comprised of
more than one “white” or “Caucasian” race:
Nordic, Alpine, and Mediterranean (named
for the geographic regions of Europe from
which they descended). These European races, they alleged, exhibited obvious physical traits that
distinguished them from one another and thus served as racial boundaries. For example, “Nordics”
were said to consist of peoples of Northern Europe—Scandinavia, the British Isles, and Northern
Germany—while “Alpines” came from the Alps Mountains of Central Europe and included French,
Swiss, Northern Italians, and Southern Germans. People from southern Europe—including Portuguese, Spanish, Southern Italians, Sicilians, Greeks, and Albanians—comprised the “Mediterranean”
race. Most Americans today would find this racial classification system bizarre, but its proponents
argued for it on the basis that one would observe striking physical differences between a Swede or
Norwegian and a Sicilian. Similar efforts were made to “carve up” the populations of Africa and Asia
into geographically local, specific races.6
The fundamental point here is that any effort to classify human populations into racial categories
is inherently arbitrary and subjective rather than scientific and objective. These racial classification
schemes simply reflected their proponents’ desires to “slice the pie” of human physical variation
according to the particular trait(s) they preferred to establish as the major, defining criteria of their

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

classification system. Two major types of “race classifiers” have emerged over the past 300 years:
lumpers and splitters. Lumpers have classified races by large geographic tracts (often continents)
and produced a small number of broad, general racial categories, as reflected in Linnaeus’s original
classification scheme and later three-race theories. Splitters have subdivided continent-wide racial
categories into specific, more localized regional races and attempted to devise more “precise” racial
labels for these specific groups, such as the three European races described earlier. Consequently,
splitters have tried to identify many more human races than lumpers.
Racial labels, whether from a lumper or a splitter model, clearly attempt to identify and describe
something. So why do these racial labels not accurately describe human physical and biological
variation? To understand why, we must keep in mind that racial labels are distinct, discrete categories
while human physical and biological variations (such as skin color, hair color and texture, eye color,
height, nose shape, and distribution of blood types) are continuous rather than discrete.
Physical anthropologists use
the term cline to refer to differences in the traits that occur in
populations across a geographical area. In a cline, a trait may
be more common in one geographical area than another, but
the variation is gradual and continuous with no sharp breaks.
A prominent example of clinal
variation among humans is skin
color. Think of it this way: Do all
“white” persons who you know
actually share the same skin
complexion? Likewise, do all “black” persons who you know share an identical skin complexion? The
answer, obviously, is no, since human skin color does not occur in just 3, 5, or even 50 shades. The
reality is that human skin color, as a continuous trait, exists as a spectrum from very light to very dark
with every possible hue, shade, and tone in between.
Imagine two people—one from Sweden and one from Nigeria—standing side by side. If we
looked only at those two individuals and ignored people who inhabit the regions between Sweden
and Nigeria, it would be easy to reach the faulty conclusion that they represented two distinct human
racial groups, one light (“white”) and one dark (“black”). 7 However, if we walked from Nigeria to
Sweden, we would gain a fuller understanding of human skin color because we would see that skin
color generally became gradually lighter the further north we traveled from the equator. At no point
during this imaginary walk would we reach a point at which the people abruptly changed skin color.
As physical anthropologists such as John Relethford (2004) and C. Loring Brace (2005) have noted,
the average range of skin color gradually changes over geographic space. North Africans are generally
lighter-skinned than Central Africans, and southern Europeans are generally lighter-skinned than
North Africans. In turn, northern Italians are generally lighter-skinned than Sicilians, and the Irish,
Danes, and Swedes are generally lighter-skinned than northern Italians and Hungarians. Thus,
human skin color cannot be used as a definitive marker of racial boundaries.
There are a few notable exceptions to this general rule of lighter-complexioned people inhabiting
northern latitudes. The Chukchi of Eastern Siberia and Inuits of Alaska, Canada, and Greenland have

Race and Ethnicity

7

darker skin than other Eurasian people living at similar latitudes, such as Scandinavians. Physical
anthropologists have explained this exception in terms of the distinct dietary customs of indigenous
Arctic groups, which have traditionally been based on certain native meats and fish that are rich in
Vitamin D (polar bears, whales, seals, and trout).
What does Vitamin D have to do with skin color? The answer is intriguing! Dark skin blocks most
of the sun’s dangerous ultraviolet rays, which is advantageous in tropical environments where sunlight
is most intense. Exposure to high levels of ultraviolent radiation can damage skin cells, causing cancer,
and also destroy the body’s supply of folate, a nutrient essential for reproduction. Folate deficiency
in women can cause severe birth defects in their babies. Melanin, the pigment produced in skin
cells, acts as a natural sunblock, protecting skin cells from damage, and preventing the breakdown
of folate. However, exposure to sunlight has an important positive health effect: stimulating the
production of vitamin D. Vitamin D is essential for the health of bones and the immune system. In
areas where ultraviolent radiation is strong, there is no problem producing enough Vitamin D, even
as darker skin filters ultraviolet radiation.8
In environments where the sun’s rays are much less intense, a different problem occurs: not enough
sunlight penetrates the skin to enable the production of Vitamin D. Over the course of human
evolution, natural selection favored the evolution of lighter skin as humans migrated and settled
farther from the equator to ensure that weaker rays of sunlight could adequately penetrate our skin.
The diet of indigenous populations of the Arctic region provided sufficient amounts of Vitamin D
to ensure their health. This reduced the selective pressure toward the evolution of lighter skin among
the Inuit and the Chukchi. Physical anthropologist Nina Jablonski (2012) has also noted that natural
selection could have favored darker skin in Arctic regions because high levels of ultraviolet radiation
from the sun are reflected from snow and ice during the summer months.
Still, many people in the United States remain convinced that biologically distinct human races
exist and are easy to identify, declaring that they can walk down any street in the United States and
easily determine who is “white” and who is “black.” The United States was populated historically by
immigrants from a small number of world regions who did not reflect the full spectrum of human
physical variation. The earliest settlers in the North American colonies overwhelmingly came from
Northern Europe (particularly, Britain, France, Germany, and Ireland), regions where skin colors
tend to be among the lightest in the world. Slaves brought to the United States during the colonial
period came largely from the western coast of Central Africa, a region where skin color tends to be
among the darkest in the world. Consequently, when we look at today’s descendants of these groups,
we are not looking at accurate, proportional representations of the total range of human skin color;
instead, we are looking, in effect, at opposite ends of a spectrum, where striking differences are
inevitable. More recent waves of immigrants who have come to the United States from other world
regions have brought a wider range of skin colors, shaping a continuum of skin color that defies
classification into a few simple categories.
Physical anthropologists have also found that there are no specific genetic traits that are exclusive
to a “racial” group. For the concept of human races to have biological significance, an analysis of
multiple genetic traits would have to consistently produce the same racial classifications. In other
words, a racial classification scheme for skin color would also have to reflect classifications by blood
type, hair texture, eye shape, lactose intolerance, and other traits often mistakenly assumed to be
“racial” characteristics. An analysis based on any one of those characteristics individually would
produce a unique set of racial categories because variations in human physical and genetic are
nonconcordant. Each trait is inherited independently, not “bundled together” with other traits and

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

inherited as a package. There is no correlation between skin color and other characteristics such as
blood type and lactose intolerance.
A prominent example of nonconcordance is sickle-cell anemia, which people often mistakenly
think of as a disease that only affects Africans, African Americans, and “black” persons. In fact, the
sickle-cell allele (the version of the gene that causes sickle-cell anemia when a person inherits two
copies) is relatively common among people whose ancestors are from regions where a certain strain
of malaria, Plasmodium falciparum, is prevalent, namely Central and Western Africa and parts of
Mediterranean Europe, the Arabian peninsula, and India. The sickle-cell trait thus is not exclusively
African or “black.” The erroneous perceptions are relatedly primarily to the fact that the ancestors
of U.S. African Americans came predominantly from Western Africa, where the sickle-cell gene is
prevalent, and are therefore more recognizable than populations of other ancestries and regions where
the sickle-cell gene is common, such as southern Europe and Arabia.9
Another trait commonly mistaken as defining race is the epicanthic eye fold typically associated
with people of East Asian ancestry. The epicanthic eye fold at the outer corner of the eyelid produces
the eye shape that people in the United States typically associate with people from China and Japan,
but is also common in people from Central Asia, parts of Eastern Europe and Scandinavia, some
American Indian groups, and the Khoi San of southern Africa.
In college, I took a course titled “Nutrition” because I thought it would be an easy
way to boost my grade point average. The
professor of the class, an authoritarian man
in his late 60s or early 70s, routinely declared
that “Asians can’t drink milk!” When this assertion was challenged by various students,
including a woman who claimed that her
best friend was Korean and drank milk and
ate ice cream all the time, the professor only
became more strident, doubling down on his
dairy diatribe and defiantly vowing that he
would not “ignore the facts” for “purposes of
political correctness.” However, it is scientific
accuracy, not political correctness, we should
be concerned about, and lactose tolerance is a complex topic. Lactose is a sugar that is naturally
present in milk and dairy products, and an enzyme, lactase, breaks it down into two simpler sugars
that can be digested by the body. Ordinarily, humans (and other mammals) stop producing lactase
after infancy, and approximately 75 percent of humans are thus lactose intolerant and cannot naturally digest milk. Lactose intolerance is a natural, normal condition. However, some people continue
to produce lactase into adulthood and can naturally digest milk and dairy products. This lactose
persistence developed through natural selection, primarily among people in regions that had long
histories of dairy farming (including the Middle East, Northern Europe, Eastern Europe, East Africa,
and Northern India). In other areas and for some groups of people, dairy products were introduced
relatively recently (such as East Asia, Southern Europe, and Western and Southern Africa and among
Australian Aborigines and American Indians) and lactose persistence has not developed yet.10
The idea of biological human races emphasizes differences, both real and perceived, between groups
and ignores or overlooks differences within groups. The biological differences between “whites” and

Race and Ethnicity

9

“blacks” and between “blacks” and “Asians” are assumed to be greater than the biological differences
among “whites” and among “blacks.” The opposite is actually true; the overwhelming majority of
genetic diversity in humans (88–92 percent) is found within people who live on the same continent.11
Also, keep in mind that human beings are one of the most genetically similar of all species. There is
nearly six times more genetic variation among white-tailed deer in the southern United States than
in all humans! Consider our closest living relative, the chimpanzee. Chimpanzees’ natural habitat is
confined to central Africa and parts of western Africa, yet four genetically distinct groups occupy
those regions and they are far more genetically distinct than humans who live on different continents.
That humans exhibit such a low level of genetic variation compared to other species reflects the fact
that we are a relatively recent species; modern humans (Homo sapiens) first appeared in East Africa
just under 200,000 years ago.12
Physical anthropologists today analyze human biological variation by examining specific genetic
traits to understand how those traits originated and evolved over time and why some genetic traits are
more common in certain populations. Since much of our biological diversity occurs mostly within
(rather than between) continental regions once believed to be the homelands of distinct races, the
concept of race is meaningless in any study of human biology. Franz Boas, considered the father
of modern U.S. anthropology, was the first prominent anthropologist to challenge racial thinking
directly during the early twentieth century. A professor of anthropology at Columbia University in
New York City and a Jewish immigrant from Germany, Boas established anthropology in the United
States as a four-field academic discipline consisting of archaeology, physical/biological anthropology,
cultural anthropology, and linguistics. His approach challenged conventional thinking at the time
that humans could be separated into biological races endowed with unique intellectual, moral, and
physical abilities.
In one of his most famous studies, Boas challenged craniometrics, in which the size and shape
of skulls of various groups were measured as a way of assigning relative intelligence and moral
behavior. Boas noted that the size and shape of the skull were not fixed characteristics within groups
and were instead influenced by the environment. Children born in the United States to parents of
various immigrant groups, for example, had slightly different average skull shapes than children
born and raised in the homelands of those immigrant groups. The differences reflected relative access
to nutrition and other socio-economic dimensions. In his famous 1909 essay “Race Problems in
America,” Boas challenged the commonly held idea that immigrants to the United States from Italy,
Poland, Russia, Greece, the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and other southern and eastern European
nations were a threat to America’s “racial purity.” He pointed out that the British, Germans, and
Scandinavians (popularly believed at the time to be the “true white” heritages that gave the United
States its superior qualities) were not themselves “racially pure.” Instead, many different tribal and
cultural groups had intermixed over the centuries. 13 In fact, Boas asserted, the notion of “racial
purity” was utter nonsense. As present-day anthropologist Jonathan Marks (1994) noted, “You may
group humans into a small number of races if you want to, but you are denied biology as a support
for it.”14

Race as a Social Concept
Just because the idea of distinct biological human races is not a valid scientific concept does not
mean, and should not be interpreted as implying, that “there is no such thing as race” or that “race
isn’t real.” Race is indeed real but it is a concept based on arbitrary social and cultural definitions

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

rather than biology or science. Thus, racial categories such as “white” and “black” are as real as
categories of “American” and “African.” Many things in the world are real but are not biological. So,
while race does not reflect biological characteristics, it reflects socially constructed concepts defined
subjectively by societies to reflect notions of division that are perceived to be significant. Some
sociologists and anthropologists now use the term social races instead, seeking to emphasize their
cultural and arbitrary roots.
Race is most accurately thought of as a socio-historical concept. Michael Omi and Howard
Winant noted that “Racial categories and the meaning of race are given concrete expression by
the specific social relations and historical context in which they are embedded.”15 In other words,
racial labels ultimately reflect a society’s social attitudes and cultural beliefs regarding notions of
group differences. And since racial categories are culturally defined, they can vary from one society
to another as well as change over time within a society. Omi and Winant referred to this as racial
formation—“the process by which social, economic, and political forces determine the content and
importance of racial categories.”16
The process of racial formation is vividly illustrated by the idea of “whiteness” in the United States.
Over the course of U.S. history, the concept of “whiteness” expanded to include various immigrant
groups that once were targets of racist beliefs and discrimination. In the mid 1800s, for example, Irish
Catholic immigrants faced intense hostility from America’s Anglo-Protestant mainstream society, and
anti-Irish politicians and journalists depicted the Irish as racially different and inferior. Newspaper
cartoons frequently portrayed Irish Catholics in apelike fashion: overweight, knuckle dragging, and
brutish. In the early twentieth century, Italian and Jewish immigrants were typically perceived as
racially distinct from America’s Anglo-Protestant “white” majority as well. They were said to belong
to the inferior “Mediterranean” and “Jewish” races. Today, Irish, Italian, and Jewish Americans are
fully considered “white,” and many people find it hard to believe that they once were perceived
otherwise. Racial categories as an aspect of culture are typically learned, internalized, and accepted
without question or critical thought in a process not so different from children learning their native
language as they grow up.
A primary contributor to expansion of the definition of “whiteness” in the United States was the
rise of many members of those immigrant groups in social status after World War II.17 Hundreds
of suburban housing developments were constructed on the edge of the nation’s major cities during
the 1940s and 1950s to accommodate returning soldiers, the Serviceman’s Readjustment Act of
1944 offered a series of benefits for military veterans, including free college education or technical
training and cost-of-living stipends funded by the federal government for veterans pursuing higher
education. In addition, veterans could obtain guaranteed low-interest loans for homes and for
starting their own farms or businesses. The act was in effect from 1944 through 1956 and was
theoretically available to all military veterans who served at least four months in uniform and were
honorably discharged, but the legislation did not contain anti-discrimination provisions and most
African American veterans were denied benefits because private banks refused to provide the loans
and restrictive language by homeowners’ associations prohibited sales of homes to nonwhites. The
male children and grandchildren of European immigrant groups benefited tremendously from the
act. They were able to obtain college educations, formerly available only to the affluent, at no cost,
leading to professional white-collar careers, and to purchase low-cost suburban homes that increased
substantially in value over time. The act has been credited, more than anything else, with creating
the modern middle class of U.S. society and transforming the majority of “white” Americans from
renters into homeowners.18 As the children of Irish, Jewish, Italian, Greek, Anglo-Saxon, and Eastern

Race and Ethnicity

11

European parents grew up together in the suburbs, formed friendships, and dated and married one
another, the old social boundaries that defined “whiteness” were redefined.19
Race is a socially constructed concept but it is not a trivial matter. On the contrary, one’s race
often has a dramatic impact on everyday life. In the United States, for example, people often use
race—their personal understanding of race—to predict “who” a person is and “what” a person is like
in terms of personality, behavior, and other qualities. Because of this tendency to characterize others
and make assumptions about them, people can be uncomfortable or defensive when they mistake
someone’s background or cannot easily determine “what” someone is, as revealed in statements such
as “You don’t look black!” or “You talk like a white person. Such statements reveal fixed notions about
“blackness” and “whiteness” and what members of each race will be like, reflecting their socially
constructed and seemingly “common sense” understanding of the world.
Since the 1990s, scholars and anti-racism activists have discussed “white privilege” as a basic feature
of race as a lived experience in the United States. Peggy McIntosh coined the term in a famous 1988
essay, “White Privilege: Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack,” in which she identified more than two
dozen accumulated unearned benefits and advantages associated with being a “white” person in the
United States. The benefits ranged from relatively minor things, such as knowing that “flesh color”
Band-Aids would match her skin, to major determinants of life experiences and opportunities, such
as being assured that she would never be asked to speak on behalf of her entire race, being able to
curse and get angry in public without others assuming she was acting that way because of her race,
and not having to teach her children that police officers and the general public would view them as
suspicious or criminal because of their race. In 2015, MTV aired a documentary on white privilege,
simply titled White People, to raise awareness of this issue among Millennials. In the documentary,
young “white” Americans from various geographic, social, and class backgrounds discussed their
experiences with race.
White privilege has gained significant attention and is an important tool for understanding how
race is often connected to everyday experiences and opportunities, but we must remember that
no group is homogenous or monolithic. “White” persons receive varying degrees of privilege and
social advantage, and other important characteristics, such as social class, gender, sexual orientation,
and (dis)ability, shape individuals’ overall lives and how they experience society. John Hartigan,
an urban anthropologist, has written extensively about these characteristics. His Racial Situations:
Class Predicaments of Whiteness in Detroit (1999) discusses the lives of “white” residents in three
neighborhoods in Detroit, Michigan, that vary significantly socio-economically—one impoverished,
one working class, and one upper middle class. Hartigan reveals that social class has played a major
role in shaping strikingly different identities among these “white” residents and how, accordingly,
social relations between “whites” and “blacks” in the neighborhoods vary from camaraderie and
companionship to conflict.

RACE IN THREE NATIONS: THE UNITED STATES, BRAZIL,
AND JAPAN
To better understand how race is constructed around the world, consider how the United States,
Brazil, and Japan define racial categories. In the United States, race has traditionally been rigidly
constructed, and Americans have long perceived racial categories as discrete and mutually exclusive: a person who had one “black” parent and one “white” parent was seen simply as “black.” The
institution of slavery played a major role in defining how the United States has classified people by

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

race through the one-drop rule, which required that any trace of known or recorded non-European
(“non-white”) ancestry was used to automatically exclude a person from being classified as “white.”
Someone with one “black” grandparent and three “white” grandparents or one “black” great-grandparent and seven “white” great-grandparents was classified under the one-drop rule simply as “black.”
The original purpose of the one-drop rule was to ensure that children born from sexual unions (some
consensual but many forced) between slave-owner fathers and enslaved women would be born into
slave status.20
Consider President Barack Obama. Obama is of biracial heritage; his mother was “white” of
Euro-American descent and his father was a “black” man from Kenya. The media often refer to
Obama simply as “black” or “African American,” such as when he is referred to as the nation’s “first
black President,” and never refer to him as “white.”21 Whiteness in the United States has long been
understood and legally defined as implying “racial purity” despite the biological absurdity of the
notion, and to be considered “white,” one could have no known ancestors of black, American Indian,
Asian, or other “non-white” backgrounds. Cultural anthropologists also refer to the one-drop rule
as hypodescent, a term coined by anthropologist Marvin Harris in the 1960s to refer to a socially
constructed racial classification system in which a person of mixed racial heritage is automatically
categorized as a member of the less (or least) privileged group.22
Another example is birth certificates issued by U.S. hospitals, which, until relatively recently, used
a precise formula to determine the appropriate racial classification for a newborn. If one parent was
“white” and the other was “non-white,” the child was classified as the race of the “non-white” parent;
if neither parent was “white,” the child was classified as the race of the father.
Not until very recently have the United States government, the media, and pop culture begun
to officially acknowledge and embrace biracial and multiracial individuals. The 2000 census was
the first to allow respondents to identify as more than one race. Currently, a grassroots movement
that is expanding across the United States, led by organizations such as Project RACE (Reclassify
All Children Equally) and Swirl, seeks to raise public awareness of biracial and multiracial people
who sometimes still experience social prejudice for being of mixed race and/or resentment from
peers who disapprove of their decision to identify with all of their backgrounds instead of just one.
Prominent biracial and multiracial celebrities such as Tiger Woods, Alicia Keys, Mariah Carey,
Beyoncé Knowles, Bruno Mars, and Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson and the election of Barack Obama
have also prompted people in the United States to reconsider the problematic nature of rigid, discrete
racial categories.
In 1977, the U.S. government established five official racial categories under Office of Management
and Budget (OMB) Directive 15 that provided a basis for recordkeeping and compiling of statistical
information to facilitate collection of demographic information by the Census Bureau and to ensure
compliance with federal civil rights legislation and work-place anti-discrimination policies. Those
categories and their definitions, which are still used today, are (a) “White: a person having origins in any
of the original peoples of Europe, North Africa, or the Middle East;” (b) “Black or African American:
a person having origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa;” (c) “American Indian or Alaskan
Native: a person having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America (including
Central America), and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment;” (d) “Asian: a
person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, or the Indian
subcontinent;” and (e) “Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander: a person having origins in any of
the original peoples of Hawaii, Guam, Samoa, or the Pacific Islands.” In addition, OMB Directive
15 established Hispanic or Latino as a separate ethnic (not racial) category; on official documents,

Race and Ethnicity

13

individuals are asked to identify their racial background and whether they are of Hispanic/Latino
ethnic heritage. The official definition of Hispanic or Latino is “a person of Mexican, Puerto Rican,
Cuban, South or Central American, or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race.”
OMB Directive 15’s terminology and definitions have generated considerable criticism and
controversy. The complex fundamental question is whether such categories are practical and
actually reflect how individuals choose to self-identify. Terms such as “non-Hispanic white” and
“Black Hispanic,” both a result of the directive, are baffling to many people in the United States
who perceive Hispanics/Latinos as a separate group from whites and blacks. Others oppose any
governmental attempt to classify people by race, on both liberal and conservative political grounds.
In 1997, the American Anthropological Association unsuccessfully advocated for a cessation of
federal efforts to coercively classify Americans by race, arguing instead that individuals should be
given the opportunity to identify their ethnic and/or national heritages (such as their country or
countries of ancestry).
Brazil’s concept of race is much more fluid, flexible, and multifaceted. The differences between
Brazil and the United States are particularly striking because the countries have similar histories.
Both nations were born of European colonialism in the New World, established major plantation
economies that relied on large numbers of African slaves, and subsequently experienced large waves of
immigration from around the world (particularly Europe) following the abolition of slavery. Despite
those similarities, significant contrasts in how race is perceived in these two societies persist, which is
sometimes summarized in the expression “The United States has a color line, while Brazil has a color
continuum.”23 In Brazil, races are typically viewed as points on a continuum in which one gradually
blends into another; “white” and “black” are opposite ends of a continuum that incorporates many
intermediate color-based racial labels that have no equivalent in the United States.
The Brazilian term for these categories, which correspond to the concept of race in the United
States, is tipos, which directly translates into Portuguese as “types.”24 Rather than describing what is
believed to be a person’s biological or genetic ancestry, tipos describe slight but noticeable differences
in physical appearance. Examples include loura, a person with a very fair complexion, straight blonde
hair, and blue or green eyes; sarará, a light-complexioned person with tightly curled blondish or
reddish hair, blue or green eyes, a wide nose, and thick lips; and cabo verde, an individual with dark
skin, brown eyes, straight black hair, a narrow nose, and thin lips. Sociologists and anthropologists
have identified more than 125 tipos in Brazil, and small villages of only 500 people may feature 40
or more depending on how residents describe one another. Some of the labels vary from region to
region, reflecting local cultural differences.
Since Brazilians perceive race based on phenotypes or outward physical appearance rather than
as an extension of geographically based biological and genetic descent, individual members of a
family can be seen as different tipos. This may seem bewildering to those who think of race as a fixed
identity inherited from one’s parents even though it is generally acknowledged that family members
often have different physical features, such as sisters who have strikingly different eye colors, hair
colors, and/or complexions. In Brazil, those differences are frequently viewed as significant enough to
assign different tipos. Cultural anthropologist Conrad Phillip Kottak, who conducted ethnographic
fieldwork in Brazil, noted that something as minor as a suntan or sunburn could lead to a person
temporarily being described as a different tipo until the effects of the tanning or burning wore off.25
Another major difference in the construction of race in the United States and Brazil is the more
fluid and flexible nature of race in Brazil, which is reflected in a popular Brazilian saying: “Money
whitens.” As darker-complexioned individuals increase their social class status (by, for example,

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

graduating from college and obtaining high-salaried, professional positions), they generally come
to be seen as a somewhat lighter tipo and light-complexioned individuals who become poorer may
be viewed as a slightly darker tipo. In the United States, social class has no bearing on one’s racial
designation; a non-white person who achieves upward social mobility and accrues greater education
and wealth may be seen by some as more “socially desirable” because of social class but does not
change racial classification.
Brazil’s Institute of Geography and Statistics established five official racial categories in 1940 to
facilitate collection of demographic information that are still in use today: branco (white), prêto
(black), pardo (brown), amarelo (yellow), and indígena (indigenous). These racial categories are
similar to the ones established in the United States under OMB Directive 15 and to Linnaeus’
proposed taxonomy in the 18th century. Pardo is unique to Brazil and denotes a person of both
branco and prêto heritage. Many Brazilians object to these government categories and prefer tipos.
The more fluid construction of race in Brazil is accompanied by generally less hostile, more benign
social interactions between people of different colors and complexions, which has contributed to
Brazil being seen as a “racial paradise” and a “racial democracy” rainbow nation free of the harsh
prejudices and societal discrimination that has characterized other multiracial nations such as the
United States and South Africa.26 The “racial democracy” image has long been embraced by the
government and elites in Brazil as a way to provide the country with a distinct identity in the
international community. However, scholars in Brazil and the United States have questioned the
extent to which racial equality exists in Brazil despite the appearance of interracial congeniality on the
surface. Many light-complexioned Brazilians reject the idea that racial discrimination and inequalities
persist and regard such claims as divisive while Afro-Brazilians have drawn attention to these
inequalities in recent years.
Though Afro-Brazilians comprise
approximately half of the country’s
population, they have historically accounted for less than 2 percent of all
university students, and severe economic disparities between tipos remain
prominent in Brazil to this day.27 The
majority of the country’s Afro-Brazilians lives in the less-affluent northern
region, site of the original sugar cane
plantations while the majority of Brazilians of European descent live in the
industrial and considerably wealthier
southern region.28 The favelas (slums)
located on the edge of major cities such
as Rio de Janeiro and São Paolo, which
often lack electricity or running water, are inhabited largely by Afro-Brazilians, who are half as likely
to have a working toilet in their homes as the overall Brazilian population.
There are significant economic differences between Brazilians according to their official racial
designation. According to government statistics, prêtos have higher unemployment and poverty rates
than other groups in Brazil and brancos earn 57 percent more than prêtos for the same occupation.
Furthermore, the vast majority of Brazilians in leadership positions in politics, the military, the

Race and Ethnicity

15

media, and education are branco or pardo. Inter-racial marriage occurs more frequently in Brazil than
in the United States, but most of the marriages are between prêtos and pardos and not between brancos
and either prêtos or pardos. Another significant area of concern centers on brutality and mistreatment
of darker-complexioned Brazilians. As a result, some scholars of race and racism describe Brazil as a
prominent example of a pigmentocracy: a society characterized by a strong correlation between a
person’s skin color and their social class.
Afro-Brazilian activism has grown substantially since the 1980s, inspired in part by the successes
of the Civil Rights movement in the United States and by actions taken by the Brazilian government
since the early 2000s. One of the Brazilian government’s strategies has been to implement U.S.-style
affirmative action policies in education and employment to increase the number of Afro-Brazilians in
the nation’s professional ranks and decrease the degree of economic disparity. Those efforts sparked an
intense backlash among lighter-complexioned Brazilians and created a complex social and political
dilemma: who, exactly, should be considered “dark/black enough” for inclusion in affirmative action,
who makes that decision, and on what grounds will the decision be based? Many Brazilian families
include relatives whose complexions are quite different and the country has clear racial categories
only in terms of its demographic statistics. Nevertheless, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, Brazil’s president
from 2003 through 2011, made promotion of greater racial equality a prominent objective of his
administration. In addition to supporting affirmative action policies, Lula appointed four AfroBrazilians to his cabinet, appointed the first Afro-Brazilian justice to the nation’s supreme court, and
established a government office for promotion of racial equality. These recent developments have led
many in Brazil and elsewhere to reconsider the accuracy of Brazil’s designation as a racial democracy,
which has been as a central component of its national identity for decades.
Scholars mostly agree that race relations are more relaxed and genteel in Brazil than in the United
States. They tend to disagree about why that is the case. Some have suggested that the differences
in racial constructions stem from important colonial-era distinctions that set the tone for years to
come. A common expression describing the situation is: “the United States had two British parents
while Brazil had a Portuguese father and an African mother.” British settlers who colonized North
America thoroughly subjugated their slaves, intermarriage was rare, and African cultural influences
on mainstream U.S. society were marginalized compared to British cultural traditions and customs.
In Brazil, on the other hand, sexual and marital unions between the Portuguese settlers, who were
overwhelmingly male, and female Africans were common, creating individuals who exhibit a wide
range of physical appearances. Sexual unions certainly occurred in the United States between male
European slave masters and female African slaves, but the one-drop rule ensured that any children
born of such unions would be classified as “black” and as slaves. In Brazil in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, the government and the Roman Catholic Church strongly encouraged
European descended men to marry the African and indigenous women they impregnated in order
to “whiten” the nation.29 The United States government did not advocate for interracial families and
most states had anti-miscegenation laws. The United States also implemented an official, governmentsanctioned system of Jim Crow racial segregation laws in that had no equivalent in Brazil.
Japan represents an example of a third way of constructing race that is not associated with Western
society or African slavery. Japanese society is more diverse than many people realize; the number of
Korean, Chinese, Indian, and Brazilian immigrants began to increase in the 1980s, and the number
of children who had one Japanese and one non-Japanese parent has increased substantially since the
1950s, driven in part by children fathered by American military men stationed in Japan. Yet, one segment of Japan’s population known as the burakumin (formerly called the eta, a word meaning “pure

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

filth”) vividly illustrates the arbitrary nature
of racial categories. Though physically and genetically indistinguishable from other Japanese
people, the burakumin are a socially stigmatized
and outcast group. They are descendants of people who worked dirty, low-prestige jobs that involved handling dead and slaughtered animals
during the feudal era of Japan in the 1600s,
1700s, and 1800s. In feudal times, they were
forced to live in communities separated from the
rest of society, had to wear a patch of leather on
their clothing to symbolize their burakumin status, and were not permitted to marry non-burakumins.30
Japan no longer legally prohibits marriage
between burakumin and non-burakumin (today,
approximately 75 percent of burakumins are
married to non-burakumins), but prejudices and
discrimination persist, particularly among older
generations, and the marriages remain socially
stigmatized. Employment for the burakumin
remains concentrated in low-paying occupations
involving physical labor despite the relative
affluence and advanced education in Japanese society overall. Burakumin earn only about 60 percent
of the national average household income.31 Stereotypes of the burakumin as unintelligent, lazy, and
violent still exist, but burakumin men account for a significant portion of Japan’s professional athletes
in popular sports such as baseball and sumo wrestling, an interesting pattern that reflects events in the
United States, where racially stigmatized groups have long found relatively abundant opportunities
for upward mobility in professional sports.

ETHNICITY AND ETHNIC GROUPS
The terms race and ethnicity are similar and there is a degree of overlap between them. The average
person frequently uses the terms “race” and “ethnicity” interchangeably as synonyms and anthropologists also recognize that race and ethnicity are overlapping concepts. Both race and ethnic identity
draw on an identification with others based on common ancestry and shared cultural traits.32 As discussed earlier, a race is a social construction that defines groups of humans based on arbitrary physical
and/or biological traits that are believed to distinguish them from other humans. An ethnic group,
on the other hand, claims a distinct identity based on cultural characteristics and a shared ancestry
that are believed to give its members a unique sense of peoplehood or heritage.
The cultural characteristics used to define ethnic groups vary; they include specific languages
spoken, religions practiced, and distinct patterns of dress, diet, customs, holidays, and other markers
of distinction. In some societies, ethnic groups are geographically concentrated in particular regions,
as with the Kurds in Turkey and Iraq and the Basques in northern Spain.

Race and Ethnicity

17

Ethnicity refers to the degree to which a person identifies with and feels an attachment to a
particular ethnic group. As a component of a person’s identity, ethnicity is a fluid, complex phenomenon that is highly variable. Many individuals view their ethnicity as an important element of
their personal and social identity. Numerous psychological, social, and familial factors play a role in
ethnicity, and ethnic identity is most accurately understood as a range or continuum populated by
people at every point. One’s sense of ethnicity can also fluctuate across time. Children of Korean immigrants living in an overwhelmingly white town, for example, may choose to self-identify simply as
“American” during their middle school and high school years to fit in with their classmates and then
choose to self-identify as “Korean,” “Korean American,” or “Asian American” in college or later in
life as their social settings change or from a desire to connect more strongly with their family history
and heritage. Do you consider your ethnicity an important part of your identity? Why do you feel
the way you do?
In the United States, ethnic identity can sometimes be primarily or purely symbolic in nature.
Sociologists and anthropologists use the term symbolic ethnicity to describe limited or occasional
displays of ethnic pride and identity that are primarily expressive—for public display—rather than
instrumental as a major component of their daily social lives. Symbolic ethnicity is pervasive in U.S.
society; consider customs such as “Kiss Me, I’m Irish!” buttons and bumper stickers, Puerto Rican
flag necklaces, decals of the Virgin of Guadalupe, replicas of the Aztec stone calendar, and tattoos of
Celtic crosses or of the map of Italy in green, white, and red stripes. When I was a teenager in the
early to mid-1990s, medallions shaped like the African continent became popular among young
African Americans after the release of Spike Lee’s film Malcolm X in 1992 and in response to clothing
worn by socially conscious rappers and rap groups of the era, such as Public Enemy. During that same
time, I surprised workers in a pizzeria in suburban Philadelphia when I asked them, in Spanish, what
part of Mexico they came from. They wanted to know how I knew they were Mexican as they said
they usually were presumed to be Italian or Puerto Rican. I replied, “The Virgin of Guadalupe gave
it away!” while pointing to the miniature figurine of the iconic national symbol of Mexico on the
counter near the register.
In the United States, ethnic identity can sometimes be largely symbolic particularly for descendants
of the various European immigrant
groups who settled in the United
States during the nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries. Regardless of whether their grandparents
and great-grandparents migrated
from Italy, Ireland, Germany, Poland, Russia, the Austro-Hungarian
Empire, Greece, Scandinavia, or
elsewhere, these third and fourth
generation Americans likely do not
speak their ancestors’ languages and
have lost most or all of the cultural
customs and traditions their ancestors brought to the United States. A

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

few traditions, such as favorite family recipes or distinct customs associated with the celebration of a
holiday, that originated in their homelands may be retained by family members across generations,
reinforcing a sense of ethnic heritage and identity today. More recent immigrants are likely to retain
more of the language and cultural traditions of their countries of origin. Non-European immigrants
groups from Asia, Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, and the Caribbean also experience significant linguistic and cultural losses over generations, but may also continue to self-identify with their
ethnic backgrounds if they do not feel fully incorporated into U.S, society because they “stick out”
physically from Euro-American society and experience prejudice and discrimination. Psychological,
sociological, and anthropological studies have indicated that retaining a strong sense of ethnic pride
and identification is common among ethnic minorities in the United States and other nations as a
means of coping with and overcoming societal bigotry.
While there have been periods of inter-ethnic tension between various European immigrant
and ethnic groups in the United States, such as English-German and Irish-Italian conflicts, the
descendants of these groups today have been assimilated, to a very large degree, into the general
racial category of “white.”
Ethnic groups and ethnicity, like race, are socially constructed identities created at particular
moments in history under particular social conditions. The earliest views of ethnicity assumed that
people had innate, unchanging ethnic identities and loyalties. In actuality, ethnic identities shift
and are recreated over time and across societies. Anthropologists call this process ethnogenesis—
gradual emergence of a new, distinct ethnic identity in response to changing social circumstances.
For example, people whose ancestors came from what we know as Ireland may identify themselves as
Irish Americans and generations of their ancestors as Irish, but at one time, people living in that part
of the world identified themselves as Celtic.
In the United States, ethnogenesis has led to a number of new ethnic identities, including African
American, Native American, American Indian, and Italian American. Slaves brought to America
in the colonial period came primarily from Central and Western Africa and represented dozens of
ethnic heritages, including Yoruba, Igbo, Akan, and Chamba, that had unique languages, religions,
and cultures that were quickly lost because slaves were not permitted to speak their own languages
or practice their customs and religions. Over time, a new unified identity emerged among their
descendants. But that identity continues to evolve, as reflected by the transitions in the label used
to identify it: from “colored” (early 1900s) to “Negro” (1930s–1960s) to “Black” (late 1960s to the
present) and “African American” (1980s to the present).

A MELTING POT OR A SALAD BOWL?
There is tremendous ethnic, linguistic, and cultural diversity throughout the United States, largely
resulting from a long history and ongoing identification as a “nation of immigrants” that attracted
millions of newcomers from every continent. Still, elected officials and residents ardently disagree
about how the United States should approach this diversity and incorporate immigrant, ethnic, and
cultural minority groups into the larger framework of American society. The fundamental question is
whether cultural minority groups should be encouraged to forego their ethnic and cultural identities
and acculturate to the values, traditions, and customs of mainstream culture or should be allowed
and encouraged to retain key elements of their identities and heritages. This is a highly emotional
question. Matters of cultural identity are often deeply personal and associated with strongly held
beliefs about the defining features of their countries’ national identities. Over the past 400 years,

Race and Ethnicity

19

three distinct social philosophies have developed from efforts to promote national unity and tranquility in societies that have experienced large-scale immigration: assimilation, multiculturalism, and
amalgamation.
Assimilation encourages and may even demand that members of ethnic and immigrant minority
groups abandon their native customs, traditions, languages, and identities as quickly as possible
and adopt those of mainstream society—“When in Rome, do as the Romans do.” Advocates of
assimilation generally view a strong sense of national unity based on a shared linguistic and cultural
heritage as the best way to promote a strong national identity and avoid ethnic conflict. They point,
for example, to ethnic warfare and genocide in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia during the 1990s
and to recent independence movements by French Canadians in Quebec and in Scotland as evidence
of negative consequences of groups retaining a strong sense of loyalty and identification with their
ethnic or linguistic communities. The “English as the Official Language” movement in the United
States is another example. People are concerned that U.S. unity is weakened by immigrants who do
not learn to speak English. In recent years, the U.S. Census Bureau has identified more than 300
languages spoken in the United States. In 2010, more than 60 million people representing 21 percent
of the total U.S. population spoke a language other than English at home and 38 million of those
people spoke Spanish.
Multiculturalism takes a different view of assimilation, arguing that ethnic and cultural diversity
is a positive quality that enriches a society and encouraging respect for cultural differences. The basic
belief behind multiculturalism is that group differences, in and of themselves, do not spark tension,
and society should promote tolerance for differences rather than urging members of immigrant,
ethnic, and cultural minority groups to shed their customs and identities. Vivid examples of
multiculturalism can be seen in major cities across the United States, such as New York, where
ethnic neighborhoods such as Chinatown and Little Italy border one another, and Los Angeles,
which features many diverse neighborhoods, including Little Tokyo, Koreatown, Filipinotown, Little
Armenia, and Little Ethiopia. The ultimate objective of multiculturalism is to promote peaceful
coexistence while allowing each ethnic community to preserve its unique heritage and identity.
Multiculturalism is the official governmental policy of Canada; it was codified in 1988 under the
Canadian Multiculturalism Act, which declares that “multiculturalism reflects the cultural and racial
diversity of Canadian society and acknowledges the freedom of all members of Canadian society to
preserve, enhance, and share their cultural heritage.”33
Amalgamation promotes hybridization of diverse cultural groups in a multiethnic society. Members
of distinct ethnic and cultural groups freely intermingle, interact, and live among one another with
cultural exchanges and, ultimately, inter-ethnic dating and intermarriage occurring as the social and
cultural barriers between groups fade over time. Amalgamation is similar to assimilation in that a
strong, unified national culture is viewed as the desired end result but differs because it represents a
more thorough “melting pot” that blends the various groups in a society (the dominant/mainstream
group and minority groups) into a new hybridized cultural identity rather than expecting minority
groups to conform to the majority’s standards.
Debate is ongoing among sociologists, anthropologists, historians, and political pundits regarding
the relative merits of each approach and which, if any, most accurately describes the United States.
It is a complex and often contentious question because people may confuse their personal ideologies
(what they think the United States should strive for) with social reality (what actually occurs).
Furthermore, the United States is a large, complex country geographically that is comprised of large
urban centers with millions of residents, moderately populated areas characterized by small towns,

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

and mostly rural communities with only several hundred or a few thousand inhabitants. The nature
of social and cultural life varies significantly with the setting in which it occurs.

ANTHROPOLOGY MEETS POPULAR CULTURE: SPORTS,
RACE/ETHNICITY AND DIVERSITY
Throughout this chapter, I have stated that the concept of race is a socially constructed idea and
explained why biologically distinct human races do not exist. Still, many in the United States cling
to a belief in the existence of biological racial groups (regardless of their racial and ethnic backgrounds). Historically, the nature of popular sports in the United States has been offered as “proof ”
of biological differences between races in terms of natural athletic skills and abilities. In this regard,
the world of sports has served as an important social institution in which notions of biological racial
differences become reified—mistakenly assumed as objective, real, and factual. Specifically, many
Americans have noted the large numbers of African Americans in Olympic sprinting, the National
Football League (NFL), and the National Basketball Association (NBA) and interpreted their disproportionate number as perceived “evidence” or “proof ” that “blacks” have unique genes, muscles,
bone structures, and/or other biological qualities that make them superior athletes relative to people
from other racial backgrounds—that they are “naturally gifted” runners and jumpers and thus predominate in sports.
This topic sparked intense media attention in 2012 during the lead-up to that year’s Olympics in
London. Michael Johnson, a retired African American track star who won gold medals at the 1992,
1996, and 2000 Summer Olympic Games, declared that “black” Americans and West Indians (of
Jamaican, Trinidadian, Barbadian, and other Caribbean descent) dominated international sprinting
competitions because they possessed a “superior athletic gene” that resulted from slavery: “All my
life, I believed I became an athlete through my own determination, but it’s impossible to think that
being descended from slaves hasn’t left an imprint through the generations . . . slavery has benefitted
descendants like me. I believe there is a superior athletic gene in us.”34 Others have previously
expressed similar ideas, such as writer John Entine, who suggested in his book, Taboo: Why Black
Athletes Dominate Sports and Why We’re Afraid to Talk About It (2000), that the brutal nature of the
trans-Atlantic slave trade and harsh conditions of slavery in the Americas produced slaves who could
move faster and who had stronger, more durable bodies than the general population and that those
supposedly hardier bodies persisted in today’s African Americans and Afro-Caribbeans, giving them
important athletic advantages over others. In a similar vein, former CBS sportscaster Jimmy “The
Greek” Snyder claimed, on the eve of Super Bowl XXII in 1988, that African Americans comprised
the majority of NFL players because they were “bred that way” during slavery as a form of selective
breeding between bigger and stronger slaves much like had been done with racehorses. Snyder was
fired from CBS shortly after amid a tidal wave of controversy and furor. Racial stereotypes regarding
perceptions of innate differences in athletic ability were a major theme in the 1992 comedy film
White Men Can’t Jump, which starred Wesley Snipes and Woody Harrelson as an inter-racial pair of
basketball street hustlers.
Despite such beliefs, even among people who otherwise do not harbor racist sentiments, the
notion of innate “black” athletic supremacy is obviously misguided, fallacious, and self-contradictory
when we examine the demographic composition of the full range of sports in the United States rather
than focusing solely on a few extremely popular sports that pay high salaries and have long served
as inspiration for upward mobility and fame in a society in which educational and employment

Race and Ethnicity

21

opportunities for lower-income and impoverished minority groups (often concentrated in innercity communities) have rarely been equivalent to those of middle-class and affluent “whites” living
in small towns and suburban communities. Take the myth that “blacks” have an innately superior
jumping ability. The idea that “white men can’t jump” stems from the relatively small number of
white American players in the NBA and has been reified by the fact that only one “white” player
(Brent Barry of the Los Angeles Clippers in 1996) has ever won the NBA’s annual slam-dunk contest.
However, the stereotype would be completely inverted if we look at the demographic composition
and results of high jump competitions. The high jump is arguably a better gauge of leaping ability
than a slam-dunk contest since it requires raising the entire body over a horizontal bar and prohibits
extension of the arms overhead, thus diminishing any potential advantage from height. For decades,
both the men’s and the women’s international high jump competitions have been dominated by
white athletes from the United States and Europe. Yet no one attributes their success to “white racial
genes.” American society does not have a generational history of viewing people who are socially
identified as “white” in terms of body type and physical prowess as it does with African Americans.
The same dynamic is at play if we compare basketball with volleyball. Both sports require similar
sets of skills, namely, jumping, speed, agility, endurance, and outstanding hand-eye coordination.
Nevertheless, beach volleyball has tended to be dominated by “white” athletes from the United States,
Canada, Australia, and Europe while indoor volleyball is more “racially balanced” (if we assume that
biological human races actually exist) since the powerhouse indoor volleyball nations are the United
States, China, Japan, Brazil, Cuba, and Russia.
Thus, a variety of factors, including cultural affinities and preferences, social access and
opportunities, existence of a societal infrastructure that supports youth participation and development
in particular sports, and the degree of prestige assigned to various sports by nations, cultures, and
ethnic communities, all play significant roles in influencing the concentration of social and/or ethnic
groups in particular sports. It is not a matter of individual or group skills or talents; important socioeconomic dimensions shape who participates in a sport and who excels. Think about a sport in which
you have participated or have followed closely. What social dynamics do you associate with that sport
in terms of the gender, race/ethnicity, and social class of the athletes who predominate in it?
For additional insight into the important role that social dynamics play in shaping the racial/
ethnic, social class, and cultural dimensions of athletes, let us briefly consider three sports: basketball,
boxing, and football. While basketball is a national sport played throughout the United States, it
also has long been associated with urban/inner-city environments, and many professional American
basketball players have come from working class and lower-income backgrounds. This trend dates
to the 1930s, when Jewish players and teams dominated professional basketball in the United
States. That dominance was commonly explained by the media in terms of the alleged “scheming,”
“flashiness,” and “artful dodging” nature of the “Jewish culture.” In other words, Jews were believed
to have a fundamental talent for hoops that explained their over-representation in the sport. In reality,
most Jewish immigrants in the early twentieth century lived in working class, urban neighborhoods
such as New York City, Philadelphia, and Chicago where basketball was a popular sport in the local
social fabric of working-class communities.35
By 1992, approximately 90 percent of NBA players were African American, and the league’s
demographics once again fueled rumors that a racial/ethnic group was “naturally gifted” in basketball.
However, within ten short years, foreign-born players largely from Eastern European nations such
as Lithuania, Germany, Poland, Latvia, Serbia, Croatia, Russia, Ukraine, and Turkey accounted for
nearly 20 percent of the starting line-ups of NBA teams. The first player selected in the 2002 NBA

22

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

draft was seven-foot six-inch center Yao Ming, a native of Shanghai, China, and by the early 2000s,
the United States had lost some of its traditional dominance of international basketball as several
nations began to catch up because of the tremendous globalization of basketball’s popularity.
Like basketball, boxing has been an urban sport popular among working-class ethnic groups.
During the early twentieth century, both amateur and professional boxing in the United States were
dominated by European immigrant groups, particularly the Irish, Italians, and Jewish Americans. As
with basketball, which inspired the “hoop dreams” of inner-city youths to escape poverty by reaching
the professional ranks, boxing provided sons of lower-income European immigrants with dreams
of upward mobility, fame, and fortune. In fact, it was one of the few American sports that thrived
during the Great Depression, attracting a wave of impoverished young people who saw pugilism as a
ticket to financial security. Throughout the first half of the twentieth century, intra-European ethnic
rivalries (Irish vs. Italian, Italian vs. Jewish) were common in U.S. boxing; fighters were seen as quasiambassadors of their respective neighborhoods and ethnic communities.
The demographic composition of boxers began to change in the latter half of the twentieth century
when formerly stigmatized and racialized Eastern European immigrant groups began to be perceived
simply as “white” and mainstream. They attained middle-class status and relocated to the newly
established suburbs, and boxing underwent a profound racial and ethnic transition. New urban
minority groups—African Americans, Puerto Ricans, and Mexican Americans who moved into
inner-city neighborhoods vacated by Europeans began to dominate boxing.
Finally, consider football, which has surpassed baseball as the most popular spectator sport in
the United States and is popular with all social classes, races/ethnicities, and regions. Collegiate
and professional football rosters are also undergoing a demographic change; a growing number of
current National College Athletic Association and NFL players were born outside the mainland
United States. Since the 1980s, many athletes from American Samoa, a U.S. territory in the South
Pacific, have joined U.S. football teams. A boy in American Samoa is an astounding 56 times more
likely to make the NFL than a boy born and raised on the U.S. mainland!36 American Samoa’s
rapid transformation into a gridiron powerhouse is the result of several inter-related factors that
dramatically increased the appeal of the sport across the tiny island, including the cultural influence
of American missionaries who introduced football. Expanding migration of Samoans to Hawaii and
California in recent decades has also fostered their interest in football, which has trickled back to the
South Pacific, and the NFL is working to expand the popularity of football in American Samoa.37
Similarly, Major League Baseball has been promoting baseball in the Dominican Republic, Korea,
and Japan in recent years.

CONCLUSION
Issues of race, racism, and ethnic relations remain among the most contentious social and political
topics in the United States and throughout the world. Anthropology offers valuable information to
the public regarding these issues, as anthropological knowledge encourages individuals to “think outside the box” about race and ethnicity. This “thinking outside the box” includes understanding that
racial and ethnic categories are socially constructed rather than natural, biological divisions of humankind and realizing that the current racial and ethnic categories that exist in the United States today do not necessarily reflect categories used in other countries. Physical anthropologists, who study
human evolution, epidemiology, and genetics, are uniquely qualified to explain why distinct biological human races do not exist. Nevertheless, race and ethnicity—as social constructs—continue to

Race and Ethnicity

23

be used as criteria for prejudice, discrimination, exclusion, and stereotypes well into the twenty-first
century. Cultural anthropologists play a crucial role in informing the public how the concept of
race originated, how racial categories have shifted over time, how race and ethnicity are constructed
differently within various nations across the world, and how the current racial and ethnic categories
utilized in the United States were arbitrarily labeled and defined by the federal government under
OMB Directive 15 in 1977. Understanding the complex nature of clines and continuous biological
human variation, along with an awareness of the distinct ways in which race and ethnicity have been
constructed in different nations, enables us to recognize racial and ethnic labels not as self-evident
biological divisions of humans, but instead as socially created categories that vary cross-culturally.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. García describes the reasons that race is considered a “discredited concept in human biology.”
Despite this scientific fact, most people continue to believe that race is “real.” Why do you
think race has continued to be an important social reality even after it has been discredited
scientifically?
2. The process of racial formation is different in every society. In the United States, the “one-drop
rule” and hypodescent have historically affected the way people with multiracial backgrounds
have been racialized. How have ideas about multiracial identity been changing in the past few
decades? As the number of people who identify as “multiracial” increases, do you think there
will be changes in the way we think about other racial categories?
3. Members of some ethnic groups are able to practice symbolic ethnicity, limited or occasional
displays of ethnic pride and identity. Why can ethnicity be displayed in an optional way while
race cannot?
4. There is no scientific evidence supporting the idea that racial or ethnic background provides a
biological advantage in sports. Instead, a variety of social dynamics, including cultural affinities
and preferences as well as access and opportunities influence who will become involved in
particular sports. Think about a sport in which you have participated or have followed closely.
What social dynamics do you think are most responsible for affecting the racial, ethnic, gender,
or social class composition of the athletes who participate?

GLOSSARY
Acculturation: loss of a minority group’s cultural distinctiveness in relation to the dominant culture.
Amalgamation: interactions between members of distinct ethnic and cultural groups that reduce
barriers between the groups over time.
Assimilation: pressure placed on minority groups to adopt the customs and traditions of the dominant culture.
Cline: differences in the traits that occur in populations across a geographical area. In a cline, a trait
may be more common in one geographical area than another, but the variation is gradual and continuous, with no sharp breaks.
Ethnic group: people in a society who claim a distinct identity for themselves based on shared cultural characteristics and ancestry.

24

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Ethnicity: the degree to which a person identifies with and feels an attachment to a particular ethnic
group.
Ethnogenesis: gradual emergence of new ethnicities in response to changing social circumstances.
Hypodescent: a racial classification system that assigns a person with mixed racial heritage to the
racial category that is considered least privileged.
Jim Crow: a term used to describe laws passed by state and local governments in the United States
during the early twentieth century to enforce racial segregation of public and private places.
Multiculturalism: maintenance of multiple cultural traditions in a single society.
Nonconcordant: genetic traits that are inherited independently rather than as a package.
One-drop rule: the practice of excluding a person with any non-white ancestry from the white racial
category.
Pigmentocracy: a society characterized by strong correlation between a person’s skin color and his
or her social class.
Race: an attempt to categorize humans based on observed physical differences.
Racial formation: the process of defining and redefining racial categories in a society.
Reified: the process by which an inaccurate concept or idea is accepted as “truth.”
Socially constructed: a concept developed by society that is maintained over time through social
interactions that make the idea seem “real.”
Symbolic ethnicity: limited or occasional displays of ethnic pride and identity that are primarily for
public display.
Taxonomy: a system of classification.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
I am an Assistant Professor of Anthropology at Millersville University of Pennsylvania, a public state-owned university located approximately 70 miles west of Philadelphia. I earned my Ph.D. in Anthropology from Temple University in 2011, with a specific focus in urban
anthropology. I currently live in Chester County, Pennsylvania in suburban Philadelphia. My research interests include U.S. immigration,
social constructs of race and ethnicity, urban social/cultural life, U.S.
popular culture, human evolution/the hominid lineage, and anthropological theory. Aside from anthropology, my hobbies include lifting
weights, watching sports (particularly boxing, football, and basketball)
and movies, traveling, and playing video games (the Grand Theft Auto
series is my personal favorite).

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Boas, Franz. “Race Problems in America.” Science 29 no. 752 (1909): 839–849.
Brace, C. Loring. ‘Race’ is a Four-Letter Word: The Genesis of the Concept. New York:
Oxford University Press, 2005.

Race and Ethnicity

25

Entine, John. Taboo: Why Black Athletes Dominate Sports and Why We’re Afraid to Talk About It. New York:
Public Affairs Publishing, 2000.
Hartigan, John. Racial Situations: Class Predicaments of Whiteness in Detroit. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1999.
Jablonski, Nina. Living Color: The Biological and Social Meaning of Skin Color. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 2012.
Marks, Jonathan. “Black, White, Other.” Natural History December, 1994: 32–35.
McIntosh, Peggy. “White Privilege and Male Privilege: A Personal Account of Coming to See
Correspondences through Work in Women’s Studies.” Working Paper 189. Wellesley, MA: Wellesley
College Center for Research on Women, 1988.
Omi, Michael and Howard Winant. Racial Formation in the United States. New York: Routledge,
2014[1986].
Relethford, John H. Reflections Of Our Past: How Human History Is Revealed In Our Genes. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press, 2004.

NOTES
1. For more information about efforts to establish a “scientific” basis for race in the 18th and 19th centuries, see the “History”
section of the Race: Are We So Different website: http://www.understandingrace.org. Stephen Jay Gould’s book, The Mismeasure
of Man (New York: W.W. Norton, 1996), has a detailed discussion of the “scientific” methods used by Morton and others.
2. More information about the social construction of racial categories in the United States can be found in Audrey Smedley,
Race in North America: Origin and Evolution of a Worldview (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2007) and Nell Irvin Painter, The
History of White People (New York: W.W. Norton, 2010).
3. More discussion of the material in this section can be found in Carol Mukhopadhyay, Rosemary Henze, and Yolanda Moses,
How Real Is Race? A Sourcebook on Race, Culture, and Biology (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2013). Chapters 5 and
6 discuss the cultural construction of racial categories as a form of classification. The Race: Are We So Different website and its
companion resources for teachers and researchers also explore the ideas described here.
4. Johann Friedrich Blumenbach, On the Natural Varieties of Mankind: De Generis Humani Varietate Nativa (New York:
Bergman Publishers, 1775).
5. For details about how these categories were established, see Stephen Jay Gould, The Mismeasure of Man.
6. For a discussion of the efforts to subdivide racial groups in the nineteenth century and its connection to eugenics, see Carol
Mukhopadhyay, Rosemary Henze, and Yolanda Moses, How Real Is Race? A Sourcebook on Race, Culture, and Biology.
7. For more information about the genetic variation between human groups that puts this example in context see Sheldon
Krimsky and Kathleen Sloan, Race and the Genetic Revolution: Science, Myth, and Culture (New York: Columbia University
Press, 2011), 174-180.
8. Carol Mukhopadhyay et. al How Real Is Race? A Sourcebook on Race, Culture, and Biology, 43-48.
9. Ibid., 50-52.
10. Ibid., 50-51.
11. Ibid., 62.
12. Alan R. Templeton, “Human Races: A Genetic and Evolutionary Perspective” American Anthropologist 100 no. 3 (1998):
632-650.
13. For more information about the efforts of Franz Boas to refute the race concept in science, see Franz Boas, “Changes in
the Bodily Form of Descendants of Immigrants” American Anthropologist 14 (1912): 530-562.
14. Jonathan Marks, “Black, White, Other,” 35.
15. Michael Omi and Howard Winant, Racial Formation in the United States, 64.
16. Ibid., 61
17. For more information about the social construction of whiteness in U.S. History see Nell Irvin Painter, The History of
White People; Noel Ignatiev, How the Irish Became White (New York: Routledge, 1995). For more information about the economic aspects of the construction of whiteness both before and after World War II, see David Roediger, The Wages of Whiteness:
Race and the Making of the American Working Class (Chicago, IL: Haymarket, 2007) and George Lipsitz, The Possessive Investment in Whiteness (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1998).
18. For a detailed discussion of this process see Douglas S. Massey and Nancy Denton, American Apartheid: Segregation and the
Making of the Underclass (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993) and Ira Katznelson, When Affirmative Action was
White: An Untold History of Racial Inequality in Twentieth Century America (New York: W.W. Norton and Company, 2005).
19. For more information on these historical developments and their social ramifications, see Karen Brodkin, How Jews Became White Folks and What That Says About Race in America (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1998) or David

26

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Roediger, Working Toward Whiteness: How America’s Immigrants Became White—The Strange Journey From Ellis Island to the
Suburbs (New York: Basic Books, 2005).
20. While the one-drop rule was intended to protect the institution of slavery, a more nuanced view of racial identity has
existed throughout U.S. History. For a history of the racial categories used historically in the United States census, including
several mixed-race categories, see the Pew Research Center’s “What Census Calls Us: Historical Timeline.” http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/interactives/multiracial-timeline/
21. It is important to note that President Obama has also stated that he self-identifies as black. See for instance, Sam Roberts
and Peter Baker. 2010. “Asked to Declare His Race, Obama Checks ‘Black.’” The New York Times, April 2. http://www.nytimes.com/2010/04/03/us/politics/03census.html
22. This concept is discussed in more detail in chapter 9 of Carol Mukhopadhyay et. al How Real Is Race: A Sourebook on Race,
Culture, and Biology.
23. Edward Telles originated this expression in his book Race in Another America: The Significance of Skin Color in Brazil
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004).
24. More information about the Brazilian concepts of race described in this section is available in Jefferson M. Fish, “Mixed
Blood: An Analytical Method of Classifying Race.” Psychology Today, November 1, 1995. https://www.psychologytoday.com/
articles/199511/mixed-blood
25. Conrad Kottak, Anthropology: Appreciating Cultural Diversity (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2013).
26. See for instance the PBS documentary Brazil: A Racial Paradise, written and presented by Henry Louis Gates, Jr.. For a
detailed critique of the idea of Brazil as a “racial democracy,” see Michael Hanchard (ed), Racial Politics in Contemporary Brazil
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1999).
27. Robert J. Cottrol, The Long Lingering Shadow: Slavery, Race, and Law in the American Hemisphere (Athens, GA: University
of Georgia Press, 2013), 246.
28. Ibid., 145
29. For more information about Brazil’s official policy toward mixed-race children during this era see Thomas E. Skidmore,
Black Into White: Race and Nationality in Brazilian Thought (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1992).
30. For a detailed discussion of stratification without race, see chapter 8 of Carol Mukhopadyay et. al How Real is Race? A
Sourcebook on Race, Culture, and Biology.
31. For more information about the status of Burakumin in Japan see Emily A. Su-lan Reber, “Buraku Mondai in Japan:
Historical and Modern Perspectives and Directions for the Future.” Harvard Human Rights Journal 12 (1999): 298
32. The distinction between race and ethnicity is a complex and controversial one within anthropology. Some anthropologists
combine these concepts in acknowledgement of the overlap between them. See for instance Karen Brodkin. How Jews Became
White and What This Says About Race in America.
33. Canadian Multicultural Act, 1985. http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/C-18.7/FullText.html
34. Rene Lynch, “Michael Johnson Says Slave Descendants Make Better Athletes” Los Angeles Times, July 5, 2012.
35. The 2010 documentary The First Basket by David Vyorst describes the experiences of Jewish basketball players in the
mid-twentieth century U.S.
36. Scott Pelley, America Samoa: Football Island. CBS News, September 17, 2010 http://www.cbsnews.com/news/american-samoa-football-island-17-09-2010/
37. Ibid.

Gender and Sexuality
Carol C. Mukhopadhyay, San Jose State University
carol.mukhopadhyay@sjsu.edu
http://www.sjsu.edu/people/carol.mukhopadhyay

Tami Blumenfield, Furman University

tami.blumenfield@furman.edu
http://www.furman.edu/academics/asianstudies/meet-our-faculty/Pages/Tami-Blumenfield.aspx
https://twitter.com/TBlumenfield

with Susan Harper, Texas Woman’s University
susanharperteaches@gmail.com
and
with Abby Gondek

abbygondek@outlook.com
http://fiu.academia.edu/AbbyGondek
https://www.facebook.com/abby.gondek

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

INTRODUCTION: SEX AND GENDER
ACCORDING TO ANTHROPOLOGISTS1

• Describe ways in which gender and
sexuality organize and structure the
societies in which we live.

Anthropologists are fond of pointing out that much of
what we take for granted as “natural” in our lives is actually
cultural—it is not grounded in the natural world or in biology but invented by humans.2 Because culture is invented,
it takes different forms in different places and changes over
time in those places. Living in the twenty-first century, we
have witnessed how rapidly and dramatically culture can
change, from ways of communicating to the emergence of
same-sex marriage. Similarly, many of us live in culturally
diverse settings and experience how varied human cultural
inventions can be.
We readily accept that clothing, language, and music are
cultural—invented, created, and alterable—but often find
it difficult to accept that gender and sexuality are not natural but deeply embedded in and shaped by culture. We
struggle with the idea that the division of humans into two
and only two categories, “male” and “female,” is not universal, that “male” and “female” are cultural concepts that take
different forms and have different meanings cross-culturally.
Similarly, human sexuality, rather than being simply natural
is one of the most culturally significant, shaped, regulated,
and symbolic of all human capacities. The concept of humans as either “heterosexual” or “homosexual” is a culturally and historically specific invention that is increasingly
being challenged in the United States and elsewhere.

• Identify ways in which culture shapes
sex/gender and sexuality.

• Assess the range of possible ways
of constructing gender and sexuality
by sharing examples from different
cultures, including small-scale
societies.
• Analyze how anthropology as a
discipline is affected by gender
ideology and gender norms.
• Evaluate cultural “origin” stories that
are not supported by anthropological
data.

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Part of the problem is that gender has a biological component, unlike other types of cultural
inventions such as a sewing machine, cell phone, or poem. We do have bodies and there are some
male-female differences, including in reproductive capacities and roles, albeit far fewer than we have
been taught. Similarly, sexuality, sexual desires and responses, are partially rooted in human natural
capacities. However, in many ways, sexuality and gender are like food. We have a biologically rooted
need to eat to survive and we have the capacity to enjoy eating. What constitutes “food,” what is
“delicious” or “repulsive,” the contexts and meanings that surround food and human eating—those
are cultural. Many potentially edible items are not “food” (rats, bumblebees, and cats in the United
States, for example), and the concept of “food” itself is embedded in elaborate conventions about eating: how, when, with whom, where, “utensils,” for what purposes? A “romantic dinner” at a “gourmet
restaurant” is a complex cultural invention.
In short, gender and sexuality, like eating, have biological components. But cultures, over time,
have erected complex and elaborate edifices around them, creating systems of meaning that often
barely resemble what is natural and innate. We experience gender and sexuality largely through the
prism of the culture or cultures to which we have been exposed and in which we have been raised.
In this chapter, we are asking you to reflect deeply on the ways in which what we have been taught
to think of as natural, that is, our sex, gender, and our sexuality, is, in fact, deeply embedded in and
shaped by our culture. We challenge you to explore exactly which, if any, aspects of our gender and
our sexuality are totally natural.
One powerful aspect of culture, and a reason cultural norms feel so natural, is that we learn culture the way we learn our native language: without formal instruction, in social contexts, picking
it up from others around us, without thinking. Soon, it becomes deeply embedded in our brains.
We no longer think consciously about what the sounds we hear when someone says “hello” mean
unless we do not speak English. Nor is it difficult to “tell the time” on a “clock” even though “time”
and “clocks” are complex cultural inventions.
The same principles apply to gender and sexuality. We learn very early (by at least age three) about
the categories of gender in our culture—that individuals are either “male” or “female” and that elaborate beliefs, behaviors, and meanings are associated with each gender. We can think of this complex
set of ideas as a gender ideology or a cultural model of gender. All societies have gender ideologies,
just as they have belief systems about other significant areas of life, such as health and disease, the
natural world, and social relationships, including family. For an activity related to this section, see
Activity 1.

FOUNDATIONS OF THE ANTHROPOLOGY OF GENDER
Gender Ideologies, Biology, and Culture
Gender vs. Sex
Words can reveal cultural beliefs. A good example is the term “sex.” In the past, sex referred both
to sexuality and to someone’s biologic sex: male or female. Today, although sex still refers to sexuality,
“gender” now means the categories male, female, or increasingly, other gender possibilities. Why has
this occurred?
The change in terminology reflects profound alterations in gender ideology in the United States
(and elsewhere). In the past, influenced by Judeo-Christian religion and nineteenth and twentieth

Gender and Sexuality

3

century scientific beliefs, biology (and reproductive capacity) was literally considered to be destiny.
Males and females, at least “normal” males and females, were thought to be born with different
intellectual, physical, and moral capacities, preferences, tastes, personalities, and predispositions for
violence and suffering.3
Ironically, many cultures, including European Christianity in the Middle Ages, viewed women
as having a strong, often “insatiable” sexual “drive” and capacity. But by the nineteenth century,
women and their sexuality were largely defined in reproductive terms, as in their capacity to “carry a
man’s child.” Even late-twentieth-century human sexuality texts often referred only to “reproductive
systems,” to genitals as “reproductive” organs, and excluded the “clitoris” and other female organs of
sexual pleasure that had no reproductive function. For women, the primary, if not sole, legitimate
purpose of sexuality was reproduction.4
Nineteenth and mid-twentieth century European and U.S. gender ideologies linked sexuality
and gender in other ways.5 Sexual preference—the sex to whom one was attracted—was “naturally”
heterosexual, at least among “normal” humans, and “normal,” according to mid-twentieth century
Freudian-influenced psychology, was defined largely by whether one adhered to conventional gender
roles for males and females. So, appropriately, “masculine” men were “naturally” attracted to “feminine” women and vice versa. Homosexuality, too, was depicted not just as a sexual preference but as
gender-inappropriate role behavior, down to gestures and color of clothing.6 This is apparent in old
stereotypes of gay men as “effeminate” (acting like a female, wearing “female” fabrics such as silk or
colors such as pink, and participating in “feminine” professions like ballet) and of lesbian women as
“butch” (cropped hair, riding motorcycles, wearing leather—prototypical masculinity). Once again,
separate phenomena—sexual preference and gender role performance—were conflated because of
beliefs that rooted both in biology. “Abnormality” in one sphere (sexual preference) was linked to
“abnormality” in the other sphere (gendered capacities and preferences).
In short, the gender and sexual ideologies were based on biological determinism. According to
this theory, males and females were supposedly born fundamentally different reproductively and in
other major capacities and preferences and were “naturally” (biologically) sexually attracted to each
other, although women’s sexual “drive” was not very well developed relative to men’s and was reproductively oriented.
Rejecting Biological Determinism
Decades of research on gender and sexuality, including by feminist anthropologists, has challenged these old theories, particularly biological determinism. We now understand that cultures,
not nature, create the gender ideologies that go along with being born male or female and the
ideologies vary widely, cross-culturally. What is considered “man’s work” in some societies, such as
carrying heavy loads, or farming, can be “woman’s work” in others. What is “masculine” and “feminine” varies: pink and blue, for example, are culturally invented gender-color linkages, and skirts
and “make-up” can be worn by men, indeed by “warriors.” Hindu deities, male and female, are
highly decorated and difficult to distinguish, at least by conventional masculinist U.S. stereotypes
(see examples and Figures 1 and 2).
Women can be thought of as stronger (“tougher,” more “rational”) than men. Phyllis Kaberry, an
anthropologist who studied the Nsaw of Cameroon in the 1940s, said males in that culture argued
that land preparation for the rizga crop was “a woman’s job, which is too strenuous for the men” and
that “women could carry heavy loads because they had stronger foreheads.”7 Among the Aka who live

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

in the present-day Central African Republic, fathers have close, intimate, relationships with infants,
play major roles in all aspects of infant-care, and can sometimes produce breast milk.8 As for sexual
desires, research on the human sexual response by William H. Masters and Virginia E. Johnson established that men and women have equal biological capacities for sexual pleasure and orgasm and
that, because males generally ejaculate simultaneously with orgasm, it is easier for women than men
to have multiple orgasms.9
Gender: A Cultural Invention and a Social Role
One’s biologic sex is a different phenomenon than one’s gender, which is socially and historically
constructed.10 Gender is a set of culturally invented expectations and therefore constitutes a role one
assumes, learns, and performs, more or less consciously. It is an “identity” one can in theory choose,
at least in some societies, although there is tremendous pressure, as in the United States, to conform
to the gender role and identity linked to your biologic sex.
This is a profound transformation in how we think about both gender and sexuality. The reality of
human biology is that males and females are shockingly similar.11 There is arguably more variability
within than between each gender, especially taking into account the enormous variability in human
physical traits among human populations globally.12 Notice, for example, the variability in height in
the two photos of U.S. college students shown in Figures 3 and 4. Which gender is “taller”? Much of
what has been defined as “biological” is actually cultural, so the possibilities for transformation and
change are nearly endless! That can be liberating, especially when we are young and want to create
identities that fit our particular configuration of abilities and preferences. It can also be upsetting to
people who have deeply internalized and who want to maintain the old gender ideology.

The Gender Binary and Beyond
We anthropologists, as noted earlier, love to shake up notions of what is “natural” and “normal.”
One common assumption is that all cultures divide human beings into two and only two genders,

Gender and Sexuality

5

a binary or dualistic model of gender. However, in some cultures gender is more fluid and flexible,
allowing individuals born as one biologic sex to assume another gender or creating more than two
genders from which individuals can select. Examples of non-binary cultures come from pre-contact
Native America. Anthropologists such as Ruth Benedict long ago identified a fairly widespread phenomenon of so-called “two-spirit” people, individuals who did not comfortably conform to the
gender roles and gender ideology normally associated with their biologic sex. Among the pre-contact
Zuni Pueblo in New Mexico, which was a relatively gender-egalitarian horticultural society, for example, individuals could choose an alternative role of “not-men” or “not-women.” A two-spirited
Zuni man would do the work and wear clothing normally associated with females, having shown a
preference for female-identified activities and symbols at an early age. In some, but not all cases, he
would eventually marry a man. Early European ethnocentric reports often described it as a form of
homosexuality. Anthropologists suggested more-complex motivations, including dreams of selection
by spirits, individual psychologies, biological characteristics, and negative aspects of male roles (e.g.,
warfare). Most significantly, these alternative gender roles were acceptable, publicly recognized, and
sometimes venerated.13
Less is known about additional gender roles available to biological women, although stories of
“manly hearted women” suggest a parallel among some Native American groups. For example, a
Kutenai woman known to have lived in 1811 was originally married to a French-Canadian man
but then returned to the Kutenai and assumed a male gender role, changing her name to Kauxuma
nupika (Gone-to-the-Spirits), becoming a spiritual prophet, and eventually marrying a woman.14
A well-known example of a non-binary gender system is found among the Hijra in India. Often
called a third gender, these individuals are usually biologically male but adopt female clothing,
gestures, and names; eschew sexual desire and sexual activity; and go through religious rituals that
give them certain divine powers, including blessing or cursing couples’ fertility and performing at
weddings and births. Hijra may undergo voluntary surgical removal of genitals through a “nirvan” or
rebirth operation. Some hijra are males born with ambiguous external genitals, such as a particularly
small penis or testicles that did not fully descend.15
Research has shown that individuals with ambiguous genitals, sometimes called “intersex,” are
surprisingly common. Martha Ward and Monica Edelstein estimate that such intersex individuals
constitute five percent of human births.16 So what are cultures to do when faced with an infant or
child who cannot easily be “sexed?” Some cultures, including the United States, used to force children
into one of the two binary categories, even if it required surgery or hormone therapy. But in other
places, such as India and among the Isthmus Zapotec in southern Oaxaca, Mexico, they have instead
created a third gender category that has an institutional identity and role to perform in society.17

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

These cross-cultural examples demonstrate that the traditional rigid binary gender model in the
United States is neither universal nor necessary. While all cultures recognize at least two biological
sexes, usually based on genitals visible at birth, and have created at least two gender roles, many cultures go beyond the binary model, offering a third or fourth gender category. Other cultures allow
individuals to adopt, without sanctions, a gender role that is not congruent with their biological sex.
In short, biology need not be destiny when it comes to gender roles, as we are increasingly discovering
in the United States.
Variability among Binary Cultures
Even societies with a binary gender system exhibit enormous variability in the meanings and practices associated with being male or female. Sometimes male-female distinctions pervade virtually all
aspects of life, structuring space, work, social life, communication, body decoration, and expressive
forms such as music. For instance, both genders may farm, but may have separate fields for “male”
and “female” crops and gender-specific crop rituals. Or, the village public space may be spatially
segregated with a “men’s house” (a special dwelling only for men, like a “men’s club”) and a “women’s
house.” In some societies, such as the Sambia of New Guinea, even when married couples occupy the
same house, the space within the house is divided into male and female areas.18
Women and men can also have gender-specific religious rituals and deities and use gender-identified tools. There are cases of “male” and “female” foods, rains, and even “languages” (including
words, verb forms, pronouns, inflections, and writing systems; one example is the Nu Shu writing
system used by some women in parts of China in the twentieth century).19 Gender ideologies can
emphasize differences in character, capacities, and morality, sometimes portraying males and females
as “opposites” on a continuum.
In societies that are highly segregated by gender, gender relationships sometimes are seen as hostile
or oppositional with one of the genders (usually female) viewed as potentially threatening. Female
bodily fluids, such as menstrual blood and vaginal secretions, can be dangerous, damaging to men,
“impure,” and “polluting,” especially in ritual contexts. In other cases, however, menstrual blood is
associated with positive power. A girl’s first menstruation may be celebrated publicly with elaborate
community rituals, as among the Bemba in southern Africa, and subsequent monthly flows bring
special privileges.20 Men in some small-scale societies go through ritualized nose-bleeding, sometimes
called “male menstruation,” though the meanings are quite complex.21
Gender Relations: Separate and Unequal
Of course, gender-differentiation is not unique to small-scale societies like the Sambia. Virtually
all major world religions have traditionally segregated males and females spatially and “marked” them
in other ways. Look at eighteenth- and nineteenth- century churches, which had gender-specific seating; at contemporary Saudi Arabia, Iranian, and conservative Malaysian mosques; and at Orthodox
Jewish temples today in Israel and the United States.
Ambivalence and even fear of female sexuality, or negative associations with female bodily fluids,
such as menstrual blood, are widespread in the world’s major religions. Orthodox Jewish women
are not supposed to sleep in the same bed as their husbands when menstruating. In Kypseli, Greece,
people believe that menstruating women can cause wine to go bad.22 In some Catholic Portuguese
villages, menstruating women are restricted from preparing fresh pork sausages and from being in

Gender and Sexuality

7

the room where the sausages are made as their presence is believed to cause the pork to spoil. Contact with these women also supposedly wilts plants and causes inexplicable movements of objects.23
Orthodox forms of Hinduism prohibit menstruating women from activities such as cooking and
attending temple.
These traditions are being challenged. A 2016 British Broadcasting Company (BBC) television
program, for example, described “Happy to Bleed,” a movement in India to change negative attitudes about menstruation and eliminate the ban on menstruating-age women entering the famous
Sabriamala Temple in Kerala.24
Emergence of Public (Male) vs. Domestic (Female) Spheres
In large stratified and centralized societies—that is, the powerful empires (so-called “civilizations”)
that have dominated much of the world for the past several thousand years—a “public” vs. “private”
or “domestic” distinction appears. The public, extra-family sphere of life is a relatively recent development in human history even though most of us have grown up in or around cities and towns with
their obvious public spaces, physical manifestations of the political, economic, and other extra-family
institutions that characterize large-scale societies. In such settings, it is easy to identify the domestic
or private spaces families occupy, but a similar public-domestic distinction exists in villages. The
public sphere is associated with, and often dominated by, males. The domestic sphere, in contrast, is
primarily associated with women—though it, too, can be divided into male and female spheres. In
India, for example, where households frequently consist of multi-generational groups of male siblings
and their families, there often are “lounging” spaces where men congregate, smoke pipes, chat, and
meet visitors. Women’s spaces typically focus around the kitchen or cooking hearth (if outside) or at
other sites of women’s activities.25 In some cases, an inner court is the women’s area while the outer
porch and roads that connect the houses are male spaces. In some Middle Eastern villages, women
create over-the-roof paths for visiting each other without going “outside” into male spaces.26
The gender division between public and private/domestic, however, is as symbolic as it is spatial,
often emphasizing a gender ideology of social separation between males and females (except young
children), social regulation of sexuality and marriage, and male rights and control over females (wives,
daughters, sisters, and mothers). It manifests as separate spaces in mosques, sex-segregated schools,
and separate “ladies compartments” on trains, as in India (Figure 5).
Of course, it is impossible to separate the
genders completely. Rural women pass
through the more-public spaces of a village to
fetch water and firewood and to work in agricultural fields. Women shop in public markets, though that can be a “man’s job.” As girls
more often attend school, as in India, they
take public transportation and thus travel
through public “male” spaces even if they
travel to all-girl schools (Figure 6). At college,
they can be immersed in and even live on
campuses where men predominate, especially
if they are studying engineering, computer
science, or other technical subjects (Figure 7).

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

This can severely limit Indian girls’ educational and occupational choices, particularly for girls who
come from relatively conservative families or regions.27
One way in which women navigate “male” spaces is by adopting routes, behavior (avoiding eye
contact), and/or clothing that create separation.28 The term “purdah,” the separation or segregation
of women from men, literally means “veiling,” although other devices can be used. In nineteenth
century Jaipur, Rajasthan, royal Rajput women inhabited the inner courtyard spaces of the palace.
But an elaborate false building front, the hawa mahal, allowed them to view the comings and goings
on the street without being exposed to the public male gaze.
As demand for educating girls has grown in traditionally sexually segregated societies, all-girl
schools have been constructed (see Figure 6), paralleling processes in the late nineteenth and early
twentieth century in the United States. At the university level, however, prestigious schools that offer
high-demand subjects such as engineering often have historically been all-male, excluding women as
Harvard once did.29 In other cases, there are no female faculty members teaching traditionally male
subjects like engineering at all-women colleges. In Saudi Arabia, women’s universities have taught
courses using closed-circuit television to avoid violating norms of sexual segregation, particularly
for young, unmarried women.30 In countries such as India, gynecologists and obstetricians have
been predominantly female, in part because families object to male doctors examining and treating
women. Thus, in places that do not have female physicians, women’s health can suffer.
Sanctions, Sexuality, Honor, and Shame
Penalties for deviating from the rules of social separation vary across and within cultures. In small
communities, neighbors and extended family kin can simply report inappropriate behavior, especially between unmarried young adults, to other family members. More severe and sometimes violent
responses by family members can occur, especially if the family’s “honor” is involved—that is, if the
young adults, especially girls, engage in activities that would “shame” or dishonor the family. Honor
and shame are complex concepts that are often linked to sexuality, especially female sexuality, and to
behavior by family members that involves or hints at sexual impropriety. The Turkish film Mustang,
nominated for the 2016 best foreign film Academy Award, offers a good illustration of how concepts
of sexualized honor and shame operate.

Gender and Sexuality

9

We hear in the news of “honor killings” carried out by conservative Muslims in countries such as
Pakistan and powerfully portrayed in documentaries such as A Girl in the River: The Price of Forgiveness (2015).31 But it is not just Islam. Some orthodox sectors of major religions, including Christianity, Judaism, and Hinduism, may hold similar views about “honor” and “shame” and impose sometimes violent sanctions against those who violate sexuality-related codes. The brutal 2012 gang
rape-murder of a young woman on a bus in Delhi, though perpetrated by strangers, was rationalized
by the men who committed the crime (and their defense attorney) as a legitimate response to the
woman’s “shameful” behavior—traveling on a bus at night with a male friend, implying sexual impropriety.32
Social separation, sex-segregated schools, and penalties for inappropriate sexual behavior have also
existed in the United States and Europe, especially among upper-strata women for whom female
“purity” was traditionally emphasized. Chastity belts in Europe, whether or not actually used, symbolized the idea that a woman’s sexuality belonged solely to her husband, thus precluding her from
engaging not only in premarital and extra-marital sex but also in masturbation (Figure 8).33 In Nathaniel Hawthorne’s The Scarlet Letter, set in mid-sixteenth century Massachusetts, Hester was forced
to wear a scarlet A on her dress and to stand on a public scaffold for three hours a day, a relatively
nonviolent but powerful form of shaming and punishment.
Stoning women to death for sexually inappropriate behavior,
especially adultery, and other violent sanctions may have occurred in some European Christian and Jewish communities.
Rape, so frequent in warfare past and present, also can
bring shame to the victim and her family, particularly in
sexually conservative societies. During the 1971 Bangladesh
war of independence against Pakistan, East Bengali women
who were raped by soldiers were ostracized by their families
because of the “shame” their rape had brought. During the
partition of India into India and Pakistan in 1947, some Sikh
families reportedly forced daughters to jump into wells to
drown rather than risk being raped by strangers.34
Alternative Models of Gender: Complementary and Fluid
Not all binary cultures are gender-segregated; nor does gender hostility necessarily accompany
gender separation. Nor are all binary cultures deeply concerned with, some might say obsessed with,
regulating female sexuality and marriage. Premarital and extra-marital sex can even be common
and acceptable, as among the !Kung San and Trobriand Islanders.35 And men are not always clearly
ranked over women as they typically are in stratified large-scale centralized societies with “patriarchal”
systems. Instead, the two genders can be seen as complementary, equally valued and both recognized
as necessary to society. Different need not mean unequal. The Lahu of southwest China and Thailand
exemplify a complementary gender system in which men and women have distinct expected roles
but a male-female pair is necessary to accomplish most daily tasks (Figure 9). A male-female pair
historically took responsibility for local leadership. Male-female dyads completed daily household
tasks in tandem and worked together in the fields. The title of anthropologist Shanshan Du’s book,
Chopsticks Only Work in Pairs (1999), encapsulates how complementary gender roles defined Lahu

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

society. A single chopstick is not
very useful; neither is a single
person, man or woman, in a dual-focused society.36
Like the Lahu, the nearby Na
believe men and women both
play crucial roles in a family and
household. Women are associated with birth and life while
men take on tasks such as butchering animals and preparing for
funerals (Figures 10 and 11). Every Na house has two large pillars
in the central hearth room, one
representing male identity and
one representing female identity.
Both are crucial, and the house might well topple symbolically without both pillars. As sociologist
Zhou Huashan explained in his 2002 book about the Na, this is a society that “values women without diminishing men.”37
Anthropologists have also encountered relatively androgynous gender-binary cultures. In these
cultures, some gender differentiation exists but “gender bending” and role-crossing are frequent, accepted, and reflect circumstances and individual capacities and preferences. Examples are the !Kung
San mentioned earlier, Native American Washoe in the United States, and some segments of European societies in countries such as Sweden and Finland and, increasingly, in the United States.38
Contemporary twenty-first century gender ideologies tend to emphasize commonality, not difference: shared human traits, flexibility, fluidity, and individual expression.
Even cultures with fairly well-defined gender roles do not necessarily view them as fixed, biologically rooted, permanent, “essentialist,” or “naturalized” as occurred in the traditional gender ideology
in the United States.39 Gender may not even be an “identity” in a psychological sense but, rather, a

Gender and Sexuality

11

social role one assumes in a particular social context just as one moves between being a student, a
daughter, an employee, a wife or husband, president of the bicycle club, and a musician.
Cultures also change over time through internal and external forces such as trade, conquest, colonialism, globalization, immigration, mass media, and, especially, films. Within every culture, there is
tremendous diversity in class, ethnicity, religion, region, education level, and generation, as well as
diversity related to more-individual family circumstances, predilections, and experiences. Gender
expectations also vary with one’s age and stage in life as well as one’s social role, even within the family (e.g., “wife” vs. “sister” vs. “mother” vs. “mother-in-law” and “father” vs. “son” vs. “brother” vs
“father-in-law”). Finally, people can appear to conform to cultural norms but find ways of working
around or ignoring them.
Even in highly male-dominated, sexually segregated societies, women find ways to pursue their
own goals, to be actors, and to push the boundaries of the gender system. Among Egyptian Awlad
‘Ali Bedouin families, for example, women rarely socialized outside their home compounds or with
unrelated men. But within their spheres, they freely interacted with other women, could influence
their husbands, and wrote and sang poetic couplets as expressive outlets.40 In some of the poorest and least-developed areas of central
India, where patrilocal extended-family male-controlled households reign,
activist Sampat Pal has organized local rural women to combat violence
based on dishonor and gender.41 Her
so-called “Gulabi Gang,” the subject
of two films, illustrates both the possibilities of resistance and the difficulties
of changing a deeply embedded system
based on gender, caste, and class system (Figure 12).42 For a related activity,
see Activity 2: Understanding Gender
from a Martian Perspective.

Unraveling Our Gender Myths: Primate Roots, “Man the Hunter,” and
Other “Origin Stories” of Gender and Male Dominance
Even unencumbered by pregnancy or infants, a female hunter would be less fleet, generally
less strong, possibly more prone to changes in emotional tonus as a consequence of the estrus
cycle, and less able to adapt to changes in temperature than males.43
—U.S. anthropologist, 1969
Women don’t ride motorcycles because they can’t; they can’t because they are not strong
enough to put their legs down to stop it.44
—Five-year-old boy, Los Angeles, 1980
Men hunted because women were not allowed to come out of their houses and roam about
in forests.45
—Pre-college student in India, 1990

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

All cultures have “creation” stories. Many have elaborate gender-related creation stories that describe the origins of males and females, their gender-specific traits, their relationships and sexual proclivities, and, sometimes, how one gender came to “dominate” the other. Our culture is no different.
The Judeo-Christian Bible, like the Koran and other religious texts, addresses origins and gender
(think of Adam and Eve), and traditional folk tales, songs, dances, and epic stories, such as the Ramayana in Hinduism and Shakespeare’s The Taming of the Shrew, treat similar themes.
Science, too, has sought to understand gender differences. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, a number of scientists, immersed in Darwinian theories, began to explore the evolutionary roots of what they assumed to be universal: male dominance. Of course, scientists, like the
rest of us, view the world partially through their own cultural lenses and through a gendered version.
Prior to the 1970s, women and gender relations were largely invisible in the research literature and
most researchers were male so it is not surprising that 1960s theories reflected prevailing male-oriented folk beliefs about gender.46
The Hunting Way of Life “Molds Man”
(and Woman)
The most popular and persistent theories argued that
male dominance is universal, rooted in species-wide gendered biological traits that we acquired, first as part of our
primate heritage, and further developed as we evolved
from apes into humans. Emergence of “the hunting way of
life” plays a major role in this story. Crucial components
include: a diet consisting primarily of meat, obtained
through planned, cooperative hunts, by all-male groups,
that lasted several days and covered a wide territory.
Such hunts would require persistence, skill, and physical stamina; tool kits to kill, butcher, transport, preserve,
and share the meat; and a social organization consisting
of a stable home base and a monogamous nuclear family. Several biological changes were attributed to adopting
this way of life: a larger and more complex brain, human
language, an upright posture (and humans’ unique foot
and stride), loss of body hair, a long period of infant dependency, and the absence of “estrus” (ovulation-related
female sexual arousal) (Figure 13), which made females
sexually “receptive” throughout the monthly cycle. Other
human characteristics purportedly made sex more enjoyable: frontal sex and fleshier breasts, buttocks, and genitals, especially the human penis. Making sex “sexier,” some
speculated, cemented the pair-bond, helping to keep the
man “around” and the family unit stable.47
Hunting was also linked to a “world view” in which
the flight of animals from humans seemed natural and
(male) aggression became normal, frequent, easy to learn,

Gender and Sexuality

13

rewarded, and enjoyable. War, some have suggested, might psychologically be simply a form of hunting and pleasurable for male participants.48 The Hunting Way of Life, in short, “molded man,” giving
our species its distinctive characteristics. And as a result, we contemporary humans cannot erase the
effects of our hunting past even though we live in cities, stalk nothing but a parking place, and can
omit meat from our diets.
The biology, psychology, and customs that separate us from the apes—all these we owe to the
hunters of time past. And, although the record is incomplete and speculation looms larger
than fact, for those who would understand the origin and nature of human behavior there is
no choice but to try to understand “Man the Hunter.”
—Washburn and Lancaster (1974)49
Gender roles and male dominance were supposed to be part of our evolutionary heritage. Males
evolved to be food-providers—stronger, more aggressive, more effective leaders with cooperative and
bonding capacities, planning skills, and technological inventiveness (tool-making). In this creation
story, females never acquired those capacities because they were burdened by their reproductive
roles—pregnancy, giving birth, lactation, and child care—and thus became dependent on males
for food and protection. The gender gap widened over time. As males initiated, explored, invented,
women stayed at home, nurtured, immersed themselves in domestic life. The result: men are active,
women are passive; men are leaders, women are followers; men are dominant, women are subordinate.
Many of us have heard pieces of this Hunting Way of Life story. Some of the men Mukhopadhyay
interviewed in Los Angeles in the late 1970s invoked “our hunting past” to explain why they—and
men generally—operated barbeques rather than their wives. Women’s qualifications to be president
were questioned on biological grounds such as “stamina” and “toughness.” Her women informants,
all hospital nurses, doubted their navigational abilities, courage, and strength despite working in
intensive care and regularly lifting heavy male patients. Mukhopadhyay encountered serious scholars
who cited women’s menstrual cycle and “emotional instability” during ovulation to explain why
women “can’t” hunt.
Similar stories are invoked today for everything from some men’s love of hunting to why men
dominate “technical” fields, accumulate tools, have extra-marital affairs or commit the vast majority
of homicides. Strength and toughness remain defining characteristics of masculinity in the United
States, and these themes often permeate national political debates.50 One element in the complex
debate over gun control is the male-masculine strength-through-guns and man-the-hunter association, and it is still difficult for some males in the United States to feel comfortable with their soft,
nurturant, emotional, and artistic sides.51
What is most striking about man-the-hunter scenarios is how closely they resemble 1950s U.S.
models of family and gender, which were rooted in the late nineteenth century “cult of domesticity”
and “true womanhood.” Father is “head” of the family and the final authority, whether in household
decisions or in disciplining children. As “provider,” Father goes “outside” into the cold, cruel world,
hunting for work. Mother, as “chief mom,” remains “inside” at the home base, creating a domestic
refuge against the “survival of the fittest” “jungle.” American anthropologists seemed to have subconsciously projected their own folk models onto our early human ancestors.
Altering this supposedly “fundamental” gender system, according to widely read authors in the
1970s, would go against our basic “human nature.” This belief was applied to the political arena,

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

then a virtually all-male domain, especially at state and national levels. The following quote from
1971 is particularly relevant and worthy of critical evaluation since, for the first time, a major U.S.
political party selected a woman as its 2016 presidential candidate (See Text Box 3, Gender and the
Presidential Election).
To make women equal participants in the political process, we will have to change the very
process itself, which means changing a pattern bred into our behavior over the millennia.
—Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox52
Replacing Stories with Reality
Decades of research, much of it by a new generation of women scholars, have altered our view
of the hunting way of life in our evolutionary past.53 For example, the old stereotype of primates as
living in male-centered, male-dominated groups does not accurately describe our closest primate relatives, gorillas, chimpanzees, and bonobos. The stereotypes came from 1960s research on savannah,
ground-dwelling baboons that suggested they were organized socially by a stable male-dominance hierarchy, the “core” of the group, that was established through force, regulated sexual access to females,
and provided internal and external defense of the “troop” in a supposedly hostile savannah environment.54 Females lacked hierarchies or coalitions, were
passive, and were part of dominant male “harems.”
Critics first argued that baboons, as monkeys rather
than apes, were too far removed from humans evolutionarily to tell us much about early human social organization. Then, further research on baboons living in
other environments by primatologists such as Thelma
Rowell discovered that those baboons were neither
male-focused nor male-dominated. Instead, the stable
group core was matrifocal—a mother and her offspring constituted the central and enduring ties. Nor
did males control female sexuality. Quite the contrary
in fact. Females mated freely and frequently, choosing
males of all ages, sometimes establishing special relationships— “friends with favors.” Dominance, while
infrequent, was not based simply on size or strength;
it was learned, situational, and often stress-induced.
And like other primates, both male and female baboons used sophisticated strategies, dubbed “primate
politics,” to predict and manipulate the intricate social
networks in which they lived.55
Rowell also restudied the savannah baboons. Even
they did not fit the baboon “stereotype.” She found
that their groups were loosely structured with no specialized stable male-leadership coalitions and were sociable, matrifocal, and infant-centered much like the
Rhesus monkeys pictured below (see Figure 15). Fe-

Gender and Sexuality

15

males actively initiated sexual encounters with a variety of male partners. When attacked by predators
or frightened by some other major threat, males, rather than “defending the troop,” typically would
flee, running away first and leaving the females carrying infants to follow behind (Figures 16).56
Man the Hunter, the Meat-Eater?
The second, more important challenge was to key assumptions about the hunting way of life. Archaeological and paleontological fossil evidence and ethnographic data from contemporary foragers
revealed that hunting and meat it provided were not the primary subsistence mode. Instead, gathered
foods such as plants, nuts, fruits, roots and small fish found in rivers and ponds constituted the bulk
of such diets and provided the most stable food source in all but a few settings (northerly climates,
herd migration routes, and specific geographical and historical settings). When meat was important,
it was more often “scavenged” or “caught” than hunted.
A major symposium on human evolution concluded that “opportunistic” “scavenging” was probably the best description of early human hunting activities. Often, tools found in pre-modern human
sites such as caves would have been more appropriate for “smashing” scavenged bones than hunting
live animals.57 Hunting, when carried out, generally did not involve large-scale, all-male, cooperative expeditions involving extensive planning and lengthy expeditions over a wide territorial range.
Instead, as among the Hadza of Tanzania, hunting was likely typically conducted by a single male,
or perhaps two males, for a couple of hours, often without success. When hunting collectively, as
occurs among the Mbuti in the Central African rainforest, groups of families likely participated with
women and men driving animals into nets. Among the Agta of the Philippines, women rather than
men hunt collectively using dogs to herd animals to a place where they can be killed.58 And !Kung
San men, despite what was shown in the 1957 ethnographic film The Hunters, do not normally hunt
giraffe; they usually pursue small animals such as hares, rats, and gophers.
Discrediting the Hunting Hypothesis
Once the “hunting-meat” hypothesis was discredited, other parts of the theory began to unravel,
especially the link between male dominance and female economic dependency. We now know that
for most of human history—99 percent of it prior to the invention of agriculture some 10,000 or so
years ago—women have “worked,” often providing the stable sources of food for their family. Richard
Lee, Marjorie Shostak, and others have detailed, with caloric counts and time-work estimates, the
significance of women’s gathering contributions even in societies such as the !Kung San, in which
hunting occurs regularly.59 In foraging societies that rely primarily on fish, women also play a major
role, “collecting” fish from rivers, lakes, and ponds. The exceptions are atypical environments such as
the Arctic.
Of course, “meat-getting” is a narrow definition of “food getting” or “subsistence” work. Many
food processing activities are time-consuming. Collecting water and firewood is crucial, heavy work
and is often done by women (Figure 17). Making and maintaining clothing, housing, and tools also
occupy a significant amount of time. Early humans, both male and female, invented an array of
items for carrying things (babies, wood, water), dug tubers, processed nuts, and cooked food. The
invention of string some 24,000 years ago, a discovery so essential that it produced what some have
called the “String Revolution,” is attributed to women.60 There is the “work of kinship,” of “healing,”

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

of “ritual,” of “teaching” the next generation,
and emotional “work. All are part of the work
of living and of the “invisible” work that
women do.
Nor is it just hunting that requires intelligence, planning, cooperation, and detailed
knowledge. Foragers have lived in a wide
variety of environments across the globe,
some more challenging than others (such as
Alaska). In all of these groups, both males and
females have needed and have developed intensive detailed knowledge of local flora and
fauna and strategies for using those resources.
Human social interactions also require sophisticated mental and communication skills,
both verbal and nonverbal. In short, humans’
complex brains and other modern traits developed as an adaptation to complex social life, a lengthy
period of child-dependency and child-rearing that required cooperative nurturing, and many different kinds of “work” that even the simplest human societies performed.
Refuting Pregnancy and Motherhood as Debilitating
Finally, cross-cultural data refutes another central man-the-hunter stereotype: the “burden” of
pregnancy and child care. Women’s reproductive roles do not generally prevent them from food-getting, including hunting; among the Agta, women hunt when pregnant. Foraging societies accommodate the work-reproduction “conflict” by spacing out their pregnancies using indigenous methods of
“family planning” such as prolonged breast feeding, long post-pregnancy periods of sexual inactivity,
and native herbs and medicinal plants. Child care, even for infants, is rarely solely the responsibility
of the birth mother. Instead, multiple caretakers are the norm: spouses, children, other relatives, and
neighbors.61 Reciprocity is the key to human social life and to survival in small-scale societies, and
reciprocal child care is but one example of such reciprocity. Children and infants accompany their
mothers (or fathers) on gathering trips, as among the !Kung San, and on Aka collective net-hunting
expeditions. Agta women carry nursing infants with them when gathering-hunting, leaving older
children at home in the care of spouses or other relatives.62
In pre-industrial horticultural and agricultural societies, having children and “working” are not
incompatible—quite the opposite! Anthropologists long ago identified “female farming systems,”
especially in parts of Africa and Southeast Asia, in which farming is predominantly a woman’s job
and men “help out” as needed.63
In most agricultural societies, women who do not come from high-status or wealthy families
perform a significant amount of agricultural labor, though it often goes unrecognized in the dominant gender ideology. Wet-rice agriculture, common in south and southeast Asia, is labor-intensive,
particularly weeding and transplanting rice seedlings, which are often done by women (Figure 10).
Harvesting rice, wheat, and other grains also entails essential input by women. Yet the Indian Census
traditionally records only male family members as “farmers.” In the United States, women’s work on
family-owned farms is often invisible.64

Gender and Sexuality

17

Women may accommodate their reproductive and child-rearing roles by engaging in work that
is more compatible with child care, such as cooking, and in activities that occur closer to home and
are interruptible and perhaps less dangerous, though cooking fires, stoves, and implements such as
knives certainly can cause harm!65 More often, women adjust their food-getting “work” in response to
the demands of pregnancy, breast-feeding, and other child care activities. They gather or process nuts
while their children are napping; they take their children with them to the fields to weed or harvest
and, in more recent times, to urban construction sites in places such as India, where women often do
the heaviest (and lowest-paid) work.
In the United States, despite a long-standing cultural model of the stay-at-home mom, some
mothers have always worked outside the home, mainly out of economic necessity. This shifting group
includes single-divorced-widowed mothers and married African-Americans (pre- and post-slavery),
immigrants, and Euro-American women with limited financial resources. But workplace policies
(except during World War II) have historically made it harder rather than easier for women (and
men) to carry out family responsibilities, including requiring married women and pregnant women
to quit their jobs.66 Circumstances have not improved much. While pregnant women in the United
States are no longer automatically dismissed from their jobs—at least not legally—the United States
lags far behind most European countries in providing affordable child care and paid parental leave.

Family and Marriage: A Cultural Construct and a Social Invention
Unraveling the theory of the hunting-way-of-life scenario, especially female dependence on
males, undermines the “naturalness” of the nuclear family with its male-provider-protector and female-domestic-child-care division of labor. More than one hundred years of cross-cultural research
has revealed the varied forms humans have invented for “partnering”—living in households, raising
children, establishing long-term relationships, transmitting valuables to offspring, and other social
behaviors associated with “family.” Once again, the universality and evolutionary origins of the U.S.
form of the human family is more fiction than fact, a projection of our cultural model of family and
gender roles onto the past and onto the entire human species.
Family: Biology and Culture
What is natural about the family? Like gender and sexuality, there is a biological component.
There is a biological mother and a biological father, although the mother plays a significantly larger
and longer role from the time of conception through the end of infant’s dependence. In the past,
conception usually required sexual intercourse, but that is no longer the case thanks to sperm banks,
which have made the embodied male potentially obsolete, biologically speaking. There is also a biological relationship between parents and offspring—again, more obvious in the case of the mother
since the baby develops in and emerges from her body. Nevertheless, DNA and genes are real and
influence the traits and potentialities of the next generation.
Beyond those biological “realities,” culture and society seem to take over, building on—or ignoring—biology. We all know there are biological fathers who may be unaware of or not concerned
about their biological offspring and not involved in their care and biological mothers who, after
giving birth, give up their children through adoption or to other family members. In recent decades,
technology has allowed women to act as “surrogate mothers,” using their bodies as carriers for implanted fertilized eggs of couples who wish to have a child. On the other hand, we all probably know

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

of excellent parents who are not the children’s biological mothers and fathers, and “legal” parenthood
through adoption can have more-profound parenting consequences for children than biological parenthood.
When we think of good (or bad) parents, or of someone as a really “good mother,” as an “excellent
father,” as two “wonderful mothers,” we are not talking biology. We usually are thinking of a set of
cultural and behavioral expectations, and being an adoptive rather than a biological parent isn’t really
the issue. Clearly, then, parenthood, mother-father relationships, and other kinship relationships
(with siblings, grandparents, and uncles-aunts) are not simply rooted in biology but are also social
roles, legal relationships, meanings and expectations constructed by human cultures in specific social
and historical contexts. This is not to deny the importance of kinship; it is fundamental, especially
in small-scale pre-industrial societies. But kinship is as much about culture as it is about biology.
Biology, in a sense, is only the beginning—and may not be necessary.
Marriage also is not “natural.” It is a cultural invention that involves various meanings and functions in different cultural contexts. We all know that it is not necessary to be married to have sex or
to have children. Indeed, in the United States, a growing number of women who give birth are not
married, and the percent of unmarried women giving birth is higher in many northwestern European
countries such as Sweden.67 Cross-culturally, marriage seems to be primarily about societal regulation of relationships—a social contract between two individuals and, often, their families, that specifies rights and obligations of married individuals and of the offspring that married women produce.
Some anthropologists have argued that marriage IS primarily about children and “descent”—who
will “own” children.68 To whom will they belong? With what rights, obligations, social statuses, access
to resources, group identities, and all the other assets—and liabilities—that exist within a society?
Children have historically been essential for family survival—for literal reproduction and for social
reproduction.
Think, for a moment, about our taken-for-granted assumptions about to whom children belong.69
Clearly, children emerge from a woman’s body and, indeed, after approximately nine months, it is her
body that has nurtured and “grown” this child. But who “owns” that child legally—to whom it “belongs” and the beliefs associated with how it was conceived and about who played a role in its conception—is not a biological given. Not in human societies. One fascinating puzzle in human evolution
is how females lost control over their sexuality and their offspring! Why do so many, though not all,
cultural theories of procreation consider women’s role as minor, if not irrelevant—not as the “seed,”
for example, but merely as a “carrier” of the male seed she will eventually “deliver” to its “owner”?
Thus, having a child biologically is not equivalent to social “ownership.” Marriage, cross-culturally,
deals with social ownership of offspring. What conditions must be met? What exchanges must occur,
particularly between families or kinship groups, for that offspring to be theirs, his, hers—for it to be
a legitimate “heir”?
Marriage is, then, a “contract,” usually between families, even if unwritten. Throughout most of
human history, kinship groups and, later, religious institutions have regulated marriage. Most major
religions today have formal laws and marriage “contracts,” even in societies with “civil” marriage
codes. In some countries, like India, there is a separate marriage code for each major religion in
addition to a secular, civil marriage code. Who children “belong to” is rarely solely about biology,
and when biology is involved, it is biology shaped by society and culture. The notion of an “illegitimate” child in the United States has not been about biology but about “legitimacy,” that is, whether
the child was the result of a legally recognized relationship that entitled offspring to certain rights,
including inheritance.

Gender and Sexuality

19

From this perspective, what we think of as a “normal” or “natural” family in the United States is
actually a culturally and historically specific, legally codified set of relationships between two individuals and, to some extent, their families. Cross-culturally, the U.S. (and “traditional” British-Euro-American) nuclear family is quite unusual and atypical. Married couples in the United States
“ideally” establish a separate household, a nuclear-family-based household, rather than living with
one spouse’s parents and forming a larger multi-generational household, often referred to as an “extended” family, which is the most common form of family structure. In addition, U.S. marriages are
monogamous—legally, one may have only one husband or wife at a time. But a majority of societies
that have been studied by anthropologists have allowed polygamy (multiple spouses). Polygyny (one
husband, multiple wives) is most common but polyandry (one wife, multiple husbands) also occurs;
occasionally marriages involve multiple husbands and multiple wives. Separate spouses, particularly
wives, often have their own dwelling space, commonly shared with their children, but usually live
in one compound, with their husbands’ parents and his relatives. Across cultures, then, most households tend to be versions of extended-family-based groups.
These two contrasts alone lead to families in the United States that are smaller and focused more
on the husband-wife (or spousal) and parent-child relationships; other relatives are more distant,
literally and often conceptually. They are also more “independent”—or, some would say, more dependent on a smaller set of relationships to fulfill family responsibilities for work, child care, finances,
emotional companionship, and even sexual obligations. Other things being equal, the death or loss
of a spouse in a “traditional” U.S. family has a bigger impact than such a loss in an extended family
household (see Text Box 1). On the other hand, nuclear families own and control their incomes and
other assets, unlike many extended families in which those are jointly held. This ownership and control of resources can give couples and wives in nuclear families greater freedom.
There are other cross-cultural variations in family, marriage and kinship: in expectations for
spouses and children, exchanges between families, inheritance rules, marriage rituals, ideal ages and
characteristics of spouses, conditions for dissolving a marriage and remarriage after a spouse’s death,
attitudes about premarital, extra-marital, and marital sexuality, and so forth. How “descent” is calculated is a social-cultural process that carves out a smaller “group” of “kin” from all of the potential
relatives in which individuals have rights (e.g., to property, assistance, political representation) and
obligations (economic, social). Often there are explicit norms about who one should and should not
marry, including which relatives. Marriage between people we call “cousins” is common cross-culturally. These variations in the definition of marriage and family reflect what human cultures do with
the biological “facts of life,” creating many different kinds of marriage, family, and kinship systems.
Another major contrast between the U.S. and many other cultures is that our husband-wife relationship is based on free choice and “romantic love.” Marriages are arranged by the couple and reflect
their desires rather than the desires of larger societal groups. Of course, even in the United States, that
has never been entirely the case. Informal prohibitions, often imposed by families, have shaped (and
continue to shape) individual choices, such as marrying outside one’s religion, racial/ethnic group,
and socio-economic class or within one’s gender. Some religions explicitly forbid marrying someone
from another religion. But U.S. formal government prohibitions have also existed, such as laws
against inter-racial marriage, which were only declared unconstitutional in 1967 (Loving v. Virginia).
These so-called anti-miscegenation laws, directed mainly at European-American and African-Americans, were designed to preserve the race-based system of social stratification in the United
States.70 They did not affect both genders equally but reflected the intersection of gender with class
and racial inequality. During slavery, most inter-racial sexual activity was initiated by Euro-American

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

males. It was not uncommon for male slave owners to have illicit, often forced sexual relations with
female slaves. The laws were created so that children of slave women inherited their mother’s racial
and slave status, thereby also adding to the slave property of the “father.”
Euro-American women’s relationships with African-American men, though far less frequent and
usually voluntary, posed special problems. Offspring would inherit the mother’s “free” status and increase the free African-American population or possibly end up “passing” as “White.” Social and legal
weapons were used to prevent such relationships. Euro-American women, especially poorer women,
who were involved sexually with African-American men were stereotyped as prostitutes, sexually depraved, and outcasts. Laws were passed that fined them for such behavior or required them to work
as indentured servants for the child’s father’s slave owner; other laws prohibited cohabitation between
a “White” and someone of African descent.
Post-slavery anti-miscegenation laws tried to preserve the “color line” biologically by outlawing
mating and to maintain the legal “purity” and status of Euro-American lineages by outlawing inter-racial marriage. In reality, of course, inter-racial mating continued, but inter-racial offspring did
not have the rights of “legitimate” children. By the 1920s, some states, like Virginia, had outlawed
“Whites” from marrying anyone who had a “single drop” of African blood. By 1924, 38 states had
outlawed Black-White marriages, and as late as the 1950s, inter-racial marriage bans existed in almost
half of the states and had been extended to Native Americans, Mexicans, “East Indians,” Malays, and
other groups designated “not White.”71
Overall, stratified inegalitarian societies tend to have the strictest controls over marriage. Such
control is especially common when some groups are considered inherently superior to others, be it
racially, castes, or “royal” blood. Patriarchal societies closely regulate and restrict premarital sexual
contacts of women, especially higher-status women. One function of marriage in these societies is
to reproduce the existing social structure, partially by insuring that marriages and any offspring resulting from them will maintain and potentially increase the social standing of the families involved.
Elite, dominant groups have the most to lose in terms of status and wealth, including inheritances.
“Royalty” in Britain, for example, traditionally are not supposed to marry “commoners” so as to ensure that the royal “blood,” titles, and other privileges remain in the “royal” family.
Cross-culturally, even in small-scale societies that are relatively egalitarian such as the San and
the Trobriand Islanders studied by Annette Weiner, marriage is rarely a purely individual choice left
to the wishes—and whims of, or “electricity” between—the two spouses.72 This is not to say that
spouses never have input or prior contact; they may know each other and even have grown up together. In most societies, however, a marriage usually has profound social consequences and is far too
important to be “simply” an individual choice. Since marriages affect families and kin economically,
socially, and politically, family members (especially elders) play a major role in arranging marriages
along lines consistent with their own goals and using their own criteria. Families sometimes arrange
their children’s marriages when the children are quite young. In Nuosu communities of southwest
China, some families held formal engagement ceremonies for babies to, ideally, cement a good crosscousin partnership, though no marital relationship would occur until much later.73 There also can be
conventional categories of relatives who are supposed to marry each other so young girls might know
that their future husbands will be particular cousins, and the girls might play or interact with them
at family functions as children.74
This does not mean that romantic love is purely a recent or U.S. and European phenomenon. Romantic love is widespread even in cultures that have strong views on arranging marriages. Traditional
cultures in India, both Hindu and Muslim, are filled with “love stories” expressed in songs, paintings,

Gender and Sexuality

21

and famous temple sculptures. One of the most beautiful buildings in the world, the Taj Mahal, is a
monument to Shah Jahan’s love for his wife. Where young girls’ marriages are arranged, often to older
men (as among the Maasai), we know that those girls, once married, sometimes take “lovers” about
whom they sing “love songs” and with whom they engage in sexual relations.75 Truly, romantic love,
sex, and marriage can exist independently.
Nevertheless, cross-culturally and historically, marriages based on free choice and romantic love
are relatively unusual and recent. Clearly, young people all over the world are attracted to the idea,
which is “romanticized” in Bollywood films, popular music, poetry, and other forms of contemporary popular culture. No wonder so many families—and conservative social and religious groups—
are concerned, if not terrified, of losing control over young people’s mating and marriage behavior
(see, for example, the excellent PBS documentary The World before Her).76 A social revolution is truly
underway and we haven’t even gotten to same-sex sex and same-sex marriage.
Text Box 1: What Can We Learn from the Na? Shattering Ideas about
Family and Relationships
By Tami Blumenfield

We have certain expectations about the trajectories of relationships and family life in the
United States—young people meet, fall in love, purchase a diamond, and then marry. To
some extent, this specific view of family is changing as same-sex relationships and nolonger-new reproductive technologies expand our views of what family can and cannot be.
Still, quite often, we think about family in a rigid, heteronormative context, assuming that
everyone wants the same thing.
What if we think about family in an entirely different way? In fact, many people already
do. In 2014, 10 percent of American adults lived in cohabitating relationships. Meanwhile,
51 percent were married in state-endorsed relationships, and that percentage has been
dropping fast.77 Those numbers may sound familiar as part of politicians’ “focus on the
family,” decrying the number of children born to unmarried parents and bemoaning the
weakening of an institution they hold dear (even though their colleagues are frequently
exposed in the news for sexual indiscretions).
It is true that adults with limited resources face challenges raising children when they
have limited access to affordable, high-quality child care. They struggle when living wage
jobs migrate to other countries or other states where workers earn less. In an economic
system that encourages concentration of resources in a tiny fraction of the population,
it is no wonder that they struggle. But is the institution of marriage really to blame? The
number of cohabitating unmarried individuals is high in many parts of Europe as well, but
with better support structures in place, parents fare much better. They enjoy parental leave
policies that mandate their jobs be held for them upon return from leave. They also benefit
from strong educational systems and state-subsidized child care, and their children enjoy
better outcomes than ours.
Critics see the “focus on the family” by U.S. politicians as a convenient political trick that
turns attention away from crucial policy issues and refocuses it on the plight of the institution of marriage and the fate of the nation’s children. Few people can easily dismiss these
concerns, even if they do not reflect their own lived realities. And besides, the family model trumpeted by politicians as lost is but one form of family that is not universal even in the
United States, much less among all human groups, as sociologist Stephanie Coontz convincingly argued in books including The Way We Never Were (1992) and The Way We
Really Are (1997). In fact, the “focus on family” ignores the diverse ways peoples on this

22

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
continent have organized their relationships. For Hopi, a Native American group living in
what is today the southwestern United States, for example, it is their mother’s kin rather
than their husbands’ from whom they draw support. The Navajo, Kiowa, and Iroquois Native American cultures all organize their family units and arrange their relationships differently.
Na people living in the foothills of the Himalayas have many ways to structure family
relationships. One relationship structure looks like what we might expect in a place where
people make their living from the land and raise livestock to sustain themselves. Young
adults marry, and brides sometimes moves into the husband’s childhood home and live
with his parents. They have children, who live with them, and they work together. A second
Na family structure looks much less familiar: young adults live in large, extended family
households with several generations and form romantic relationships with someone from
another household. When they are ready, the young man seeks permission to spend the
night in the young woman’s room. If both parties desire, their relationship can evolve into a
long-term one, but they do not marry and do not live together in the same household. When
a child is conceived, or before if the couple chooses, their relationship moves from a secretive one to one about which others know. Even so, the young man rarely spends daylight
hours with his partner. Instead, he returns to his own family’s home to help with farming
and other work there. The state is not involved in their relationship, and their money is not
pooled either, though presents change hands. If either partner becomes disenchanted with
the other, the relationship need not persist. Their children remain in the mother’s home,
nurtured by adults who love them deeply—not just by their mothers but also by their grandmothers, maternal aunts, maternal uncles, and often older cousins as well. They enjoy
everyday life with an extended family (Figure 18). The third Na family structure mixes the
preceding two systems. Someone joins a larger household as
a spouse. Perhaps the family
lacked enough women or men
to manage the household and
farming tasks adequately or the
couple faced pressure from the
government to marry.
As an anthropologist who
has done fieldwork in Na communities since 2001, I can attest to the loving and nurturing
families their system encourages. It protects adults as well as
children. Women who are suffering in a relationship can end
it with limited consequences for
their children, who do not need
to relocate to a new house and
adjust to a new lifestyle. Lawyers need not get involved, as
they often must in divorce cases elsewhere in the world. A man who cannot afford to build a new house for his family—a
significant pressure for people in many areas of China that prevents young men from marrying or delays their marriages—can still enjoy a relationship or can choose, instead, to

Gender and Sexuality

23

devote himself to his role as an uncle. Women and men who do not feel the urge to pursue
romantic lives are protected in this system as well; they can contribute to their natal families
without having to worry that no one will look out for them as they age.
Like any system composed of real people, Na systems are not perfect, and neither are
the people who represent them. In the last few decades, people have flocked to Lugu Lake
hoping to catch a glimpse of this unusual society, and many tourists and tour guides have
mistakenly taken Na flexibility in relationships as signifying a land of casual sex with no
recognition of paternity. These are highly problematic assumptions that offend my Na acquaintances deeply. Na people have fathers and know who they are, and they often enjoy
close relationships despite living apart. In fact, fathers are deeply involved in children’s
lives and often participate in everyday child-rearing activities. Of course, as in other parts
of the world, some fathers participate more than others. Fathers and their birth families
also take responsibility for contributing to school expenses and make other financial contributions as circumstances permit. Clearly, this is not a community in which men do not fulfill
responsibilities as fathers. It is one in which the responsibilities and how they are fulfilled
varies markedly from those of fathers living in other places and cultures.
Though problems exist in Na communities and their relationship patterns are already
changing and transforming them, it is encouraging that so many people can live satisfied
lives in this flexible system. The Na shatter our expectations about how families and relationships should be organized. They also inspire us to ask whether we can, and should,
adapt part of their ethos into our own society.78
For more information, see the TEDx FurmanU presentation by Tami Blumenfield.

Male Dominance: Universal and Biologically Rooted?
Unraveling the myth of the hunting way of life and women’s dependence on male hunting undermined the logic behind the argument for biologically rooted male dominance. Still, for feminist
scholars, the question of male dominance remained important. Was it universal, “natural,” inevitable,
and unalterable? Were some societies gender-egalitarian? Was gender inequality a cultural phenomenon, a product of culturally and historically specific conditions?
Research in the 1970s and 1980s addressed these questions.79 Some argued that “sexual asymmetry” was universal and resulted from complex cultural processes related to women’s reproductive
roles.80 Others presented evidence of gender equality in small-scale societies (such as the !Kung San
and Native American Iroquois) but argued that it had disappeared with the rise of private property
and “the state.”81 Still others focused on evaluating the “status of women” using multiple “variables”
or identifying “key determinants” (e.g., economic, political, ecological, social, and cultural) of women’s status.”82 By the late 1980s, scholars realized how difficult it was to define, much less measure,
male dominance across cultures and even the “status of women” in one culture.
Think of our own society or the area in which you live. How would you go about assessing the
“status of women” to determine whether it is male-dominated? What would you examine? What information would you gather and from whom? What difficulties might you encounter when making a
judgment? Might men and women have different views? Then imagine trying to compare the status
of women in your region to the status of women in, let’s say, the Philippines, Japan, or China or in
a kin-based, small society like that of the Minangkabau living in Indonesia and the !Kung San in
Botswana. Next, how might Martians, upon arriving in your city, decide whether you live in a “male

24

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

dominated” culture? What would they notice? What would they have difficulty deciphering? This
experiment gives you an idea of what anthropologists confronted—except they were trying to include
all societies that ever existed. Many were accessible only through archaeological and paleontological
evidence or through historical records, often made by travelers, sailors, or missionaries. Surviving
small-scale cultures were surrounded by more-powerful societies that often imposed their cultures
and gender ideologies on those under their control.
For example, the !Kung San of Southern Africa when studied by anthropologists, had already been
pushed by European colonial rulers into marginal areas. Most were living on “reserves” similar to Indian reservations in the United States. Others lived in market towns and were sometimes involved in
the tourist industry and in films such as the ethnographically flawed and ethnocentric film The Gods
Must Be Crazy (1980). !Kung San women at the time were learning European Christian ideas about
sexuality, clothing, and covering their breasts, and children were attending missionary-established
schools, which taught the church’s and European views of gender and spousal roles along with the
Bible, Jesus, and the Virgin Mary. During the struggle against apartheid in South Africa, the South
African military tried to recruit San to fight against the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO), taunting reluctant !Kung San men by calling them “chicken” and assuming, erroneously,
that the !Kung San shared their “tough guys / tough guise” version of masculinity.83
Given the complexity of evaluating “universal male dominance,” scholars abandoned the search for
simple “global” answers, for key “determinants” of women’s status that would apply to all societies. A
1988 Annual Review of Anthropology article by Mukhopadhyay and Higgins concluded that “One of
the profound realizations of the past ten years is that the original questions, still unanswerable, may
be both naive and inappropriate.”84 Among other things, the concept of “status” contains at least five
separate, potentially independent components: economics, power/authority, prestige, autonomy, and
gender ideologies/beliefs. One’s life-cycle stage, kinship role, class, and other socio-economic and
social-identity variables affect one’s gender status. Thus, even within a single culture, women’s lives
are not uniform.85
New Directions in the Anthropology of Gender
More-recent research has been focused on improving the ethnographic and archaeological record
and re-examining old material. Some have turned from cause-effect relations to better understanding
how gender systems work and focusing on a single culture or cultural region. Others have explored
a single topic, such as menstrual blood and cultural concepts of masculinity and infertility across
cultures.86
Many American anthropologists “returned home,” looking with fresh eyes at the diversity of women’s lives in their own society: working-class women, immigrant women, women of various ethnic and
racial groups, and women in different geographic regions and occupations.87 Some ethnographers,
for example, immersed themselves in the abortion debates, conducting fieldwork to understand the
perspective and logic behind pro-choice and anti-choice activists in North Dakota. Others headed to
college campuses, studying the “culture of romance” or fraternity gang rape.88 Peggy Sanday’s work
on sexual coercion, including her cross-cultural study of rape-prone societies, was followed by other
studies of power-coercion-gender relationships, such as using new reproductive technologies for selecting the sex of children.89
Many previously unexplored areas such as the discourse around reproduction, representations of
women in medical professions, images in popular culture, and international development policies

Gender and Sexuality

25

(which had virtually ignored gender) came under critical scrutiny.90 Others worked on identifying
complex local factors and processes that produce particular configurations of gender and gender
relations, such as the patrifocal (male-focused) cultural model of family in many parts of India.91
Sexuality studies expanded, challenging existing binary paradigms, making visible the lives of lesbian
mothers and other traditionally marginalized sexualities and identities.92
The past virtual invisibility of women in archaeology disappeared as a host of new studies was published, often by feminist anthropologists, including a pioneering volume by Joan Gero and Margaret
Conkey, Engendering Archaeology: Women and Prehistory. That book gave rise to a multi-volume series
specifically on gender and archaeology edited by Sarah Nelson. Everything from divisions of labor to
power relations to sexuality could be scrutinized in the archaeological record.93
Some anthropologists argued that there are recurring patterns despite the complexity and variability of human gender systems. One is the impact of women’s economic contributions on their power,
prestige, and autonomy.94 Women’s work, alone, does not necessarily give them control or ownership of what they produce. It is not always valued and does not necessarily lead to political power.
Women in many cultures engage in agricultural labor, but the fields are often owned and controlled
by their husbands’ families or by a landlord, as in many parts of India and Iran.95 The women have
little authority, prestige, or autonomy.96 Many foraging and some horticultural societies, on the other
hand, recognize women’s economic and reproductive contributions, and that recognition may reflect
relative equality in other spheres as well, including sexuality. Gender relations seem more egalitarian,
overall, in small-scale societies such as the San, Trobrianders, and Na, in part because they are kinship-based, often with relatively few valuable resources that can be accumulated; those that exist are
communally owned, usually by kinship groups in which both women and men have rights.
Another factor in gender equality is the social environment. Positive social relations—an absence
of constant hostility or warfare with neighbors—seems to be correlated with relatively egalitarian
gender relations. In contrast, militarized societies—whether small-scale horticultural groups like
the Sambia who perceive their neighbors as potential enemies or large-scale stratified societies with
formal military organizations and vast empires—seem to benefit men more than women overall.97
Warrior societies culturally value men’s roles, and warfare gives men access to economic and political
resources.
As to old stereotypes about why men are warriors, there may be another explanation. From a reproductive standpoint, men are far more expendable than women, especially women of reproductive
age.98 While this theme has not yet been taken up by many anthropologists, male roles in warfare
could be more about expendability than supposed greater male strength, aggressiveness, or courage.
One can ask why it has taken so long for women in the United States to be allowed to fly combat
missions? Certainly it is not about women not being strong enough to carry the plane.99
Patriarchy . . . But What about Matriarchy?
The rise of stratified agriculture-intensive centralized “states” has tended to produce transformations in gender relations and gender ideologies that some have called patriarchy, a male-dominated
political and authority structure and an ideology that privileges males over females overall and in
every strata of society. Gender intersects with class and, often, with religion, caste, and ethnicity.
So, while there could be powerful queens, males took precedence over females within royal families,
and while upper-class Brahmin women in India could have male servants, they had far fewer formal
assets, power, and rights than their brothers and husbands. Also, as noted earlier, families strictly

26

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

controlled their movements, interactions with males, “social reputations,” and marriages. Similarly,
while twentieth-century British colonial women in British-controlled India had power over some
Indian men, they still could not vote, hold high political office, control their own fertility or sexuality,
or exercise other rights available to their male counterparts.100 Of course, poor lower-class lower-caste
Indian women were (and still are) the most vulnerable and mistreated in India, more so overall than
their brothers, husbands, fathers, or sons.
On the other hand, we have yet to find any “matriarchies,” that is, female-dominated societies
in which the extent and range of women’s power, authority, status, and privilege parallels men’s in
patriarchal societies. In the twentieth century, some anthropologists at first confused “matriarchy”
with matrilineal. In matrilineal societies, descent or membership in a kinship group is transmitted
from mothers to their children (male and female) and then, through daughters, to their children,
and so forth (as in many Na families). Matrilineal societies create woman-centered kinship groups in
which having daughters is often more important to “continuing the line” than having sons, and living arrangements after marriage often center around related women in a matrilocal extended family
household (See Text Box 1, What Can We Learn from the Na?). Female sexuality may become less
regulated since it is the mother who carries the “seed” of the lineage. In this sense, it is the reverse of
the kinds of patrilineal, patrilocal, patrifocal male-oriented kinship groups and households one finds
in many patriarchal societies. Peggy Sanday suggested, on these and other grounds, that the Minangkabau, a major ethnic group in Indonesia, is a matriarchy.101
Ethnographic data have shown that males, especially as members of matrilineages, can be powerful
in matrilineal societies. Warfare, as previously mentioned, along with political and social stratification can alter gender dynamics. The Nayar (in Kerala, India), the Minangkabau, and the Na are
matrilineal societies embedded in, or influenced by, dominant cultures and patriarchal religions such
as Islam and Hinduism. The society of the Na in China is also matrifocal in some ways. Thus, the
larger context, including contemporary global processes, can undermine women’s power and status.102 At the same time, though, many societies are clearly matrifocal, are relatively female-centered,
and do not have the kinds of gender ideologies and systems found in most patriarchal societies.103
Text Boxes 1 and 2 provide examples of such systems.
Text Box 2: Does Black Matriarchy Exist in Brazil? Histories of Slavery and
African Cultural Survivals in Afro-Brazilian Religion
By Abby Gondek

Candomblé is an Afro-Brazilian spirit possession religion in which Yoruba (West African)
deities called orixás are honored at religious sites called terreiros where the Candomblé
priestesses (mães do santo) and their “daughters” (filhas do santo) live. One of the central
“hubs” of Candomblé worship in Brazil is the northeastern state of Bahia, where Afro-Brazilns make up more than 80 percent of the population in the capital city, Salvador. Brazil’s
geography is perceived through the lenses of race and class since Bahia, a majority Afro-Brazilian state, is viewed as underdeveloped, backward, and poor relative to the whiter
and wealthier Southern region.104
In the 1930s, a Jewish female anthropologist Ruth Landes provided a different perspective about Bahia, one that emphasized black women’s communal power. During the time in
which Landes conducted her research, the Brazilian police persecuted Candomblé communities for “harboring communists.” The Brazilian government was linked with Nazism,
torture, rape, and racism, and Afro-Brazilians resisted this oppression.105 Also during this

Gender and Sexuality
period, debate began among social scientists about whether Candomblé was a matriarchal
religion in which women were the primary spiritual leaders. The debate was rooted in the
question of where “black matriarchy” came from. Was it a result of the history of slavery or
was it an African “cultural survival”? The debate was simultaneously about the power and
importance of Afro-Brazilian women in spiritual and cultural life.
On one side of the debate was E. Franklin Frazier, an African-American sociologist
trained at University of Chicago, who maintained that Candomblé and the lack of legal
marriage gave women their important position in Bahia. He believed that black women
had been matriarchal authorities since the slavery period and described them as defiant
and self-reliant. On the other side of the debate was anthropologist Melville Herskovits,
who was trained by German immigrant Franz Boas at Columbia University. Herskovits
believed that black women’s economic roles demonstrated African cultural survivals, but
downplayed the priestesses’ importance in Candomblé.106 Herskovits portrayed patriarchy
rather than matriarchy as the central organizing principle in Bahia. He argued that African
cultural survivals in Brazil came from the patrilineal practices of Dahomey and Yoruba in
West Africa and portrayed Bahian communities as male-centered with wives and “concubines” catering to men and battling each other for male attention.
Ruth Landes and her work triggered the debate about “black matriarchy” in Bahia. Landes had studied with anthropologists Franz Boas and Ruth Benedict at Columbia University. She began her studies of Candomblé in 1938 in Salvador, Bahia, working with her
research partner, guide, and significant other, Edison Carneiro, a scholar of Afro-Brazilian
studies and journalist, resulting in publication in 1947 of The City of Women.107 Landes
contended that Afro-Brazilian women were the powerful matriarchal leaders of terreiros
de Candomblé. She called them matriarchal because she argued that their leadership was
“made up almost exclusively of women and, in any case controlled by women.”108 Landes
claimed that the women provided spiritual advice and sexual relationships in exchange
for financial support from male patrons of the terreiros. She also explained that newer
caboclo houses (in which indigenous spirits were worshipped in addition to Yoruba spirits)
had less-stringent guidelines and allowed men to become priests and dance for the gods,
actions considered taboo in the Yoruba tradition. Landes elaborated that these men were
primarily “passive” homosexuals. She looked down on this “modern” development, which
she viewed as detracting from the supposedly “pure” woman-centered Yoruba (West African) practices.109
Even Landes’ (controversial) argument about homosexuality was part of her claim about
matriarchy; she contended that the homosexual men who became pais do santo (“fathers
of the saint,” or Candomblé priests) had previously been “outcasts”—prostitutes and vagrants who were hounded by the police. By becoming like the “mothers” and acting as
women, they could gain status and respect. Landes was strongly influenced by both Edison Carneiro’s opinion and the convictions of Martiniano Eliseu do Bonfim (a revered
babalaô or “father of the secrets”) and the women priestesses of the traditional houses
(Gantois, Casa Branca, and Ilê Axé Opô Afonjá) with whom she spent the majority of her
time. Thus, her writings likely represent the views of her primary informants, making her
work unique; at that time, anthropologists (ethnocentrically) considered themselves more
knowledgeable about the cultures they studied than the people in those cultures.
Landes incorporated ideas from the pre-Brazil research of E. Franklin Frazier and Melville Herskovits to contend that the existence of the matriarchy in Bahia rested on women’s
economic positions, sexuality, and capacities, which were influenced by (1) white slave
owners’ preference for black women as heads of families and the inculcation of leadership

27

28

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
traits in black women and not black men and (2) the history of women’s roles as property
owners, market sellers, priestesses, and warriors in West Africa.110
Landes’ findings continue to be critiqued in contemporary academic contexts because
some scholars disagree with her matriarchy thesis and her views about homosexual pais
and filhos do santo. J. Lorand Matory, director of African and African-American research at
Duke University, has taken one of the strongest positions against Landes, arguing that she
altered the evidence to argue for the existence of the “cult matriarchate.” Matory believes
that her division between “new” and “traditional” houses is a false one and that men traditionally were the leaders in Candomblé. In fact, Matory contends that, at the time of Landes’ research, more men than women were acting as priests.111 In contrast, Cheryl Sterling
sees Landes’ The City of Women as “still relevant today as the first feminist account of
Candomblé” and maintains that Candomblé is a space in which Afro-Brazilian women are
the “supreme authority” and that the terreiro is an enclave of “female power.” The Brazilian
state stereotypes black women as socially pathological with “unstable” family structures,
making them “sub-citizens,” but Sterling argues that Candomblé is a space in which female
blackness prevails.112

Has Civilization “Advanced” Women’s Position?
Ironically, some nineteenth- and twentieth-century writers and social scientists, such as Herbert
Spencer, have argued that women’s positions “advanced” with civilization, especially under European influence, at least relative to so-called “primitive” societies. The picture is complicated, but
the opposite may actually be true. Most anthropological studies have suggested that “civilization,”
“colonialism,” “development,” and “globalization” have been mixed blessings for women.113 Their
traditional workloads tend to increase while they are simultaneously excluded from new opportunities in agricultural cash crops, trading, and technology. Sometimes they lose traditional rights (e.g.,
to property) within extended family kinship groups or experience increased pressure from men to be
the upholders of cultural traditions, whether in clothing or marriage practices. On the other hand,
new political, economic, and educational opportunities can open up for women, allowing them not
only to contribute to their families but to delay marriage, pursue alternatives to marriage, and, if they
marry, to have a more powerful voice in their marriages.114
Deeply embedded cultural-origin stories are extremely powerful, difficult to unravel, and can persist despite contradictory evidence, in part because of their familiarity. They resemble what people
have seen and experienced throughout their lifetimes, even in the twenty-first century, despite all the
changes. Yet, nineteenth and twentieth century cultural models are also continuously reinforced and
reproduced in every generation through powerful devices: children’s stories; rituals like Valentine’s
Day; fashion, advertisements, music, video games, and popular culture generally; and in financial,
political, legal, and military institutions and leaders. But profound transformations can produce a
“backlash,” as in U.S. movements to restore “traditional” family forms, “traditional” male and female
roles, sexual abstinence-virginity, and the “sanctity” of heterosexual marriage.115 Some would argue
that backlash elements were at work in the 2016 Presidential and Congressional elections (see Text
Box 3).
Cultural origin stories also persist because they are legitimizing ideologies—complex belief
systems often developed by those in power to rationalize, explain, and perpetuate systems of
inequality. The hunting-way-of-life theory of human evolution, for example, both naturalizes and
essentializes male dominance and other gender-related traits and provides an origin story and a

Gender and Sexuality

29

legitimizing ideology for the “traditional” U.S. nuclear family as “fundamental to human social
organization and life.” It also can be used to justify “spousal rape” and domestic violence, treating
both as private family matters and, in the past, as male “rights.” Not surprisingly, elements of the
traditional nuclear family model appear in the 2015 U.S. Supreme Court case that legalized samesex marriage, especially in the dissenting views. And cultural models of gender and family played a
role in the 2016 U.S. Presidential election. For a related activity, see Activity 3 below.
Text Box 3: Gender and the 2016 U.S. Presidential Election
By Carol C. Mukhopadhyay

The 2016 presidential election was gender precedent-setting in ways that will take decades to analyze (see for example Gail Collins). For the first time, a major U.S. political
party chose a woman as its presidential candidate. And while Hillary Rodham Clinton did
not win the electoral college, she won the popular vote, the first woman to do so, and by
nearly three million votes. As a cultural anthropologist who has long studied women and
politics, I offer a few preliminary observations on the role of gender in the 2016 presidential
election.116

Women on the Political Leadership Stage
From a positive perspective, for the first time, two women (Republican Carly Fiorina
and Democrat Hillary Clinton) participated in televised presidential primary debates and
one went on to the “finals.” Millions of people, including children, saw articulate, accomplished, powerful women competing with men to be “Commander-in-Chief.” During the
2016 Democratic National Convention, the country watched a major political party and key
male leaders celebrate the life and professional and leadership-relevant achievements of
a woman, its presidential nominee. The role-modeling impacts are enormous—and, one
hopes, long-lasting.

The Gendered White House Family
The 2016 presidential campaign challenged, at least momentarily, the traditional, taken-for-granted, gendered institution of the White House first “family.” What if the president’s spouse were male? This would wreck havoc with the conventional “first lady” role!
Traditionally, the spouse, even if highly educated, becomes the “help mate” and “listener,”
handles “domestic affairs,” organizes and attends important social occasions, and works
on gender-appropriate projects such as children’s health. Hillary Clinton was roundly criticized, as first lady, for venturing beyond the “domestic sphere” and pursuing health care reform in Bill Clinton’s administration even though she had indisputably relevant professional
expertise. Michelle Obama, with her Harvard law degree and prior career as a lawyer,
became best known as “First Mom” and a “fashion-setter” whose clothing was discussed
and emulated. While she was a very positive role model, especially for African-Americans,
and developed major initiatives to combat childhood obesity and promote fresh food, she
did not challenge gender conventions. How many girls remember her professional credentials and achievements?
Had Hillary Clinton won, the need to confront gendered elements of the conventional
White House family would have come to the forefront as the “first gentleman” role gradually evolved. Certainly, no one would have expected Bill Clinton to choose china patterns,
redecorate the living quarters, or become a “fashion trend-setter.”

30

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
Consensual Sexual Interactions: Which Century Are We In?
The 2016 presidential campaign stimulated discussion of other often-ignored gender-related topics. Despite some progress, sexual harassment and sexual assault, including
rape, remain widespread in the workplace and on college campuses (cf. Stanford case,
The Hunting Ground). Yet there has been enormous pressure on women—and institutions—to remain silent.
In October 2016, after a video was released of Donald Trump bragging about his ability to sexually grope women he did not know, the presidential candidate said it was only
“locker room talk”...not anything he had ever done. Hearing these denials, several women,
some well-known, came forth with convincing claims that Trump had groped them or in
other ways engaged in inappropriate, non-consensual sexual behavior. Trump responded by denying the charges, insulting the accusers, and threatening lawsuits against the
claimants and news media organizations that published the reports.117 For many women,
the video aroused memories of their own recurring experiences with sexual harassment
and assault. After the video was released, Kelly Oxford started a tidal wave of women unburdening long-kept secrets with her tweet: “Women: tweet me your first assaults.” Others
went on record denouncing Trumps’ talk and behavior, and the hashtag #NotOkay surged
on Twitter.
In a normal U.S. presidential election, the video and repeated accusations of sexual
assault would have forced the candidate to withdraw (as happened with Gary Hart in a
previous election). Instead, accusers experienced a backlash not only from Trump but from
some media organizations and Trump supporters, illustrating why women are reluctant to
come forth or press sexual charges, especially against powerful men (see the 1991 Anita
Hill-Clarence Thomas case). These voters’ reactions and the continued willingness of so
many others to vote for the candidate suggest that “locker room banter” and unwanted
sexual advances are still considered normal and acceptable among significant segments
of our population. After all, “boys will be boys,” at least in the old (false) baboon stereotype
of male behavior! Clearly, we need more public conversations about what constitutes appropriate and consensual sexually related behavior.

Sexism: Alive and Well
The 2016 presidential campaign revealed that sexism is alive and well, though not always recognized, explicit, or acknowledged even when obvious (see article by Lynn Sherr).
The media, both before and after the election, generally underplayed the impact of sexism
despite research showing that sexist attitudes, not political party, were more likely to predict voters preference for Donald Trump over Hillary Clinton.118
The campaign also reflected a persistent double standard. Despite widespread agreement that Hillary Clinton was highly qualified to be president, her judgment, competence,
“stamina,” and even her proven accomplishments were subjected to scrutiny and criticism
not normally applied to similarly experienced male candidates. Additional gender-specific
criteria were imposed: “likeability,” “smiling enough,” “warmth,” and appearance. She did
not “look” “presidential”—an image of leadership that evoked the stereotype baboon model! But being six feet tall with large biceps and acting “tough” and “aggressive” probably
would have disqualified her, as a woman, from the start! Other traits that are acceptable
in men—ambitious, goal-focused, strategic, “wanting” the presidency—were treated as
liabilities in Clinton, part of a “power-hungry” critique, as though women are not legitimately
supposed to pursue or hold power.

Gender and Sexuality
Patriarchal Stereotypes of Women
Hillary Clinton’s candidacy seems to have activated long-standing patriarchal stereotypes and images of women. One is the “good vs. bad” woman opposition. The “good”
woman is chaste, obedient, nurturing, self-sacrificing, gentle—the Virgin Mary/Mother figure. The “bad” woman is greedy, selfish, independent, aggressive, and often, sexually
active—importantly, she lies, deceives, is totally untrustworthy. Bad (“nasty”) women in
myths and reality must be punished for their transgressions; they are dangerous to men
and threaten the social order.
As a researcher and someone who had many conversations with voters during this election, I was shocked by the intensity and level of animosity directed at Hillary Clinton. It was
palpable, and it went far beyond a normal critique of a normal candidate. At Republican
rallies, mass shouts of “lock her up” and T-shirts and bumper stickers bearing slogans like
“Trump that Bitch” (and worse) bore a frightening resemblance to violence-inciting hatespeech historically directed at African-Americans and at Jews, gays, and socialists in Nazi
Germany, as well as to hate-filled speech that fueled Medieval European witch-burnings
in which thousands (if not millions), mainly women, were burned at the stake [“burn the
witch”].119 Clinton was indeed challenging “traditional” gender roles in U.S. politics, the
workplace, and at home. Patriarchy was being threatened, and many, though not all, voters
found that profoundly disturbing even though they did not necessarily recognize it or admit
it.120
Beyond that, there is a long tradition of blaming women for personal and societal disasters—for convincing Adam to eat the forbidden fruit, for the breakup of joint family households in places like India. Women often become the repository for people’s frustrations
when things “go wrong” (Remember the spoiled sausage in Portuguese culture discussed
earlier in this chapter?). Women—like minorities, immigrants, and “evil empires”—are culturally familiar, available targets to which one can legitimately assign blame, frustration,
and even rage, as we saw in the 2016 election.121

Hillary Clinton as a Symbol of Change
Ironically, Hillary Clinton was depicted and criticized during the campaign as a symbol of
the “establishment” while her key opponents stood for “change.” I think it is just the opposite. Hillary Clinton and her campaign and coalition symbolized (and embraced) the major
transformations—indeed, upheavals—that have occurred in the United States since the
1960s. It is not just feminism and a new definition of masculinity that rejects the old baboon
male-dominance tough-guy model, although that is one change.122 While economic anxiety
and “white nationalism” both played roles, the election was also about an “America” that
is changing demographically, socially, religiously, sexually, linguistically, technologically,
and ideologically—changing what constitutes “truth” and reality. For many in rural areas,
outside forces—especially the government, run by liberal, urban elites—are seen as trying
to control one’s way of life with gun control, environmental regulations, ending coal mining,
banning school (Christian) prayer, requiring schools to teach evolution and comprehensive
sex education (vs. abstinence only). Hillary Clinton, her coalition, and her alignment with
the Obama White House, not just with its policies but with an African-American “first family,” symbolized the intersection of all these social, demographic, and cultural transformations. She truly represented “change.”
Ironically, Clinton’s opponents, even in the Democratic Party, were more “establishment”
candidates culturally, demographically, and in their gender relationships. Bernie Sanders
attracted an enormous, enthusiastic following and came close to winning the Democratic
presidential primary. Yet his rhetoric and policy proposals, while unusual in twenty-first

31

32

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
century mainstream politics, resembled the economic inequality, anti-Wall Street, “it’s only
about economics” focus of early twentieth century democratic socialists such as Eugene
Debs and Norman Thomas and of progressive Henry Wallace. And, not surprisingly, Sanders appealed largely to Euro-American demographic groups rather than to the broader
spectrum of twenty-first century voters.
In short, the election and the candidacy of Hillary Rodham Clinton symbolized more
than half a century of enormous change—and a choice between continuing that change
or selecting a candidate who symbolized what was traditional, familiar, and, to many, more
comfortable. Whether the transformations of the past fifty years will be reversed remains
to be seen.123

Discussion
From a global perspective, the United States lags behind many countries in women’s political leadership and representation. For national legislative bodies, U.S. women constitute
only 19 percent of Congress, below the world average of 23 percent, below the average
in the Americas, 28 percent, and far below Nordic countries, 41 percent. The U.S. ranks
104th of 193 countries in the world (see http://www.ipu.org/wmn-e/classif.htm). When it
comes to political leadership, over 65 nations have elected at least one woman as their
head of state, including countries with predominantly Muslim, Christian, Jewish, Hindu,
and/or Buddhist populations. (see https://www.theglobalist.com/women-on-top-of-the-political-world/.) Yet the U.S. still has never elected a woman President (or even Vice-President). Are you surprised by these data or by some of the countries that rank higher than
the United States? Why? What do you think are some of the reasons the US lags behind
so many other countries?
Additional Resources and Links
Center for American Women and Politics
Presidential Gender Watch: http://presidentialgenderwatch.org/
Institute for Women’s Policy Research
Pew Research Institute (U.S. and international data)
United Nations, UN Women

CONTEMPORARY ANTHROPOLOGICAL APPROACHES TO
STUDYING SEXUALITY AND GENDER
Contemporary anthropology now recognizes the crucial role played by gender in human society.
Anthropologists in the post-2000 era have focused on exploring fluidity within and beyond sexuality, incorporating a gendered lens in all anthropological research, and applying feminist science
frameworks, discourse-narrative analyses, political theory, critical studies of race, and queer theory
to better understand and theorize gendered dynamics and power. Pleasure, desire, trauma, mobility,
boundaries, reproduction, violence, coercion, bio-politics, globalization, neoliberal “development”
policies and discourses, immigration, and other areas of anthropological inquiry have also informed
gender and sexuality studies. We next discuss some of those trends.124

Gender and Sexuality

33

Heteronormativity and Sexuality in the United States
In the long history of human sexual relationships, we see that most involve people from different
biological sexes, but some societies recognize and even celebrate partnerships between members of
the same biological sex.125 In some places, religious institutions formalize unions while in others
unions are recognized only once they result in a pregnancy or live birth. Thus, what many people in
the United States consider “normal,” such as the partnership of one man and one woman in a sexually exclusive relationship legitimized by the state and federal government and often sanctioned by
a religious institution, is actually heteronormative. Heteronormativity is a term coined by French
philosopher Michel Foucault to refer to the often-unnoticed system of rights and privileges that
accompany normative sexual choices and family formation. For example, a “biologically female”
woman attracted to a “biologically male” man who pursued that attraction and formed a relationship
with that man would be following a heteronormative pattern in the United States. If she married
him, she would be continuing to follow societal expectations related to gender and sexuality and
would be agreeing to state involvement in her love life as she formalizes her relationship.
Despite pervasive messages reinforcing heteronormative social relations, people find other ways
to satisfy their sexual desires and organize their families. Many people continue to choose partners
from the so-called “opposite” sex, a phrase that reflects the old U.S. bipolar view of males and females
as being at opposite ends of a range of characteristics (strong-weak, active-passive, hard-soft, outside-inside, Mars-Venus).126 Others select partners from the same biological sex. Increasingly, people
are choosing partners who attract them—perhaps female, perhaps male, and perhaps someone with
ambiguous physical sexual characteristics.
Labels have changed rapidly in the United States during the twenty-first century as a wider range
of sexual orientations has been openly acknowledged, accompanied by a shift in our binary view of
sexuality. Rather than thinking of individuals as either heterosexual OR homosexual, scholars and
activists now recognize a spectrum of sexual orientations. Given the U.S. focus on identity, it is not
surprising that a range of new personhood categories, such as bisexual, queer, questioning, lesbian,
and gay have emerged to reflect a more-fluid, shifting, expansive, and ambiguous conception of sexuality and sexual identity.
Transgender, meanwhile, is a category for people who transition from one sex to another, male to
female or female to male, using a number of methods. Anthropologist David Valentine explored how
the concept of “transgender” became established in the United States and found that many people
who were identified by others as transgender did not embrace the label themselves. This label, too,
has undergone a profound shift in usage, and the high-profile transition by Caitlyn Jenner in the
mid-2010s has further shifted how people think about those who identify as transgender.127
By 2011, an estimated 8.7 million people in the United States identified as lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and/or transgender.128 These communities represent a vibrant, growing, and increasingly politically
and economically powerful segment of the population. While people who identify as gay, lesbian,
bisexual, and transgender—or any of a number of other sexual and gender minorities—have existed
throughout the United States’ history, it is only since the Stonewall uprisings of 1969 that the modern LGBT movement has been a key force in U.S. society.129 Some activists, community members,
and scholars argue that LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, and/or transgender) is a better choice of labels
than GLBT since it puts lesbian identity in the foreground—a key issue because the term “gay” is
often used as an umbrella term and can erase recognition of individuals who are not gay males. Recently, the acronym has been expanded to include LGBTQ (queer or questioning), LGBTQQ (both

34

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

queer and questioning), LGBTQIA (queer/questioning, intersex, and/or asexual), and LGBTQAIA
(adding allies as well).
Like the U.S. population overall, the LGBTQ community is extremely diverse. Some African-Americans prefer the term “same-gender loving” because the other terms are seen as developed
by and for “white people.” Emphasizing the importance and power of words, Jafari Sinclaire Allen
explains that “same-gender loving” was “coined by the black queer activist Cleo Manago [around
1995] to mark a distinction between ‘gay’ and ‘lesbian’ culture and identification, and black men
and women who have sex with members of the same sex.”130 While scholars continue to use gay,
lesbian, and queer and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control uses MSM (men who have sex with
men), “same-gender loving” resonates in some urban communities.
Not everyone who might fit one of the LGBTQQIA designations consciously identifies with a
group defined by sexual orientation. Some people highlight their other identities, as Minnesotans,
for example, or their ethnicity, religion, profession, or hobby—whatever they consider central and
important in their lives. Some scholars argue that heteronormativity allows people who self-identify
as heterosexual the luxury of not being defined by their sexual orientation. They suggest that those
who identify with the sex and gender they were assigned at birth be referred to as cisgender.131 Only
when labels are universal rather than used only for non-normative groups, they argue, will people
become aware of discrimination based on differences in sexual preference.
Though people are urging adoption of sexual identity labels, not everyone is embracing the move
to self-identify in a specific category. Thus, a man who is attracted to both men and women might
self-identify as bisexual and join activist communities while another might prefer not to be incorporated into any sexual-preference-based politics. Some people prefer to eliminate acronyms altogether,
instead embracing terms such as genderfluid and genderqueer that recognize a spectrum instead of a
static identity. This freedom to self-identify or avoid categories altogether is important. Most of all,
these shifts and debates demonstrate that, like the terms themselves, LGBTQ communities in the
United States are diverse and dynamic with often-changing priorities and makeup.
Changing Attitudes toward LGBTQ People in the United States
In the last two decades, attitudes toward LGBTQ—particularly lesbian, gay and bisexual—people
have changed dramatically. The most sweeping change is the extension of marriage rights to lesbian,
gay, and bisexual people. The first state to extend marriage rights was Massachusetts in 2003. By
2014, more than half of U.S. Americans said they believed same-sex couples should have the right to
marry, and on June 26, 2015, in Obergefell v. Hodges, the U.S. supreme court declared that same-sex
couples had the legal right to marry.132 Few civil rights movements have seen such progress in such
a short period of time. While many factors have influenced the shift in attitudes, sociologists and
anthropologists have identified increased awareness of and exposure to LGBTQ people through the
media and personal interactions as playing key roles.133
Legalization of same-sex marriage also helped normalize same-sex parenting. Sarah, whose three
young children—including a set of twins—are mothered by Sarah and her partner, was active in
campaigns for marriage equality in Minnesota and ecstatic when the campaign succeeded in 2013
(see Text Box 4).
However, legalization of same-sex marriage has not been welcomed everywhere in the United
States. Anthropologist Jessica Johnson’s ethnographic work profiling a Seattle-based megachurch
from 2006 through 2008 initially explored their efforts to oppose same-sex marriage. Later, she

Gender and Sexuality

35

shifted her focus to the rhetoric of gender, masculinity, and cisgender sexuality used by the church
and its pastor.134 Official church communications dismissed homosexuality as aberrant and mobilized members to advocate against same-sex marriage. The church’s efforts were not successful.
Interestingly, activists and gender studies scholars express concern over incorporating marriage—a heteronormative institution some consider oppressive—into queer spaces not previously
governed by state authority. These concerns may be overshadowed by a desire for normative lives
and legal protections, but as sociologist Tamara Metz and others have argued, legally intertwining
passion, romance, sexual intimacy, and economic rights and responsibilities is not necessarily a
move in the right direction.135 As Miriam Smith has written, “We must move beyond thinking of
same-sex marriage and relationship recognition as struggles that pit allegedly normalized or assimilated same-sex couples against queer politics and sensibilities and, rather, recognize the increasingly
complex gender politics of same-sex marriage and relationship recognition, a politics that implicates
groups beyond the LGBT community.”136
While U.S. culture on the whole has become more supportive and accepting of LGBTQ people,
they still face challenges. Sexual orientation and gender identity are not federally protected statuses.
Thus, in 32 states (as of 2016), employers can legally refuse to hire and can fire someone simply for
being LGBTQ.137 Even in states where queer people have legal protection, transgender and other
gender-diverse people do not. LGBTQ people can be legally denied housing and other important resources heterosexual people take for granted. LGBTQ youth made up 40 percent of homeless young
people in the United States in 2012 and are often thrust into homelessness by family rejection.138
Transgender people are the most vulnerable and experience high levels of violence, including homicide. See Activity 4: Bathroom Transgression.
Text Box 4: Moving Toward Marriage Equality in Minnesota: Sarah’s Letter
In 2013, the Minnesota state legislature voted on whether to approve same-sex marriage. Before the vote, a woman named Sarah made the difficult decision to advocate
publicly for the bill’s approval. In the process, she wrote the following letter.
Dear Minnesota Senator,
This is an open letter to you in support of the marriage equality bill. I may not be your constituent, and you may already know how you are planning to vote, but I ask you to read this
letter with an open mind and heart nonetheless.
I want same-sex marriage for the same reasons as many others. My partner Abby and
I met in the first days of 2004 and have created a loving home together with our three kids
and two cats. We had a commitment ceremony in 2007 in Minneapolis and were legally
married in Vancouver during our “honeymoon.” We want our marriage to be recognized
because our kids deserve to have married parents, and because we constantly face increased stress as a result of having our relationship not recognized. But that’s not why I’m
writing. I’m writing because there is one conversation I have over and over again with my
son that puts a pit in my stomach each time, and I’m ready for that pit to go away.
Abby and I both wear wedding bands. We designed them prior to our ceremony and
spent more time on that decision than we did on the flowers, dresses, and music combined.
Our son is now three and a half and, like other kids his age, he asks about everything. All
the time. When I get him dressed, change his diaper (please let him be potty-trained soon),
or wipe his nose, he sees my ring. And he always asks:

36

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
“Mama, what’s that ring on your finger?”
“It’s my wedding band.”
“Why you wear a wedding band?”
	“Because when Ima and I got married, we picked out wedding bands and now we
wear them every day. It shows that we love each other.”
“I want wear wedding band.”
	“Someday when you’re all grown up, you’ll fall in love and get married. And you’ll get
to wear a wedding band, too.”
“I’ll grow up and get married? And then I get a wedding band?”
“Yep.”
“Okay.”
And then he goes about his day. This conversation may seem silly and harmless to you, but
read it again. Look at how many times the issue of marriage comes up. We call it a wedding
band, but every time we say that, we know it’s not completely true because we were not
legally wed in Minnesota. When I tell my son about our marriage or our wedding, I know I’m
hiding a secret from him, but am I really supposed to explain that it was a “commitment
ceremony” and we are “committed, but not “married”? He’s too young to be saddled with
the pain that comes from being left out. He looks at our pictures and sees that his parents
made a commitment to each other because of love. He doesn’t understand his grandfather’s speech recognizing how bittersweet the day was because the state we call home
refused to bless our union as it blesses the unions of our friends. And he doesn’t understand that, when I tell him he will grow up and get married, his marriage will (most likely) be
part of a tradition from which his parents are excluded.
I am grateful that he is blissfully unaware right now. Imagine having the conversation with
your children. Imagine the pain you would feel if innocent conversations with your child reminded you constantly that your love is not valued by your community. Don’t get me wrong;
our friends and family treated our ceremony as they would a legal wedding. We had a
phenomenal time with good food, music, laughter, and joy. If our ceremony in Minneapolis
had been enough, though, we wouldn’t have bothered to get legally married in Vancouver.
There is something so powerful and intangible about walking into a government office and
walking out with a marriage license. We are grateful we had the opportunity there, and
simply wish our state would recognize our commitment as the
marriage that it is.
Take a look at the picture of
my family. It’s outdated, primarily because we can’t get our
kids to sit still long enough for
a photo. I’m on the right, Abby
on the left. Our son is now 3.5
and our girls (twins) are almost
2. We can appreciate that this
is a difficult vote for many of you
and we would be honored if you
think of our family and the im-

Gender and Sexuality

37

pact this vote will have on us. We know many people outside of the Twin Cities never have
a chance to meet families like ours. Tell them about us, if it helps. We are happy to answer
any questions you may have. Thank you for reading.
Sincerely,
Sarah
Minneapolis, Minnesota
April 2013
Note: Minnesota legalized same-sex marriage in 2013.

Sexuality outside the United States
Same-sex sexual and romantic relationships probably exist in every society, but concepts like “gay,”
“lesbian,” and “bisexual” are cultural products that, in many ways, reflect a culturally specific gender
ideology and a set of beliefs about how sexual preferences develop. In many cultures (such as the Sambia discussed above), same-sex sex is a behavior, not an identity. Some individuals in India identify
as practicing “female-female sexuality” or “male-male sexuality.” The film Fire by Mira Nair aroused
tremendous controversy in India partly because it depicted a same-sex relationship between two
married women somewhat graphically and because it suggested alternatives available to women stuck
in unhappy and abusive patriarchal marriages.139 Whether one is “homosexual” or “heterosexual”
may not be linked simply to engaging in same-sex sexual behavior. Instead, as among some Brazilian
males, your status in the sexual relationship, literally and symbolically, depends on (or determines!)
whether you are the inserter or the penetrated.140 Which would you expect involves higher status?
Even anthropologists who are sensitive to cross-cultural variations in the terms and understandings
that accompany same-sex sexual and romantic relationships can still unconsciously project their own
meanings onto other cultures. Evelyn Blackwood, an American, described how surprised she was to
realize that her Sumatran lover, who called herself a “Tombois,” had a different conception of what
constituted a “lesbian” identity and lesbian relationship than she did.141 We must be careful not to
assume that other cultures share LGBTQ identities as they are understood in the United States and
many European countries.
Furthermore, each country has its own approach to sexuality and marriage, and reproduction often plays a central role. In Israel, an embrace of pro-natalist policies for Jewish Israelis has meant that
expensive reproductive technologies such as in vitro fertilization are provided to women at no cost or
are heavily subsidized. An Israeli gay activist described how surprised queer activists from other countries were when they found that nearly all Israeli female same-sex couples were raising children. (This
embrace of same-sex parenting did not extend to male couples, for whom the state did not provide
assisted reproductive support.) The pro-natalist policies can be traced in part to Israel’s emergence as a
state: founded in the aftermath of persecution and systematic genocide of Jewish residents of Europe
from 1937 through 1945, Israel initially promoted policies that encouraged births at least in part as
resistance to Nazi attempts to destroy the Jewish people. The contexts may be less dramatic elsewhere,
but local and national histories often inform policies and practices.
In Thailand, Ara Wilson has explored how biological women embrace identities as toms and dees.
Although these terms seem to be derived from English-language concepts (dees is etymologically

38

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

related to “ladies”), suggesting international influences, the ubiquity and acceptance of toms and dees
in Thailand does diverge from patterns in the United States.142
In China (as elsewhere), the experiences of those involved in male-male sexuality and those involved in female-female sexuality can differ. In her book Shanghai Lalas: Female Tongzhi Communities
and Politics in Urban China, Lucetta Yip Lo Kam discusses how lesbians in China note their lack of
public social spaces compared with gay men.143 Even the words lala and tongzhi index different categories from the English terms: lala encompasses lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered people while
tongzhi is a gloss term that usually refers to gay men but has been expanded in the last two decades to
other uses. (Tongzhi is a cooptation of the Chinese-language socialist-era term for comrade.)
Language makes a difference in how individuals and communities articulate their identities. Anthropologists such as Kam have commented on how sharing their own backgrounds with those with
whom they work can be instrumental in gaining trust and building rapport. Her identity as a Chinese-speaking queer anthropologist and activist from Hong Kong helped women in Shanghai feel
comfortable speaking with her and willing to include her in their networks.144
From these examples, we see that approaches to sexuality in different parts of the world are evolving, just as gender norms in the United States are undergoing tremendous shifts. Anthropologists
often cross boundaries to research these changes, and their contributions will continue to shape
understandings of the broad range of approaches to sexuality.

Anthropology of the Body
Another important topic for anthropologists interested in gender and sexuality is the anthropology of the body, sometimes referred to as embodied anthropology. Viewing the human body as an
analytic category offers exciting new theoretical possibilities.145 Topics that have attracted particular
attention include popular and scientific representations of the body; (dis)ability; the anthropology of
obesity; the politics of reproduction; coercion; complex issues associated with genital modifications
such as female circumcision; and the relationship between bodies and borders.146 Who can cross
which lines physically (think about national borders), emotionally, psychologically, and socially? Embodied anthropology foregrounds these questions.
Anthropologists increasingly write about their own experiences using an auto-ethnographic mode.
For example, Pamela Runestad examined how her time as a patient in a Japanese maternity ward
influenced her understanding of the importance of carefully crafted meals and nutrition for HIV/
AIDS patients.147 In subsequent research on HIV/AIDS in Japan, she probed more deeply into how
patients’ nourishment inside and outside clinical settings affected their perceptions of health.
Anthropology of the body overlaps with work on gender and sexuality, including the discourse surrounding women’s bodies and reproductive functions. Emily Martin’s pioneering book, The Woman
in the Body, critically examined lay women and medical descriptions of menstruation, child-bearing,
and menopause in the United States. She identified a scientific ideology of reproduction that is
infused with traditional U.S. binary gender stereotypes similar to those in man-the-hunter origin
stories. In her classic essay about what she calls a “scientific fairy tale,” Martin describes how U.S.
biology texts represented the egg and sperm as romantic partners whose actions are described with
passive or active verbs according to gendered assumptions.148
I realized that the picture of egg and sperm drawn in popular as well as scientific accounts
of reproductive biology relies on stereotypes central to our cultural definitions of male and

Gender and Sexuality

39

female. The stereotypes imply not only that female biological processes are less worthy than
their male counterparts but also that women are less worthy than men. Part of my goal in
writing this article is to shine a bright light on the gender stereotypes hidden within the
scientific language of biology.149
Subsequent work has challenged the “sperm penetrates egg” model of fertilization, noting that
it is medically inaccurate and reinforces male-active-dominant, female-passive (penetrated) gender
models. In reality, the egg and sperm fuse, but the egg activates the sperm by releasing molecules that
are crucial for it to find and adhere to the egg.150 Old videos like The Miracle of Life offer, in their
narration and background music, striking examples of the cultural ideology of reproduction in the
United States that Martin and others have described.151
In another classic essay, Corinne Hayden explored interactions between biology, family, and gender among lesbian couples. Even though both members of the lesbian couples she studied did not
necessarily contribute biologically to their offspring, the women and their families found ways to
embrace these biological differences and develop a new formulation of family that involved biological
connection but was not limited to it.152
Some research analyzes the body, especially the female body, as a site of coercion and expression
of power relations by individuals (e.g., partner rape and domestic violence), but state-sanctioned
collective acts also occur, such as using women as “sex slaves” (Japan’s so-called “Comfort Women”
during World War II) and using civilian rape as a form of psychological warfare. Anthropologists
document other ways in which states exert power over bodies—through family planning policies
(China’s planned birth policy), legislation that bans (or permits) artificial forms of contraception
and abortion, and government programs to promote fertility, including subsidized infertility treatments.153 For example, Turkish anthropologists have described how state policies in Turkey have
appropriated, for state purposes, sexual issues of concern to Turkish families, such as assisted reproduction for disabled war veterans and treatment of vaginismus, a condition that prevents women
from engaging in sexual intercourse. Power relationships are also associated with new reproductive
technologies. For example, the availability of amniocentesis often contributes to shifts in the ratio
of male and female babies born. Unequal power relations are also in play between surrogate mothers (often poor women) and wealthier surrogate families desiring children.154

Women in Anthropology
As seen earlier in this chapter, female anthropologists have always played a key role in anthropology. In sex-segregated societies, they have had unique access to women’s worlds. Recently, they have
analyzed how gender might affect styles of authorship and authority in ethnographies. Social characteristics, including gender, race, class, sexuality, and religion, also influence how an anthropologist
engages in fieldwork and how she and her colleagues relate to one another.155 Sometimes the identity
of an anthropologist creates new opportunities for deeper understanding and connection, but at
other times one’s personal identity can create professional challenges.
Fieldwork
Women face particular challenges when conducting fieldwork regardless of the culture but particularly in sex-segregated and patriarchal societies. Sometimes women are perceived as more vulnerable

40

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

than men to sexual harassment, and their romantic choices in fieldwork situations are subject to
greater scrutiny than choices made by men in similar situations.156 Women may be more likely to
juggle family responsibilities and professional projects and bring children with them for fieldwork. At
first glance, this practice may raise eyebrows because of the risks it brings to accompanying children
and because of potential negative impacts on the anthropologist’s planned work, but many female
anthropologists have found fieldwork undertaken with their families to be a transformative experience both professionally and personally. Whereas appearing as a decontextualized single fieldworker
can arouse suspicion, arriving at a field site with the recognizable identities of parent, daughter, or
spouse can help people conceptualize the anthropologist as someone with a role beyond camera-toting interviewer and observer. At the same time, arriving as a multi-person group also complicates
what Jocelyn Linnekin called “impression management.” One’s child is often less aware of delicate
matters and less sensitive in communicating preferences to hosts, causing potentially embarrassing
situations but also creating levity that might otherwise be slow to develop. Fieldwork as a family
unit also allows for a different rhythm to the elusive work-life balance; many families have reported
cherishing time spent together during fieldwork since they rarely had so much time together in their
activity-filled home settings.157
More anthropologists now conduct fieldwork in their home communities. Some wish to explore
theoretical and empirical questions best examined in local field sites. Others are reluctant or unable
to relocate their families or partners temporarily. Conducting fieldwork close to home can also be
a less expensive option than going abroad! But the boundaries of field and home can become quite
porous. In their writings, women anthropologists reveal how the realms of public and private and
political and personal are connected in the field/home. Innovative, activist, and self-reflective studies
address intersections that other scholars treat separately.158
Academic Anthropology in the United States
Though the representation of women in U.S. academic anthropology is now proportional to their
numbers in the Ph.D. pool, discrepancies remain between male and female anthropology professors
in rank and publication rates. A 2008 report on the status of women in anthropology, for example,
found evidence of continuity of the “old boys’ network”—the tendency for men in positions of
power to develop relationships with other men, which creates pooled resources, positive performance
evaluations, and promotions for those men but not for women. Furthermore, since women in the
United States are usually socialized to avoid making demands, they often accept lower salary offers
than could have been negotiated, which can have significant long-term financial consequences.159
Women are also over-represented among non-tenure-track anthropology faculty members who are
often paid relatively small per-course stipends and whose teaching leaves little time for research and
publishing. Some married women prioritize their partners’ careers, limiting their own geographic
flexibility and job (and fieldwork) opportunities. Left with few academic job options in a given area,
they may leave academia altogether.160
On a positive note, women have an increasingly prominent place in the highest ranks of anthropology, including as president of the American Anthropological Association. Nonetheless, systemic
gender inequality continues to affect the careers of female anthropologists. Given what we know
about gender systems, we should not be surprised.

Gender and Sexuality

41

Masculinity Studies
Students in gender studies and anthropology courses on gender are often surprised to find that
they will be learning about men as well as women. Early women’s studies initially employed what
has been called an “add women and stir” approach, which led to examinations of gender as a social
construct and of women’s issues in contemporary society. In the 1990s, women’s studies expanded
to become gender studies, incorporating the study of other genders, sexuality, and issues of gender
and social justice.161 Gender was recognized as being fundamentally relational: femaleness is linked
to maleness, femininity to masculinity. One outgrowth of that work is the field of “masculinity
studies.”162
Masculinity studies goes beyond men and their roles to explore the relational aspects of gender.
One focus is the enculturation processes through which boys learn about and learn to perform “manhood.” Many U.S. studies (and several excellent videos, such as Tough Guise by Jackson Katz), have
examined the role of popular culture in teaching boys our culture’s key concepts of masculinity, such
as being “tough” and “strong,” and shown how this “tough guise” stance affects men’s relationships
with women, with other men, and with societal institutions, reinforcing a culture of violent masculinity. Sociologist Michael Kimmel has further suggested that boys are taught that they live in a
“perilous world” he terms “Guyland.”163
Anthropologists began exploring concepts of masculinity cross-culturally as early as the 1970s,
resulting in several key publications in 1981, including Herdt’s first book on the Sambia of New
Guinea and Ortner and Whitehead’s volume, Sexual Meanings. In 1990, Gilmore analyzed cross-cultural ethnographic data in his Manhood in the Making: Cultural Concepts in Masculinity.164 Other
work followed, including a provocative video on the Sambia, Guardians of the Flutes. But the growth
of studies of men and masculinity in the United States also stimulated new research approaches,
such as “performative” aspects of masculinity and how gender functions in wealthier, post-industrial
societies and communities with access to new technologies and mass media.165
Anthropologists sometimes turn to unconventional information sources as they explore gendered
culture, including popular television commercials. Interestingly, the 2015 Super Bowl commercials
produced for the Always feminine product brand also focused on gender themes in its #Likeagirl
campaign, which probed the damaging connotations of the phrases “throw like a girl” and “run like
a girl” by first asking boys and girls to act out running and throwing, and then asking them to act
out a girl running and throwing. A companion clip further explored the negative impacts of anti-girl
messages, provoking dialogue among Super Bowl viewers and in social media spaces (though, ironically, that dialogue was intended to promote consumption of feminine products). As the clips remind
us, while boys and men play major roles in perceptions related to gender, so do the women who
raise them, often reinforcing gendered expectations for play and aspiration. Of course, women, like
men, are enculturated into their culture’s gender ideology.166 Both girls and boys—and adults—are
profoundly influenced by popular culture.
Though scholars from many disciplines publish important work on masculinity, anthropologists,
with their cross-cultural research and perspectives, have significantly deepened and enriched interdisciplinary understandings. Anthropologists have made strong contributions not only by providing
nuanced portrayals (of, for example, men in prison, heroin users, migrant laborers, college students,
and athletes in the United States) but also through offering vivid accounts of expectations of men in
other societies, including the relationship between those expectations and warfare. This can include

42

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

differences in expectations based on a person’s age, other role-based variations, and transformation of
traditional roles as a result of globalization.167
Not all societies expect men to be “tough guys/guise,” and those that do go about it in different
ways and result in different impacts on men and women.168 For example, in Sichuan Province in
China, young Nuosu men must prove their maturity through risky behavior such as theft. In recent
years, theft has been supplanted for many by heroin use, particularly as young men have left their
home communities for urban areas (where they are often feared by city residents and attract suspicion).169 Meanwhile, in the Middle East, technologies such as assisted reproduction are challenging
and reshaping ideas about masculinity among some Arab men, particularly men who acknowledge
and struggle with infertility. There and elsewhere, conceptions of fatherhood are considered crucial
components of masculinity. In Japan, for example, a man who has not fathered a child is not considered to be fully adult.170
Elsewhere, as we saw in the first part of this chapter, men are expected to be gentle nurturers of
young children and to behave in ways that do not fit typical U.S. stereotypes. In Na communities,
men dote on babies and small children, often rushing to pick them up when they enter a room.
In South Korea, men in wildly popular singing groups wear eyeliner and elaborate clothing that
would be unusual for U.S. groups, and throughout China and India, as in many other parts of the
world, heterosexual men walk down the street holding hands or arm-in-arm without causing raised
eyebrows. Physical contact between men, especially in sex-segregated societies, is probably far more
common than contact between men and women! Touch is a human form of intimacy that need not
have sexual implications. So if male-male relations are the most intimate in a society, physical expressions of those relations are “normal” overall unless there is a cultural fear of male physical intimacy.
There is much more nuance in actual behavior than initial appearances lead people to believe.
Anthropologists are also applying approaches taken in American studies to other cultures. They
are engaging in more-intimate discussions of males’ self-perceptions, dilemmas, and challenges and
have not hesitated to intercede, carefully, in the communities in which they work. Visual anthropologist Harjant Gill, conducting research in the Punjab region of India, began asking men about
pressures they faced and found that the conversations prompted unexpected reflection. Gill titled his
film Mardistan (Macholand) and shepherded the film through television broadcasts and smaller-scale
viewings to encourage wide discussion in India of the issues he explored.171 For a related activity, see
Activity 5: Analyzing Gendered Stereotypes and Masculinity in Music Videos.

CONCLUSION
In 1968, a cigarette company in the United States decided to target women as tobacco consumers
and used a clever marketing campaign to entice them to take up smoking. “You’ve come a long way,
baby!” billboards proclaimed. Women, according to the carefully constructed rhetoric, had moved
away from their historic oppressed status and could—and should—now enjoy the full complement
of twentieth-century consumer pleasures. Like men, they deserved to enjoy themselves and relax
with a cigarette. The campaigns were extremely successful; within several years, smoking rates among
women had increased dramatically. But had women really come a long way? We now know that
tobacco (including in vaporized form) is a highly addictive substance and that its use is correlated
with a host of serious health conditions. In responding to the marketing rhetoric, women moved
into a new sphere of bodily pleasure and possibly enjoyed increased independence, but they did so at
a huge cost to their health. They also succumbed to a long-term financial relationship with tobacco

Gender and Sexuality

43

companies who relied on addicting individuals in order to profit. Knowing about the structures at
work behind the scenes and the risks they took, few people today would agree that women’s embrace
of tobacco represented a huge step forward.
Perhaps saying “You’ve come a long way, baby!” with the cynical interpretation with which we read
it today can serve as an analogy for our contemporary explorations of gender and culture. Certainly,
many women in the United States today enjoy heightened freedoms. We can travel to previously
forbidden spaces, study disciplines long considered the domain of men, shape our families to meet
our own needs, work in whatever field we choose, and, we believe, live according to our own wishes.
But we would be naive to ignore how gender continues to shape, constrain, and inform our lives. The
research and methods of anthropology can help us become more aware of the ongoing consequences
of our gendered heritage and the ways in which we are all complicit in maintaining gender ideologies
that limit and restrict people’s possibilities.
By committing to speak out against subtle, gender-based discrimination and to support those
struggling along difficult paths, today’s anthropologists can emulate pioneers such as Franz Boas
and Margaret Mead, who sought to fuse research and action. May we all be kinder to those who
differ from the norm, whatever that norm may be. Only then will we all—women, men and those
who identify with neither category—have truly come a long way. (But we will leave the infantilizing
“baby” to those tobacco companies!)

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What is “natural” about how you experience gender and human sexuality? What aspects are at
least partially shaped by culture? How do other cultures’ beliefs and practices regarding gender
and sexuality differ from those commonly found in the United States? Are there any parallels?
Does it depend on which U.S. community we are talking about? What about your own beliefs
and practices?
2. Reflect on the various ways you have “learned” about gender and sexuality throughout your
life. Which influences do you think had the biggest impact?
3. How important is your gender to how you think about yourself, to your “identity” or selfdefinition, to your everyday life? Reflect on what it would be like to be a different gender.
4. How important is your “sexuality” and “sexual orientation” to how you think about yourself,
to your identity or self-definition? Reflect on what it would be like if you altered your sexual
identity or practices.
5. In what ways have your school settings been shaped by and around gender norms?
6. How are anthropologists influenced by gender norms? How has this affected the discipline of
anthropology?

GLOSSARY
Androgyny: cultural definitions of gender that recognize some gender differentiation, but also accept
“gender bending” and role-crossing according to individual capacities and preferences.
Binary model of gender: cultural definitions of gender that include only two identities--male and
female.

44

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Biologic sex: refers to male and female identity based on internal and external sex organs and chromosomes. While male and female are the most common biologic sexes, a percentage of the human
population is intersex with ambiguous or mixed biological sex characteristics.
Biological determinism: a theory that biological differences between males and females leads to fundamentally different capacities, preferences, and gendered behaviors. This scientifically unsupported
view suggests that gender roles are rooted in biology, not culture.
Cisgender: a term used to describe those who identify with the sex and gender they were assigned
at birth.
Dyads: two people in a socially approved pairing. One example is a married couple.
Gender: the set of culturally and historically invented beliefs and expectations about gender that one
learns and performs. Gender is an “identity” one can choose in some societies, but there is pressure
in all societies to conform to expected gender roles and identities.
Gender ideology: a complex set of beliefs about gender and gendered capacities, propensities, preferences, identities and socially expected behaviors and interactions that apply to males, females, and
other gender categories. Gender ideology can differ among cultures and is acquired through enculturation. Also known as a cultural model of gender.
Heteronormativity: a term coined by French philosopher Michel Foucault to refer to the often-unnoticed system of rights and privileges that accompany normative sexual choices and family formation.
Legitimizing ideologies: a set of complex belief systems, often developed by those in power, to rationalize, explain, and perpetuate systems of inequality.
Matrifocal: groups of related females (e.g. mother-her sisters-their offspring) form the core of the
family and constitute the family’s most central and enduring social and emotional ties.
Matrilineal: societies where descent or kinship group membership is transmitted through women,
from mothers to their children (male and female), and then through daughters, to their children,
and so forth.
Matrilocal: a woman-centered kinship group where living arrangements after marriage often center
around households containing related women.
Patriarchy: describes a society with a male-dominated political and authority structure and an ideology that privileges males over females in domestic and public spheres.
Patrifocal: groups of related males (e.g. a father-his brothers) and their male offspring form the core
of the family and constitute the family’s most central and enduring social and emotional ties.
Patrilineal: societies where descent or kinship group membership is transmitted through men, from
men to their children (male and female), and then through sons, to their children, and so forth.
Patrilocal: a male-centered kinship group where living arrangements after marriage often center
around households containing related men.
Third gender: a gender identity that exists in non-binary gender systems offering one or more gender
roles separate from male or female.
Transgender: a category for people who transition from one sex to another, either male-to-female
or female-to-male.

Gender and Sexuality

45

ACTIVITIES
Activity 1: How Does Gender Shape Your Life?
Think about everything, and we do mean everything, you did since waking up this morning.
Include micro-behaviors, tiny behavioral acts that take minutes or even seconds, as well as objects,
substances, and language, spoken and written. Think about all the “cultural” (i.e. not found “in nature”) artifacts associated with these behaviors. For example, while urinating is natural, your “toilet”
is a cultural invention. Now, which activities and behaviors were in some way “gendered”? That is,
which had an element associated with “female” or “male” in some way?
As you think about how gender has shaped your life today, consider:
•
•
•
•
•

What did you sleep in?
How did you handle bodily functions?
How did you clean yourself?
How did you modify your body? (e.g. “shaving”, “makeup,” “deodorant”)
What do the names for products, like deodorants, perfumes or aftershave, convey?

List all these gendered (and gender-neutral) aspects of your day thus far. Also consider: how
typical is today? Would a weekend involve more or less “gendered” dimensions?

Activity 2. Understanding Gender from a Martian Perspective.
If you were a Martian, what would you have to “know” or “learn” in order to follow gender rules
on a college campus? As you consider your response, think about the following questions.
• In what ways are we a gender “binary” culture? An “opposite sex” culture? An “androgynous”
culture?
• Are areas of U.S. life informally sexually segregated? Are there, informally, “male” and “female”
spheres? Are there male spheres where women are not supposed to go? Or spheres where if they
go, they incur certain risks? Are there any parallels for men who enter female spheres?
• Are there any elements of an “honor” and “shame” culture in the U.S. that a Martian should be
aware of? What about in your own social circle?

Activity 3. E
 thnographic Interview: How has Gender Changed Over
Time?
Interview someone at least age 65 (if you are close to 65, find someone a generation older or
younger than you). Ask that person: What kind of changes in gender roles, gender relations, gender
restrictions or privileges have occurred within your lifetime? After you conclude your interview, compare notes with others to find common threads. Then ask someone closer to your age what changes
they anticipate may happen their lifetime?

Activity 4. Bathroom Transgression.
Transgender people often face dilemmas when needing to use public restrooms. As a way to experience what it’s like to be an ally, some people have started intentionally using bathrooms designated

46

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

for others—an issue that took on a heightened relevance in 2016, when North Carolina banned
transgender people from using sex-segregated bathrooms that did not correspond to the sex registered
on their birth certificates. As part of this activity, consider whether you dare enter the bathroom you
don’t normally use. If you do, then try it! What happens when you enter the men’s room, or the women’s room? How are these boundaries patrolled and enforced? Many European countries offer unisex
facilities; do you think the U.S. should do so as well? Or do you agree with some politicians in North
Carolina who cited safety concerns for public restroom use by transgender individuals?
Note: keep safety in mind if you choose this activity, and beware of settings where people may be hostile
to an experiment like this.

Activity 5. A
 nalyzing Gendered Stereotypes and Masculinity in Music
Videos.
Popular culture plays an enormous role in shaping our ideas about gender, about femininity and
masculinity, and about sexuality. Watch several of the videos below, paying careful attention to how
these concepts are visible in current music videos. Do they draw on gendered stereotypes or push
boundaries of expected gendered norms? Specify which videos you watched in your response, and
also look for examples of other videos that could stimulate fruitful conversations about masculinity,
femininity and other gender dynamics.
• Watch Maddi & Tae, “Girl in a Country Song.” This song is partly a response to Blake Shelton—“Boys ’Round Here,” and Florida Georgia Line—“Get your Shine On.” What do you
think of Maddi & Tae’s portrayal of men in their video? How does it compare with portrayals of
women in videos by Blake Shelton and Florida Georgia Line?
• Compare “Bitch in Business” (created by MBA students), to “Girl in a Country Song.” Pay
particular attention to the third and fourth verses of “Bitch in Business.” Would you change any
lyrics, or do you think they are justified? What about the word “Bitch” itself? Is it problematic?
In what ways? Do words matter? Can you really change the historically negative associations of
a word, like “bitch” or “slut”? Are there parallels to ethnic slurs?
• Compare Niki Minaj and Lady Gaga: how do they deploy gender in their songs, lyrics and videos? How do their strategies compare to a male artist from a similar genre?
• Compare Sir Mix-A-Lot, “Baby Got Back” and Niki Minaj, “Anaconda.” How do they deploy
gender in their songs, lyrics, and videos? Is there any significant difference between what Minaj
does in her video and what Sir Mix-a-Lot does in his? How is race used in these videos?
• Should the music video industry be regulated and if so, in what ways and why? Does it make a
difference if the videos are frequently consumed by (and marketed to) young people, pre-teens
and teens, rather than adults who have a more fully-developed personal sense of identity? What
concerns might you as a parent have?
For further exploration and analysis, view the video, Hip-Hop: Beyond Beats and Rhymes (http://
www.mediaed.org/). Do you think the analysis provided by filmmaker Byron Hurt can be applied to
these music videos?
Also view Dreamworlds 3 (http://www.mediaed.org/), which analyzes the stories told in popular
culture about gender and sexuality. How well does this analysis apply to contemporary videos, including the ones that you’ve just viewed?

Gender and Sexuality

47

RESOURCES FOR FURTHER EXPLORATION
Educational Media Companies and Distributors:
• Documentary Education Resources. http://www.der.org. One of the earliest distributors of anthropology-ethnographic films. Includes older, but still very useful, ethnographic films. Such
films document ways of life that are rapidly disappearing.
• Media Education Foundation. http://www.mediaed.org/ Focuses on contemporary USA culture, with a wide range of videos analyzing mass media, popular culture, and advertising. .
Videos often include teaching guides.
• Women Make Movies. www.wmm.com. Wide range of films/videos by women filmmakers on
diverse topics, social groups, both within the US and throughout the world. One of the earliest
distributors of films on gender.
• Women’s Media Center. www.womensmediacenter.com/ More U.S.-centered resources, especially contemporary issues of women’s representation in the media.

Some Key Accessible Readings by Anthropologists:
Brettell, Carolyn and Brettell, Carolyn B. and Carolyn F. Sargent, eds. Gender in Cross-Cultural Perspective.
6th edition (New York: Routledge, 2012). Excellent collection of articles, with overviews. Also includes a
Film Bibliography for each topical section of the book.
Geller, Pamela L. and Miranda K. Stockett, eds., Feminist Anthropology: Past, Present, and Future
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2006). Many articles by biological and archeological
anthropologists.
Hodgson, Dorothy L., ed. The Gender, Culture, and Power Reader. (New York: Oxford University Press,
2016). Useful reader for students and non-specialist readers. Includes a wide range of articles, often
adapted from longer academic articles.
Ellen Lewin, ed., Feminist Anthropology: A Reader (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2006). Excellent
collection with introductory essay by editor, a pioneer in feminist and Lesbian-Gay studies.
Strum, Shirley and Fedigan, Linda, eds., Primate Encounters: Models of Science, Gender and Society (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2000).
Ward, Martha and Monica Edelstein, A World full of Women. 6th edition (New York: Routledge/Taylor
Francis, 2014). Readable overview of the field.

Some Useful Organizational Websites
American Men’s Studies Association
Association for Feminist Anthropology, American Anthropological Association
VOICES: Journal of the Association for Feminist Anthropology
Book reviews from the Association for Feminist Anthropology
Association for Queer Anthropology
Center for American Women and Politics, Rutgers University
Feminist Majority Foundation
Guttmacher Center (Research on reproductive health)
National Women’s Studies Association
Planned Parenthood

48

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Dr. Mukhopadhyay specializes in gender, sexuality, race/ethnicity,
and culture-cognition, with research in the USA and India on gendered families, politics, and science-engineering. In graduate school
she co-created one of the earliest gender-culture courses. She has developed numerous gender classes and taught, for 20 years, a popular anthropology and gender-oriented, multi-section Human Sexuality
course. Gender-related publications include: Cognitive Anthropology
Through a Gendered Lens (2011). How Exportable are Western Theories of
Gendered Science? (2009), A Feminist Cognitive Anthropology: The Case
of Women and Mathematics (2004), Women, Education and Family
Structure in India (1994, with S. Seymour). She co-authored an early
Annual Review of Anthropology article on gender (1988) and is in the
Association for Feminist Anthropology. In other work, she served as a
Key Advisor for the AAA RACE project; co-authored How Real is Race:
A Sourcebook on Race, Culture and Biology, (2nd Edition, 2014) and promotes active learning approaches to teaching about culture (cf.2007).
Tami Blumenfield is Assistant Professor of Asian Studies at Furman
University and was a 2016 Fulbright Scholar affiliated with Yunnan
University. Since 2001, she has been engaged in a long-term ethnographic fieldwork project in northwest Yunnan Province, studying
changes in education, social life, and ecology in Na communities. Blumenfield is the co-editor of Cultural Heritage Politics in China, with
Helaine Silverman (2013), and of Doing Fieldwork in China…With
Kids! with Candice Cornet (2016). Blumenfield also produced Some
Na Ceremonies, a Berkeley Media film by Onci Archei and Ruheng
Duoji. Blumenfield holds a PhD in Sociocultural Anthropology from
the University of Washington.
Susan Harper, Ph.D., is an educator, activist, and advocate in Dallas,
Texas. She holds a Ph.D. in Cultural Anthropology from Southern
Methodist University and a Graduate Certificate in Women’s Studies
from Texas Woman’s University. Her ethnographic research focuses on
New Religious Movements, primarily NeoPaganism, in the American
South; the intersection of gender, sexuality, and religious identity; and
ses, sexuality, and sex education. Her work has been published in the
Journal of Bisexuality. Susan is passionate about a variety of social justice causes, including domestic and intimate partner violence prevention and recovery, sexual assault prevention and recovery, LGBTQ
equality and inclusion, and educational justice. She has given presentations on LGBTQ+ equality and inclusion to a variety of audiences,
including the North Texas Society of Human Resource Managers, The
Turning Point Rape Crisis Center, and various religious organizations.
She teaches courses in anthropology, sociology, and Women’s and Gender Studies at various universities and colleges in the DFW area. She also serves as Graduate Reader/Editor for Texas Woman’s

Gender and Sexuality

49

University. She is currently working on an autoethnography about burlesque and visual anthropology
project exploring the use of Pinterest by practitioners of NeoPaganism.
Abby Gondek is a PhD candidate in Global and Socio-cultural Studies
(majoring in Anthropology/Sociology) at Florida International University
in Miami, Florida. She defended her dissertation proposal in April 2016.
Her project, “Jewish Women’s Transracial, Transdisciplinary and Transnational Social Science Networks, 1920–1970” uses social network analysis
and grounded theory methodology to understand the relationships between the anti-racist and pro-political/economic justice stance taken by
Jewish female social scientists and their Jewish gendered-racialized subjectivities. Further information about her work is available from http://
transform-art-gender.webs.com and http://abbygondek.blogspot.com as
well as https://www.instagram.com/abbygondek/.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank the many people who supported this writing project. We especially
appreciate the editorial guidance of Nina Brown and the constructive feedback from two anonymous
reviewers. We are grateful to our students as well, particularly those in Blumenfield’s Gender in East
Asia at Furman University who read a draft version of this chapter in 2016 and shared feedback
that helped us improve the chapter, and to Mukhopadhyay’s students at California State University
Chico and at San Jose State University. We also thank the many individuals who shared their lives
with us and with other anthropologists, enabling us to understand and appreciate the breadth, depth,
and richness of human cultural diversity. Finally, Carol Mukhopadhyay extends her thanks to Nina
Brown and Tami Blumenfield, and to Susan Seymour, on many levels, for help on the 2016 Gender
and the Presidential Election text box.

NOTES
1. The Introduction and much of the material in the Foundations segment draws upon and synthesizes Mukhopadhyay’s
decades of research, writing, and teaching courses on culture, gender, and human sexuality. Some of it has been published.
Other material comes from lecture notes. See http://www.sjsu.edu/people/carol.mukhopadhyay.
2. We use quotation marks here and elsewhere in the chapter to alert readers to a culturally specific, culturally invented concept in the United States. We need to approach U.S. cultural inventions the same way we would a concept we encountered in
a foreign, so-called “exotic” culture.
3. See Carolyn B. Brettell and Carolyn F. Sargent, Gender in Cross-Cultural Perspective (New York: Routledge, 2005). Also,
Anne Fausto-Sterling, Myths of Gender. Biological Theories About Women and Men (New York: Basic Books, 1991). For some
web-based examples of these nineteenth century views, see article at http://www.bl.uk/romantics-and-victorians/articles/
gender-roles-in-the-19th-century. For a list of descriptive terms, see http://www2.ivcc.edu/gen2002/Women_in_the_Nineteenth_Century.htm.
4. For an example of a textbook, see Herant A. Katchadurian, Fundamentals of Human Sexuality (Fort Worth, TX: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1989). See also Linda Stone, Kinship and Gender: An Introduction (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2013).
5. Material in the following paragraphs comes from Mukhopadhyay, unpublished Human Sexuality lecture notes.
6. Herant A. Katchadurian, Fundamentals of Human Sexuality, 365.
7. Phyllis Kaberry, Women of the Grassfields. A Study of the Economic Position of Women in Bamenda, British Cameroons (Colonial Research publication 14. London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.1952) The image comes from the cover of her book,
which is also available online: http://www.era.anthropology.ac.uk/Kaberry/Kaberry_text/.
8. See Barry S. Hewlett, Intimate Fathers: The Nature and Context of Aka Pygmy Paternal Infant Care (Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press, 1991); and personal communication with Mukhopadhyay.
9. W.H. Masters and V.E. Johnson, Human Sexual Response (New York: Bantam Books, 1966).

50

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

10. Some feminist scholars have also questioned the “naturalness” of the biological categories male and female. See for example, Judith Butler, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (New York: Routledge, 1999 [1990]).
11. For genital similarities, see Janet S. Hyde and John D. DeLamater, Understanding Human Sexuality (McGraw Hill, 2014),
94–101. For more parallels, see Mukhopadhyay’s online Human Sexuality course materials, at www.sjsu.edu/people/carol.
mukhopadhyay.
12. For some idea of the enormous variability in human physical characteristics, see Chapter 1 and Chapter 2 in C. Mukhopadhyay, R. Henze, and Y. Moses, How Real is Race: Race, Culture and Biology (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2014).
13. Information about alternative gender roles in pre-contact Native American communities can be found in Martha Ward
and Monica Edelstein, A World Full of Women (Boston: Pearson, 2013). Also, see the 2011 PBS Independent Lens film Two
Spirits for an account of the role of two-spirit ideology in Navajo communities, including the story of a Navajo teenager who
was the victim of a hate crime because of his two-spirit identity.
14. Martha Ward and Monica Edelstein, A World Full of Women.
15. Serena Nanda, Neither Man nor Woman: the Hijras of India (Boston, MA: Cengage, 1999); Serena Nanda, Gender Diversity: Cross-cultural Variations (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland 2000); and Gayatri Reddy and Serena Nanda, “Hijras: An
“Alternative” Sex/Gender in India,” in Gender in Cross-Cultural Perspective, ed. C. Brettell and C. Sargent, 278–285 (Upper
Saddle River New Jersey: Pearson, 2005).
16. Janet S. Hyde and John D. DeLamater, Understanding Human Sexuality, 99; Martha Ward and Monica Edelstein, A World
Full of Women.
17. Beverly Chinas, personal communication with Mukhopadhyay. See also her writings on Isthmus Zapotec women such as:
Beverly Chinas, The Isthmus Zapotecs: A Matrifocal Culture of Mexico (New York: Harcourt Brace College Publishers 1997). For
a film on this culture, see Maureen Gosling and Ellen Osborne, Blossoms of Fire, Film (San Francisco: Film Arts Foundation,
2001).
18. Gilbert Herdt, The Sambia (New York: Holt Rinehart and Winston, 2006). For an excellent film see Gilbert Herdt, Guardians of the Flutes (London UK: BBC, 1994).
19. More information about the Nu shu writing system can be found in the film by Yue-Qing Yang, Nu Shu: A Hidden Language of Women in China (New York: Women Make Movies, 1999).
20. Ernestine Friedl, Women and Men: An Anthropologist’s View (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1975). See Audrey
Richards, Chisungu: A Girl’s Initiation Ceremony among the Bemba of Zambia (London: Faber, 1956) and A. Richards, Land,
Labour and Diet in Northern Rhodesia, An Economic Study of the Bemba Tribe (London: Oxford, 1939).
21. See for example, Ian Hogbin, The Island of Menstruating Men: Religion in Wogeo, New Guinea (Scranton, PA: Chandler
Publishing Company, 1970).
22. Susannah M Hoffman, Richard A Cowan and Paul Aratow, Kypseli: Men and Women Apart A Divided Reality (Berkeley
CA: Berkeley Media, 1976).
23. Denise Lawrence, Menstrual Politics: Women and Pigs in Rural Portugal, in Blood Magic: The Anthropology of Menstruation, ed. Thomas Buckley and Alma Gottlieb, 117–136 (Berkeley: University of California Press. 1988.), 122–123.
24. See http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03k6k0h. Some women are posing with photos of menstrual pads and hashtags
#happytobleed: http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/asia/indian-women-launch-happy-to-bleed-campaign-to-protestagainst-sexist-religious-rule-a6748396.html.
25. See the film by Michael Camerini and Rina Gill, Dadi’s Family (Watertown, MA: DER, 1981).
26. Cynthia Nelson, “Public and Private Politics: Women in the Middle Eastern World” American Ethnologist 1 no. 3 (1974):
551–56.
27. Carol C. Mukhopadhyay, “Family Structure and Indian Women’s Participation in Science and Engineering,” in Women,
Education and Family Structure in India, ed. Carol C. Mukhopadhyay and Susan Seymour, 103–133 (Boulder: Westview
Press, 1994).
28. Elizabeth Fernea, Guests of the Sheik.an Ethnography of an Iraqi Village (New York: Anchor Books, 1965).
29. Susan Seymour, Cora Du Bois: Anthropologist, Diplomat, Agent (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 2015).
30. Carol C. Mukhopadhyay, “Women in Science: Is the Glass Ceiling Disappearing?” Proceedings of conference organized
by the National Institute of Science and Technology Development Studies, the Department of Science and Technology,
Government of India; Indian Council of Social Science Research; and the Indo-U.S. Science and Technology Forum. March
8–10, 2004. New Delhi, India.
31. See for instance, http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/a-powerful-documentary-about-pakistans-honor-killings
and http://www.latimes.com/world/afghanistan-pakistan/la-fg-pakistan-oscar-20160229-story.html.
32. For more details, see the film by Leslee Udwin, India’s Daughter (Firenze, Italy: Berta Film). The Wikipedia article about
the film notes the reluctance of the Indian government to air the film in India, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/India’s_Daughter.
33. For a critique of the “myth” of the medieval chastity belt, see http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/sex/chastity-belts-theodd-truth-about-locking-up-womens-genitalia.
34. See for example, the film by Sabiha Sumar, Silent Waters (Mumbai, India: Shringar Film). While this is not a documentary,
the film reflects the tumultuous history of the partition into two countries.

Gender and Sexuality

51

35. For the !Kung San, see Marjorie Shostak, Nisa: Life and Words of a Kung Woman (New York: Vintage, 1983). For Trobrianders, see Annette B. Weiner, The Trobrianders of Papua New Guinea (New York: Holt Rinehart and Winston, 1987).
36. Shanshan Du, Chopsticks Only Work in Pairs: Gender Unity and Gender Equality Among the Lahu of Southwest China (New
York: Columbia University Press, 1999).
37. Zhou Huashan, Zhong nu bu qingnan de muxi mosuo: Wufu de guodu? [Matrilineal Mosuo, Valuing Women without Devaluing Men: A Society without Fathers or Husbands?] (Beijing: Guangming Ribao Chubanshe, 2009 [2001]).
38. Ernestine Friedl, Women and Men: An Anthropologist’s View (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1975).
39. Carol C. Mukhopadhyay, “Sati or Shakti: Women, Culture and Politics in India,” in Perspectives on Power: Women in Asia,
Africa and Latin America, ed. Jean O’Barr, 11–26 (Durham: Center for International Studies, Duke University 1982).
40. Lila Abu-Lughod, Writing Women’s Worlds: Bedouin Stories (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008).
41. Mukhopadhyay and Seymour use the term “patrifocal” to describe households that consist of related males, usually brothers, and their sons, and the spouses and children of those males. See C. Mukhopadhyay and S. Seymour, “Introduction” in
Women, Family, and Education in India (Boulder: Westview Press, 1994).
42. For powerful documentaries see, the film by Nishta Jain, Gulabi Gang (Stavanger, Norway: Kudos Family Distribution,
2012); and the film by Kim Longinotto, Pink Saris (New York: Women Make Movies, 2011).
43. Lionel Tiger, Men in Groups (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2005[1969]), 45.
44. Carol C. Mukhopadhyay, The Sexual Division of Labor in the Family, PhD Dissertation, University of California, Riverside,
1980, 192.
45. Carol C. Mukhopadhyay, fieldnotes, India; and Mukhopadhyay, The Cultural Context of Gendered Science: The Case of
India, 2001, www.sjsu.edu/people/carol.mukhopadhyay/papers.
46. For example, the major symposium on Man the Hunter sponsored by Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological
Research included only four women among more than sixty listed participants. See Richard B. Lee and Irven DeVore, Man
the Hunter (Chicago: Aldine Atherton, 1972[1968]), xiv–xvi.
47. Mukhopadhyay, Lecture Notes, Human Sexuality, Gender and Culture.
48. S.Washburn and C.S. Lancaster, “The Evolution of Hunting.” in Man the Hunter, 299.
49. Ibid., 303.
50. Jackson Katz, Tough Guise 2: Violence, Manhood and American Culture (Northampton, MA: Media Education Foundation,
2013).
51. Abigail Disney and Kathleen Hughes, The Armor of Light (New York: Fork Films, 2015).
52. Lionel Tiger and Robin Fox, The Imperial Animal (New York: Transaction Publishers, 1997 [1971]), 101.
53. Some useful reviews include the following: Linda M. Fedigan, “The Changing Role of Women in Models of Human
Evolution” Annual Review of Anthropology 16 (1986): 25–66; Linda Fedigan, Primate Paradigms: Sex Roles and Social Bonds
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992); Pamela L. Geller and Miranda K. Stockett. Feminist Anthropology: Past, Present,
and Future (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press 2006); Joan M. Gero and Margaret W. Conkey, Engendering Archeology: Women and Prehistory (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 1991); Shirley Strum and Linda Fedigan Primate Encounters:
Models of Science, Gender and Society. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000); Meredith F. Small, What’s Love Got to
Do with It? The Evolution of Human Mating (New York: Doubleday, 1995); Nancy Makepeace Tanner, On Becoming Human
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981). For a readable short article, see Meredith Small, “What’s Love Got to Do
with It,” Discover Magazine, June 1991, 46–51.
54. Irven DeVore, ed. Primate Behavior (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1965).
55. Ibid. Also, for primate politics in particular, see Sarah B. Hrdy, The Woman That Never Evolved (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1999 [1981]). See also Hrdy’s website http://www.citrona.com/hrdy.html.
56. Thelma Rowell. Social Behaviour of Monkeys (New York: Penguin Books, 1972). For an excellent online article on Rowell’s
work with additional references, read Vinciane Despret, “Culture and Gender Do Not Dissolve into How Scientists ‘Read’
Nature: Thelma Rowell’s Heterodoxy.” In Rebels of Life. Iconoclastic Biologists in the Twentieth Century, edited by O. Hartman
and M. Friedrich (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008), 340–355. http://www.vincianedespret.be/2010/04/culture-andgender-do-not-dissolve-into-how-scientists-read-nature-thelma-rowells-heterodoxy/.
57. See Richard B. Lee and Irven DeVore, eds. Man the Hunter (Chicago: Aldine Atherton, 1972[1968]).
58. See Estioko-Griffin, Agnes A. Daughters of the Forest. Natural History 95(5):36–43 (May 1986).
59. Richard B. Lee, The !Kung San. Men, Women and Work in a Foraging Society (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
1979).
60. Martha Ward and Monica Edelstein, A World Full of Women, 26.
61. Susan Seymour, “Multiple Caretaking of Infants and Young Children: An Area in Critical Need of a Feminist Psychological Anthropology,” Ethos 32 no. (2004): 538–556.
62. Serena Nanda and Richard L. Warms, Cultural Anthropology (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2006), 274.
63. Ester Boserup, Women’s Role in Economic Development (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1970); Barbara D. Miller, Cultural
Anthropology (Pearson/Allyn and Bacon, 2012).
64. Mauma Downie and Christina Gladwin, Florida Farm Wives: They Help the Family Farm Survive (Gainesville: Food and
Resource Economics Department, University of Florida, 1981).

52

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

65. Judith K. Brown, “A Note on the Division of Labor by Sex,” American Anthropologist 72 (1970):1073–78.
66. See www.momsrising.org for some contemporary examples of the challenges and obstacles workplaces pose for working
mothers, as well as efforts to advocate for improved accommodation of parenting and working.
67. Conrad Kottak, Cultural Anthropology. Appreciating Cultural Diversity (New York: McGraw Hill, 2013).
68. See C. Mukhopadhyay, Human Sexuality Lecture notes, for the following analysis, available from http://www.sjsu.edu/
people/carol.mukhopadhyay/courses/AnthBioHS140/. See also Mukhopadhyay, Part II, “Culture Creates Race,” especially
chapter 7 and 9, in Carol Mukhopahdyay, R. Henze and Y. Moses How Real is Race? A Sourcebook on Race, Culture and Biology
(Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2014).
69. Ibid.
70. This and subsequent material comes from C. Mukhopadhyay, Part 2, especially chapter 9, and p. 182–185, in Carol
Mukhopahdyay, R. Henze and Y. Moses. How Real is Race? A Sourcebook on Race, Culture and Biology, 2nd edition (Lanham,
MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2014).
71. Carol C. Mukhopadhyay, Yolanda Moses and Rosemary Henze, How Real is Race?, Chapter 9.
72. Annette B. Weiner, The Trobrianders of Papua New Guinea (New York: Holt Rinehart and Winston, 1987).
73. Lu Hui, “Preferential Bilateral-Cross-Cousin Marriage among the Nuosu in Liangshan,” in Perspectives on the Yi of Southwest China, Stevan Harrell, ed. (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2001).
74. Elizabeth Fernea, Guests of the Sheik.
75. See the film Maasai Women, 1980.
76. An excellent documentary on two alternative paths some women take in contemporary India: the Miss India path and the
fundamentalist Hindu path. Filmed in India, The World Before Her, http://www.pbs.org/pov/worldbeforeher/.
77. See https://contemporaryfamilies.org/the-way-we-still-never-were-brief-report/ and https://www.pri.org/stories/
2014-09-14/singles-now-outnumber-married-people-america-and-thats-good-thing for background and links to detailed
information.
78. Material in this text box was adapted from “What Can We Learn from the Na? Shattering Ideas about Family and
Relationships,” a TEDx FurmanU presentation by Tami Blumenfield. See also Tami Blumenfield, “Chinese Tour Groups
in Europe, Chinese Tour Groups in Yunnan: Narrating a Nation in the World” The China Beat June 2, 2011. http://www.
thechinabeat.org/?p=3494; Siobhan M. Mattison, Brooke Scelza, and Tami Blumenfield, “Paternal Investment and the Positive Effects of Fathers among the Matrilineal Mosuo (Na) of Southwest China” American Anthropologist 116 no. 3 (2014):
591–610; Tami Blumenfield, “Resilience in Mountainous Southwest China: Adopting a Socio-Ecological Approach to Community Change,” in Worlds in the Making: Interethnicity and the Processes of Generating Meaning in Southwestern China, Cahiers
d’Extrême Asie 23 (2014).
79. See reviews in Naomi Quinn, “Anthropological Studies of Women’s Status,” Annual Review of Anthropology 6 (1977):
181–225; Carol Mukhopadhyay and Patricia Higgins, “Anthropological Studies of the Status of Women Revisited: l977-l987”
Annual Review of Anthropology 17 (1988):461–95.
80. Michelle Rosaldo and Louise Lamphere, ed. Woman, Culture and Society (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1974).
81. Rayna Rapp Reiter, ed. Toward an Anthropology of Women (New York: Monthly Review Press, 1975); Karen Sacks, Sisters
and Wives. The Past and Future of Sexual Equality (Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1979).
82. Peggy Sanday, Female Power and Male Dominance: On the Origins of Sexual Inequality (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1981).
83. For an alternative ethnographic, research based video see N!ai: The Story of a !Kung Woman. 1980.
84. Carol Mukhopadhyay and Patricia Higgins, “Anthropological Studies of the Status of Women Revisited: l977-l987,”
Annual Review of Anthropology 17 (1988), 462.
85. Ibid.
86. See for example, Evelyn Blackwood. Webs of Power. Women, Kin, and Community in a Sumatran Village (Lanham, MD:
Rowman and Littlefield. 2000); Marcia Inhorn, Infertility and Patriarchy: The Cultural Politics of Gender and Family Life in
Egypt (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1996); Thomas Buckley and Alma Gottlieb, ed. Blood Magic. The
Anthropology of Menstruation. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1988); Marcia Inhorn, and Frank Van Balen, eds.
Infertility around the Globe: New Thinking on Childlessness, Gender and Reproductive Technologies (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002).
87. Johnnetta Cole, ed. All American Women: Lines That Divide, Ties That Bind (New York:Free Press, 1986).
Louise Lamphere, Helena Ragone and Patricia Zavella, eds. Situated Lives: Gender and Culture in Everyday Life. (New York:
Routledge, 1997).
88. See for example, Faye Ginsburg. Contested Lives: The Abortion Debate in an American Community (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1989); Dorothy Holland and Margaret Eisenhart. Educated in Romance. (Chicago: University of Chicago,
1990); Peggy Sanday, Fraternity Gang Rape: Sex, Brotherhood, and Privilege on Campus. (New York: New York University Press,
2007).
89. Peggy Sanday, “The Socio-cultural Context of Rape: A Cross-cultural Study” Journal of Social Issues 37 no. 5 (1981): 5–27.
See also Conrad Kottak, Cultural Anthropology. Appreciating Cultural Diversity (New York: McGraw Hill, 2013); Veena Das,

Gender and Sexuality

53

Violence, Gender and Subjectivity, Annual Reviews of Anthropology 37 (2008):283–299; Tulsi Patel, ed. Sex-Selective Abortion
in India. Gender, Society and New Reproductive Technologies (New Delhi, India: Sage Publications, 2007).
90. Eleanor Leacock and Helen I. Safa, eds., Women’s Work: Development and the Division of Labor by Gender (South Hadley,
MA: Bergin & Garvey, 1986); Nandini Gunewardena and Ann Kingsolver, eds. The Gender of Globalization: Women Navigating Cultural and Economic Marginalities (Santa Fe, NM: School for Advanced Research Press, 2008); Kay B.Warren and Susan
C. Bourque, “Women, Technology, and Development Ideologies. Frameworks and Findings,” in Sandra Morgen, ed. Critical
Reviews for Research and Teaching (Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association Publication, 1989), 382–410.
91. Carol C. Mukhopadhyay and Susan Seymour, ed. Women, Education and Family Structure in India (Boulder: Westview
Press, 1994).
92. Ellen Lewin, Lesbian Mothers: Accounts of Gender in American Culture (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 1993).
93. See Joan Gero and Margaret Conkey, ed. Engendering Archeology. Women and Prehistory (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1991); Sarah M. Nelson, Worlds of Gender. The Archeology of Women’s Lives Around the Globe. (Lanham, MD: Altamira, 2007).
See also earlier volumes. Rosemary A. Joyce, Ancient Bodies, Ancient Lives: Sex, Gender and Archeology (New York: Thames
and Hudson, 2008); Barbara Voss, “Sexuality Studies in Archeology,” Annual Review of Anthropology 37 (2008): 317–336.
94. The following analysis was developed by Mukhopadhyay in scholarly papers and in lecture notes.
95. Mary E. Hegland, Days of Revolution: Political Unrest in an Iranian Village (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2015).
96. This analysis was developed by Mukhopadhyay in scholarly papers and in lecture notes. An example of this pattern from
Iran is Mary E. Hegland, Days of Revolution.
97. Conrad Kottak, Cultural Anthropology. Appreciating Cultural Diversity.15th ed. (McGraw Hill, 2013).
98. E. Friedl, Women and Men: An Anthropologist’s View; C. Mukhopadhyay and Patricia Higgins, “Anthropological Studies of
the Status of Women Revisited: 1977–1987.” Annual Review of Anthropology 17 (1988): 461–495.
99. One 1970s male pilot, when asked about why there were no women pilots, said, without thinking, “Because women
aren’t strong enough to fly the plane!” He then realized what he’d said and laughed. From Mukhopadhyay, field notes, 1980.
100. Ann Stoler, “Making Empire Respectable. The Politics of Race and Sexual Morality in Twentieth-century Colonial
Cultures,” in Situated Lives. Gender and Culture in Everyday Life, ed. Louise Lamphere, H. Ragone, and P. Zavella, 373–399
(New York: Routledge, 1997).
101. Peggy Sanday, Women at the Center: Life in a Modern Matriarchy (Cornell: Cornell University Press, 2002).
102. Mukhopadhyay, lecture notes, Gender and Culture.
103. See for instance Annette B. Weiner, The Trobrianders of Papua New Guinea; Martha Ward and Monica Edelstein, A World
Full of Women; Carolyn B. Brettell and Carolyn F. Sargent, eds. Gender in Cross-Cultural Perspective.
104. Kirsten Marie Ernst,“Rios, Pontes E Overdrives:” Northeastern Regionalism in a Globalized Brazil (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2007); John Collins, “‘BUT WHAT IF I SHOULD NEED TO DEFECATE IN YOUR NEIGHBORHOOD, MADAME?’: Empire, Redemption, and the ‘Tradition of the Oppressed’ in a Brazilian World Heritage Site,” Cultural Anthropology 23 no. 2 (2012): 279–328; Jan Rocha, “Analysis: Brazil’s ‘Racial Democracy’” BBC News, April 19, 2000;
Allan Charles Dawson, “Food and Spirits: Religion, Gender, and Identity in the ‘African’ Cuisine of Northeast Brazil,” African
and Black Diaspora 5 (2012): 243–263; Alan P Marcus, “Sex, Color and Geography: Racialized Relations in Brazil and Its
Predicaments” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 103(5): 1282–1299.
105. Ruth Landes, The City of Women (New York: The MacMillan Company, 1947), 2, 6–13, 61–64, 92, 106.
106. E. Franklin Frazier, “The Negro Family in Bahia, Brazil” American Sociological Review 7 no. 4 (1942): 476–477; E.
Franklin Frazier, The Negro Family in the United States (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1939), 125. For the opposing view,
see Mark Alan Healey, “‘The Sweet Matriarchy of Bahia’: Ruth Landes’ Ethnography of Race and Gender.” Disposition: The
Cultural Practice of Latinamericanism II 23 no. 50 (1998): 101.
107. See Melville J. Herskovits, “The Negro in Bahia, Brazil: A Problem in Method” American Sociological Review 8 no. 4
(1943): 395–396; Edison Carneiro, “Letters from Edison Carneiro to Ruth Landes: Dating from September 28, 1938 to
March 14, 1946” (Washington, DC: Box 2 Ruth Landes Papers, National Anthropological Archives, Smithsonian Institution,
1938); Ruth Landes, The City of Women (New York: MacMillan Company, 1947).
108. Ruth Landes, “Fetish Worship in Brazil” The Journal of American Folklore 53 no. 210(1940): 261.
109. Ruth Landes, The City of Women (New York: MacMillan Company, 1947), 31–32, 37.
110. Ruth Landes, “Negro Slavery and Female Status” African Affairs 52 no. 206 (1953): 55. Also, Ruth Landes, “A Cult
Matriarchate and Male Homosexuality” The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 35 no. 3 (1940): 386–387, 393–394;
Ruth Landes, “Negro Slavery and Female Status,” African Affairs 52 no. 206 (1953): 55–57.
111. J. Lorand Matory, “Gendered Agendas: The Secrets Scholars Keep about Yorùbá-Atlantic Religion,” Gender & History
15 no. 3 (2003): 413.
112. Cheryl Sterling, “Women-Space, Power, and the Sacred in Afro-Brazilian Culture,” The Global South 4 no. 1 (2010):
71–93.
113. Nandini Gunewardena and Ann Kingsolver, The Gender of Globalization: Women Navigating Cultural and Economic
Marginalities (Santa Fe, NM: School for Advanced Research Press, 2008).
114. Women’s political power, when exerted, may go unnoticed by the global media. For an example, see the documentary
Pray the Devil to Hell on women’s role in forcing Liberian President Charles Taylor from office and leading to the election of

54

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Ellen Johnson Sirleaf as President. For an excellent documentary on some of the alternative paths contemporary women in
India are taking, see The World before Her. For more on changes in women’s education in India, see Carol C. Mukhopadhyay.
2001. “The Cultural Context of Gendered Science: The Case of India.” Available at http://www.sjsu.edu/people/carol.mukhopadhyay/papers/
115. See the excellent film The Purity Myth: The Virginity Movement’s War Against Women. Available through Media Education
Foundation.
116. Carol C. Mukhopadhyay. 1982. “Sati or Shakti: Women, Culture and Politics in India.” In Perspectives on Power: Women
in Asia, Africa and Latin America, edited by Jean O’Barr, 11–26. Durham, NC: Center for International Studies, Duke
University; Carol C. Mukhopadhyay. 2008. “Sati or Shakti: An Update in Light of Contemporary U.S. Presidential Politics.” Paper presented at Gender and Politics from a Feminist Anthropological Perspective. November 2008, San Francisco. On
the 2016 Election, see: Carol Mukhopadhyay.. “Gender and Trump,” Social Justice blog, January 19, 2017, http://www.
socialjusticejournal.org/gender-and-trump/.
117. For more information on the initial Trump video, see http://time.com/4523755/donald-trump-leaked-tape-impact. For
coverage of the women accusing Trump and his response, see http://www.cnn.com/2016/10/14/politics/trump-women-accusers/index.html. For coverage of Trumps’ response to the allegations, see http://time.com/4531872/donald-trump-sexual-assault-accusers-attack.
118. Carly Wayne, Nicholas Valentino and Marzia Oceno. 2016. “How Sexism Drives Support for Donald Trump.” Washington Post, October 23. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/10/23/how-sexism-drives-supportfor-donald-trump. Also see Libby Nelson. 2016. “Hostility toward Women Is One of the Strongest Predictors of Trump
Support.” Vox. November 1. http://www.vox.com/2016/11/1/13480416/trump-supporters-sexism. For an article that also
covers research by psychologists, see Emily Crockett. 2016. “Why Misogyny Won.” Vox. November 15. http://www.vox.com/
identities/2016/11/15/13571478/trump-president-sexual-assault-sexism-misogyny-won.
119. For examples of anti-Clinton rhetoric, see article and associated video at http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/deplorable-anti-clinton-merch-at-trump-rallies_us_572836e1e4b016f378936c22. Figures for numbers of witches killed range from
thousands to millions, with most suggesting at least 60,000–80,000 and probably far more. Regardless, it is estimated that
75–80 percent were women. See for example Douglas Linder. 2005. “A Brief History of Witchcraft Persecutions before Salem”
http://law2.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/salem/witchhistory.html and http://womenshistory.about.com/od/witcheseurope/a/Witch-Hunts-In-Europe-Timeline.htm.
120. Mark DiCamillo of the Field Poll suggested one reason polls were wrong is that female Trump voters hid their actual
voting preferences from pollsters. DiCamillo is quoted in Debra J. Saunders. 2016. “How Herd Mentality Blinded Pollsters
to Trump Potential.” San Francisco Chronicle. November 13, E3.
121. For a critique of those who “blame” Euro-American (“white”) women for Hillary Clinton’s defeat, see the article by Kelly
Dittmar. 2016. “No, Women Didn’t Abandon Clinton, Nor Did She Fail to Win Their Support.” Ms. Magazine. November
14. http://msmagazine.com/blog/2016/11/14/women-didnt-abandon-clinton/.
122. See Women in the World. 2016. “Donald Trump’s Victory Threatens to Upend Progressive Notions of Masculinity.”
November 20. http://nytlive.nytimes.com/womenintheworld/2016/11/20/donald-trumps-victory-threatens-to-upend-progressive-notions-of-masculinity/.
123. For a powerful video reaction and interpretation of this election, see https://vimeo.com/191751334.
124. There is a huge body of research on these (and other) topics that we simply have not been able to cover in one chapter
of a book. We hope the material and references we have provided will give readers a starting point for further investigation!
125. Many gender studies scholars have moved away from labeling people “biologically female” or “biologically male,” shifting
instead to terms like “assigned female at birth” and “assigned male at birth.” Terms that foreground assignment help recognize
the fluidity of gender identity and the existence of intersex people who do not fit neatly into those categories.
126. Carol C. Mukhopadhyay, “A Feminist Cognitive Anthropology: The Case of Women and Mathematics” Ethos 32 no. 4
(2004): 458–492.
127. David Valentine, Imagining Transgender: An Ethnography of a Category (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007). See
also Jessi Hempel, “My Brother’s Pregnancy and the Making of a New American Family” TIME September 2016. http://time.
com/4475634/trans-man-pregnancy-evan./
128. Gary G. Gates, “How Many People are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender?” University of California, Los Angeles:
Williams Institute, 2011. http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/research/census-lgbt-demographics-studies/how-many-people-are-lesbian-gay-bisexual-and-transgender./
129. David Carter, Stonewall: The Riots that Sparked a Gay Revolution (St. Martin’s Griffin, 2010); Eric Marcus, Making Gay
History: The Half-Century Fight for Lesbian and Gay Equal Rights (New York: Harper Collins, 2002).
130. Jafari Sinclaire Allen, “‘In the Life’ In Diaspora: Autonomy / Desire / Community,” in Routledge Handbook of Sexuality,
Health and Rights, ed. Peter Aggleton and Richard Parker (New York: Routledge, 2010), 459.
131. Kristen Schilt and Laurel Westbrook, “Doing Gender, Doing Heteronormativity: ‘Gender Normals,’ Transgender People,
and the Social Maintenance of Heterosexuality” Gender and Society 23 no. 4 (2009): 440–464.
132. Justin McCarthy, “Same-Sex Marriage Support Reaches New High at 55%.” Gallup. http://www.gallup.com/
poll/169640/sex-marriage-support-reaches-new-high.aspx.

Gender and Sexuality

55

133. Ellen Lewin and William Leap, Out in Theory: The Emergence of Lesbian and Gay Anthropology (Urbana: University of
Illinois Press, 2002); William Leap and Ellen Lewin, Out in the Field: Reflections of Lesbian and Gay Anthropologist (Urbana:
University of Illinois Press, 1996).
134. Jessica Johnson, “The Citizen-Soldier: Masculinity, War, and Sacrifice at an Emerging Church in Seattle, Washington.”
Political and Legal Anthropology Review 33 no. 2 (2010): 326–351.
135. Tamara Metz, Untying the Knot: Marriage, the State, and the Case for Their Divorce (Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2010).
136. Miriam Smith, “Gender Politics and the Same-Sex Marriage Debate in the United States,” Social Politics 17 no. 1 (2010):
1–28. Quote is on p.1
137. Luke Malone, “Here Are The 32 States Where You Can Be Fired For Being LGBT,” Vocativ.com, February 12, 2015.
http://www.vocativ.com/culture/lgbt/lgbt-rights-kansas/.
138. The Williams Institute. 2012. “America’s Shame: 40% of Homeless Youth are LGBT Kids.” San Diego Gay and Lesbian
News, 13 July. http://williamsinstitute.law.ucla.edu/press/americas-shame-40-of-homeless-youth-are-lgbt-kids/.
139. Fire, film by Mira Nair. 1996. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i2yW8BtM8sw.
140. Don Kulick, “The Gender of Brazilian Transgendered Prostitutes” American Anthropologist 99 no. 3 (1997): 574–585.
141. Evelyn Blackwood, “Tombois in West Sumatra: Constructing Masculinity and Erotic Desire,” in Feminist Anthropology:
A Reader, ed. Ellen Lewin, 411–434 (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2006).
142. Ara Wilson, The Intimate Economies of Bangkok: Tomboys, Tycoons, and Avon Ladies in the Global City (Berkeley: University
of California Press, 2004).
143. Lucetta Yip Lo Kam, Shanghai Lalas: Female Tongzhi Communities and Politics in Urban China. Hong Kong: Hong Kong
University Press, 2012).
144. Ibid.
145. Frances E. Mascia-Lees, ed., A Companion to the Anthropology of the Body and Embodiment (Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011).
146. Don Kulick and Jens Rydström, Loneliness and Its Opposite: Sex, Disability, and the Ethics of Engagement (Durham,
NC: Duke University Press, 2015); Susan Greenhalgh, Fat-Talk Nation: The Human Costs of America’s War on Fat (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 2015); Ellen Gruenbaum, The Female Circumcision Controversy: An Anthropological Perspective
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2001); Seth M. Holmes, Fresh Fruit, Broken Bodies: Migrant Farmworkers in
the United States (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2013); Eithne Luibhéid, Entry Denied: Controlling Sexuality at the
Border (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2002).
147. Pamela Runestad, “The Medical Anthropologist as the Patient: Developing Research Questions on Hospital Food in
Japan through Auto-Ethnography,”ASIANetwork Exchange 23 no. 1 (2016):66–82.
148. Emily Martin, The Woman in the Body (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1987); Emily Martin, “The Egg and the Sperm:
How Science Has Constructed a Romance Based on Stereotypical Male-Female Roles” Signs 16 no. 3 (1991): 485–501.
149. Emily Martin, “The Egg and the Sperm,” 485.
150. David H. Freedman, “The Aggressive Egg,” Discover, June, 1992, 61–65.
151. The Miracle of Life, 1983. There was a sequel in 2001: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/body/life-greatest-miracle.html.
152. Corinne P. Hayden, “Gender, Genetics and Generation: Reformulating Biology in Lesbian Kinship,” Cultural Anthropology 10 no. 1 (1995): 41–63.
153. For some of the positive results for women, see Vanessa Fong, “China’s One-Child Policy and the Empowerment of
Urban Daughters,” American Anthropologist 104 no. 4 (2002): 1098–1109.
154. The examples from Turkey come from: “The Biopolitics of the Family in Turkey: neoconservatism, sexuality and reproduction.” Session at 2015 American Anthropological Association meetings, Denver; and from a paper given by Sen Gupta in
session 4–0615, “Development, Gender, and the neoliberal Social Imaginary,” at the 2015 American Anthropological Association meetings, Denver. There is a huge body of research on these topics (and others) that we simply could not cover in one
chapter. We hope the references we have provided will give readers a starting point for further investigation!
155. Ruth Behar, “Introduction: Out of Exile,” in Women Writing Culture, ed. Ruth Behar and Deborah Gordon (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1995); Peggy Golde, Women in the Field: Anthropological Experiences (Chicago, IL: Aldine
Publishing Company, 1970); Nancy J. Parezo, Hidden Scholars: Women Anthropologists and the Native American Southwest
(Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1993), 5–9.
156. Helen Brannagh, “Sex ‘Suggested’ and Power Play: Notes on Harassment in the Field,” in China: New Faces of Ethnography, ed. Bettina Gransow, Pal Nyiri, and Shiaw-Chian Fong (Piscataway, NJ: Verlag, 2005); Fran Markowitz and Michael
Ashkenaziand, Sex, Sexuality, and the Anthropologist (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999).
157. See Candice Cornet and Tami Blumenfield, “Anthropological Fieldwork and Families in China and Beyond,” in Doing
Fieldwork in China…with Kids! The Dynamics of Accompanied Fieldwork in the People’s Republic, ed. Candice Cornet and
Tami Blumenfield (Copenhagen: NIAS Press, 2006); Tami Blumenfield, “Blurred Boundaries of Learning and Ethnography
in an Era of Constant Connectedness: Lessons from Fieldwork with Children in Southwest China,” ibid, 69–85. Additional
perspectives from a father-son duo and a mother-daughter pair in the same volume are those by Eriberto P. Lozada Jr. and
E. Patrick Lozada III, “Opening the Door (开门): Doing Fieldwork with Children in Rural China,” and by Jeanne L. Shea,

56

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

“Clean Your Plate and Don’t Be Polite: An American Mother’s Education in Early Childhood Parenting and Family Life in
Shanghai, China.” For another discussion of how children influence perceptions of a fieldworking parent, see Jocelyn Linnekin, “Family and Other Uncontrollables: Impression Management in Accompanied Fieldwork,” in Fieldwork and Families:
Constructing New Models for Ethnographic Research, ed. Juliana Flinn, Leslie Marshall, and Jocelyn Armstrong (Honolulu:
Hawaii University Press, 1998), 71–83.
158. Lynn Bolles, “Telling the Story Straight: Black Feminist Intellectual Thought in Anthropology” Transforming Anthropology: Journal of the Association of Black Anthropologists 21 no. 1 (2013): 63–64.
159. See Christina Wasson et al., We’ve Come a Long Way, Maybe: Academic Climate Report of the Committee on the Status of
Women in Anthropology, 2008, 5, 8. Available from https://web.csulb.edu/~lemaster/Publications%20(PDFs)/2008-coswa-academic-climate-report.pdf and Elizabeth Rudd, E. Morrison, J. Picciano, and Maresi Nerad, “Social Science PhDs—
Five+ Years Out: Anthropology Report. CIRGE Report 2008-01,” 2008. http://www.education.uw.edu/cirge/social-science-phds-five-years-out-anthropology-report-2/.
160. Ibid.
161. See Agatha M. Beins and Judith L. Kennedy, Women’s Studies for the Future: Foundations, Interrogations, Politics (Rutgers,
NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2005); Florence Howe and Mari Jo Buhl, The Politics of Women’s Studies: Testimony from the 30
Founding Mothers (New York: The Feminist Press, 2000); Marilyn J. Boxer and Caroline Stimpson, When Women Ask the
Questions: Creating Women’s Studies in America (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2001); Susan Shaw and Janet Lee,
Women’s Voices, Feminist Visions (New York: McGraw Hill, 2014).
162. Rachel Adams and Michael Savan, The Masculinity Studies Reader (New York: Wiley-Blackwell, 2002); Judith Keagan
Gardiner, Masculinity Studies and Feminist Theory (New York: Columbia University Press, 2002); Matthew C. Gutmann,
“Trafficking in Men: The Anthropology of Masculinity,” Annual Review of Anthropology 26 no. 1 (2007): 385–409. There were
a number of earlier explorations of masculinity, several focused on African-American males. See for example Michelle Wallace,
Black Macho and the Myth of the Superwoman (New York: Warner Books, 1980).
163. See especially numerous films available through Media Education Foundation and Women Make Movies. See also Susan
Bordo, The Male Body: A New Look at Men in Public and in Private (New York: Farrar Straus and Giroux, 1999); Rebecca
Solnit, Men Explain Things to Me (Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2014). Also, Jackson Katz’ film Tough Guise 2: Violence, Media, and the Crisis in Masculinity (2013) and the website www.jacksonkatz.com/ have other books, articles, and workshops
on gender violence prevention. See also Michael Kimmel, Guyland: The Perilous World Where Boys Become Men (New York:
Harper Perennial, 2009).
164. Thomas Grego, Mehinaku: The Drama of Daily Life in a Brazilian Indian Village (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1977). See also Paula Brown and Georgeda Buchbinder, Man and Woman in the New Guinea Highlands (Washington DC:
American Anthropological Association, 1976); Gilbert Herdt, Guardians of the Flutes (film); Stanley Brandeis, Metaphors of
Masculinity: Sex and Status in Andalusian Folklore (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1980); Sherry B. Ortner
and Harriet Whitehead, Sexual Meanings (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981); David Gilmore, Manhood in the
Making: Cultural Concepts of Masculinity (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990).
165. See article by Matthew C. Guttman, “Trafficking in Men: The Anthropology of Masculinity,” Annual Review of Anthropology 26 (2007): 385–409.
166. See several excellent videos through Media Education Foundation including Dreamworlds 3, Killing Us Softly 4, The
Purity Myth as well as those addressing masculinity such as Tough Guise 2, Joystick Warriors, and Hip Hop: Beyond Beats and
Rhymes.
167. Philippe Bourgois and Jeffrey Schonberg, Righteous Dopefiend (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2009); Seth
M. Holmes, Fresh Fruit, Broken Bodies: Migrant Farmworkers in the United States (Berkeley: University of California Press,
2013); Mary H. Moran, “Warriors or Soldiers? Masculinity and Ritual Transvestism in the Liberian Civil War,” in Situated
Lives, ed. Louise Lamphere, Helena Ragone, and Patricia Zavella, 440–450. New York: Routledge, 1997); Kimberly Theidon,
“Reconstructing Masculinities: The Disarmament, Demobilization, and Reintegration of Former Combatants in Colombia,”
in The Gender, Culture, and Power Reader, ed. Dorothy Hodgson, 420–429 (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016); Casey
High, “Warriors, Hunters, and Bruce Lee: Gendered Agency and the Transformation of Amazonian Masculinity” American
Ethnologist 37 no. 4 (2010): 753–770.
168. James W. Messerschmidt, Masculinities in the Making: From the Local to the Global (Lanham, MD: Rowman Littlefield,
2015).
169. Liu Shao-hua, Passage to Manhood: Youth, Masculinity, and Migration in Southwest China (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2010).
170. See Marcia C. Inhorn, The New Arab Man: Emergent Masculinities, Technologies, and Islam in the Middle East (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2012); Marcia C. Inhorn, Wendy Chavkin, and Jose-Alberto Navarro, Globalized Fatherhood.
New York: Berghahn. For discussion of Japan, see Mark J. McLelland. 2005. “Salarymen Doing Queer: Gay Men and the
Heterosexual Public Sphere in Japan,” in Genders, Transgenders and Sexualities in Japan, edited by M. J. McLelland and R.
Dasgupta, 96–110 (New York: Routledge, 2014).
171. Dipanita Nath, “Mardistan: Four Men Talk about Masculinity in Harjant Gill’s Film,” The Indian Express, August 25,
2014. http://indianexpress.com/article/cities/delhi/be-a-super-man./ The film is available online: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=tSrGuXTEHsk.

Religion
Sashur Henninger-Rener, University of LaVerne and the Los Angeles Community College District
sashur.henninger@gmail.com

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Define religion and explain its
significance in human cultures.

• Summarize theories developed
by anthropologists to explain the
importance of supernatural beliefs in
human communities.
• Identify the four elements of religion
(cosmology, belief in the supernatural,
rules of behavior, and rituals) and
explain how each element contributes
to religious practices.
• Define rites of passage, rites
of intensification, and rites of
revitalization and explain the purpose
of each type of ritual.

Humans have always wondered about the meaning of the
life, the nature of the universe, and the forces that shape our
lives. While it is impossible to know for sure how the people
who lived thousands of years ago answered these kinds of
questions, there are some clues. Fifty thousand years ago,
human communities buried the dead with stone tools,
shells, animal bones, and other objects, a practice that suggests they were preparing the deceased for an afterlife, or a
world beyond this one. Thirty thousand years ago, artists
entered the Chauvet cave in France and painted dramatic
scenes of animals on the cave walls along with abstract symbols that suggest the images were part of a supernatural belief system, possibly one focused on ensuring safety or success in hunting (Figure 1).1 A few thousand years later,
collections of small clay sculptures, known as Venus figurines, began appearing across Eurasia. They seem to express
ideas about fertility or motherhood and may have been
viewed as magical (Figure 2).2
Because ideas about the supernatural are part of every
human culture, understanding these beliefs is important
to anthropologists. However, studying supernatural beliefs
is challenging for several reasons. The first difficulty arises

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

from the challenge of defining the topic itself. The word “religion,” which is commonly used in the United States to refer
to participation in a distinct form of faith such as Christianity,
Islam, or Judaism, is not a universally recognized idea. Many
cultures have no word for “religion” at all and many societies
do not make a clear distinction between beliefs or practices
that are “religious,” or “spiritual” and other habits that are an
ordinary part of daily life. For instance, leaving an incense
offering in a household shrine dedicated to the spirits of the
ancestors may be viewed as a simple part of the daily routine rather than a “religious” practice. There are societies that
believe in supernatural beings, but do not call them “gods.”
Some societies do not see a distinction between the natural
and the supernatural observing, instead, that the spirits share
the same physical world as humans. Concepts like “heaven,”
“hell,” or even “prayer” do not exist in many societies. The
divide between “religion” and related ideas like “spirituality”
or even “magic” is also murky in some cultural contexts.
To study supernatural beliefs, anthropologists must cultivate a perspective of cultural relativism and strive to understand beliefs from an emic or insider’s perspective. Imposing
the definitions or assumptions from one culture on another
is likely to lead to misunderstandings. One example of this
problem can be found in the early anthropological research of
Sir James Frazer who attempted to compose the first comprehensive study of the world’s major magical and religious belief
systems. Frazer was part of early generation of anthropologists
whose work was based on reading and questionnaires mailed
to missionaries and colonial officials rather than travel and participant-observation. As a result, he had
only minimal information about the beliefs he wrote about and he was quick to apply his own opinions. In The Golden Bough (1890) he dismissed many of the spiritual beliefs he documented: “I look
upon [them] not merely as false but as preposterous and absurd.”3 His contemporary, Sir E.B. Tylor,
was less dismissive of unfamiliar belief systems, but he defined religion minimally and, for some, in
overly narrow terms as “the belief in supernatural beings.” This definition excludes much of what people around the world actually believe.4 As researchers gained more information about other cultures,
their ideas about religion became more complex. The sociologist Emile Durkheim recognized that
religion was not simply a belief in “supernatural beings,” but a set of practices and social institutions
that brought members of a community together. Religion, he said, was “a unified system of beliefs and
practices relative to sacred things, that is to say, things set aside and forbidden—beliefs and practices
which unite into one single moral community called a Church, all those who adhere to them.”5
Durkheim’s analysis of religion emphasized the significance of spiritual beliefs for relationships
between people. Subsequent anthropological research in communities around the world has confirmed that rituals associated with beliefs in the supernatural play a significant role in structuring
community life, providing rules or guidelines for behavior, and bonding members of a community to
one another. Interestingly, religious “beings,” such as gods or spirits, also demonstrate social qualities.

Religion

3

Most of the time, these beings are imagined in familiar terms as entities with personalities, desires,
and “agency,” an ability to make decisions and take action. Supernatural beings, in other words, are
not so different from people.6 In keeping with this idea, religion can be defined as “the means by
which human society and culture is extended to include the nonhuman.”7 This definition is deliberately broad and can be used to encompass many different kinds of belief systems.
Many religions involve ideas or rituals that could be described as “magical” and the relationship
between religion and magic is complex. In his book A General Theory of Magic (1902), Marcel Mauss
suggested that religion and magic were two opposite poles on a spectrum of spiritual beliefs. Magic
was at one end of the spectrum; it was private, secret, and individual. Religion was at the opposite
end of the spectrum; it was public and oriented toward bringing the community together.8 Although
Mauss’ formulation presented religion and magic as part of the same general way of thinking, many
contemporary anthropologists are convinced that making a distinction between religion and magic
is artificial and usually not particularly useful. With this caution in mind, magic can be defined as
practices intended to bring supernatural forces under one’s personal control. Sorcerers are individuals who seek to use magic for their own purposes. It is important to remember that both magic and
sorcery are labels that have historically been used by outsiders, including anthropologists, to describe
spiritual beliefs with which they are unfamiliar. Words from the local language are almost always
preferable for representing how people think about themselves.

THEORIES OF RELIGION
Sir James Frazer’s effort to interpret religious mythology was the first of many attempts to understand the reasons why cultures develop various kinds of spiritual beliefs. In the early twentieth
century, many anthropologists applied a functional approach to this problem by focusing on the
ways religion addressed human needs. Bronislaw Malinowski (1931), who conducted research in the
Trobriand Islands located near Papua New Guinea, believed that religious beliefs met psychological
needs. He observed that religion “is not born out of speculation or reflection, still less out of illusion
or apprehension, but rather, out of the real tragedies of human life, out of the conflict between human plans and realities.”9
At the time of Malinowski’s research, the Trobriand Islanders participated in an event called the
kula ring, a tradition that required men to build canoes and sail on long and dangerous journeys
between neighboring islands to exchange ritual items. Malinowski noticed that before these dangerous trips several complex rituals had to be performed, but ordinary sailing for fishing trips required
no special preparations. What was the difference? Malinowski concluded that the longer trips were
not only more dangerous, but also provoked more anxiety because the men felt they had less control
over what might happen. On long voyages, there were many things that could go wrong, few of
which could be planned for or avoided. He argued that religious rituals provided a way to reduce or
control anxiety when anticipating these conditions.10 The use of rituals to reduce anxiety has been
documented in many other settings. George Gmelch (1971) documented forms of “baseball magic”
among professional athletes. Baseball players, for instance, have rituals related to how they eat, dress,
and even drive to the ballpark, rituals they believe contribute to good luck.11
As a functionalist, Malinowski believed that religion provided shared values and behavioral norms
that created solidarity between people. The sociologist Emile Durkheim also believed that religion
played an important role in building connections between people by creating shared definitions
of the sacred and profane. Sacred objects or ideas are set apart from the ordinary and treated with

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

great respect or care while profane objects or ideas are ordinary and can be treated with disregard or
contempt. Sacred things could include a God or gods, a natural phenomenon, an animal or many
other things. Religion, Durkheim concluded, was “a unified system of beliefs and practices relative
to sacred things, that is to say, things set apart and forbidden—beliefs and practices that unite, into
one single moral community called a Church, all those who adhere to them.”12 Once a person or a
thing was designated as sacred, Durkheim believed that celebrating it through ritual was a powerful
way to unite communities around shared values.13 In addition, celebrating the sacred can create an
intense emotional experience Durkheim referred to as collective effervescence, a passion or energy
that arises when groups of people share the same thoughts and emotions. The experience of collective
effervescence magnifies the emotional impact of an event and can create a sense of awe or wonder.14
Following Durkheim, many anthropologists, including Dame Mary Douglas, have found it useful
to explore the ways in which definitions of sacred and profane structure religious beliefs. In her book
Purity and Danger (1966), Douglas analyzed the way in which cultural ideas about things that were
“dirty” or “impure” influenced religious beliefs. The kosher dietary rules observed by Jews were one
prominent example of the application of this kind of thinking.15
The philosopher and historian Karl Marx famously called religion “the opium of the people.”16
He viewed religion as an ideology, a way of thinking that attempts to justify inequalities in power
and status. In his view, religion created an illusion of happiness that helped people cope with the
economic difficulties of life under capitalism. As an institution, Marx believed that the Christian
church helped to legitimize and support the political and economic inequality of the working class
by encouraging ordinary people to orient themselves toward the afterlife, where they could expect to
receive comfort and happiness. He argued that the obedience and conformity advocated by religious
leaders as a means of reaching heaven also persuaded people not to fight for better economic or social
conditions in their current lives. Numerous examples of the use of religion to legitimize or justify
power differences have been documented cross-culturally including the existence of divine rulers,
who were believed to be empowered by the Gods themselves, in ancient Egyptian and Incan societies.
A glimpse of the legitimizing role of religion is also seen in the U.S. practice of having elected officials
take an oath of office using the Bible or another holy book.
The psychologist Sigmund Freud believed that religion is the institution that prevents us from
acting upon our deepest and most awful desires. One of his most famous examples is the Oedipal
complex, the story of Oedipus who (unknowingly) had a sexual relationship with his mother and,
once he discovered this, ripped out his own eyes in a violent and gory death. One possible interpretation of this story is that there is an unconscious sexual desire among males for their mothers and
among females their fathers. These desires can never be acknowledged, let alone acted on, because
of the damage they would cause to society.17 In one of his most well-known works, Totem and Taboo, Freud proposes that religious beliefs provide rules or restrictions that keep the worst anti-social
instincts, like the Oedipal complex, suppressed. He developed the idea of “totemic religions,” belief
systems based on the worship of a particular animal or object, and suggested that the purpose of these
religions was to regulate interactions with socially significant and potentially disruptive objects and
relationships.18
One interesting interpretation of religious beliefs that builds on the work of Durkheim, Marx, and
Freud is Marvin Harris’ analysis of the Hindu prohibition against killing cows. In Hinduism, the cow
is honored and treated with respect because of its fertility, gentle nature, and association with some
Hindu deities. In his book Cow, Pigs, Wars, and Witches (1974), Harris suggested that these religious

Religion

5

ideas about the cow were actually based in an economic reality. In India, cows are more valuable alive
as a source of milk or for doing work in the fields than they are dead as meat. For this reason, he
argued, cows were defined as sacred and set apart from other kinds of animals that could be killed
and eaten. The subsequent development of religious explanations for cows’ specialness reinforced and
legitimated the special treatment.19
A symbolic approach to the study of religion developed in the mid-twentieth century and presented new ways of analyzing supernatural beliefs. Clifford Geertz, one of the anthropologists responsible for creating the symbolic approach, defined religion as “a system of symbols which acts to
establish powerful, persuasive, and long-lasting moods and motivations.... by formulating conceptions of a general order of existence and clothing these conceptions with such an aura of factuality
that the moods and motivations seem uniquely realistic.”20 Geertz suggested that religious practices
were a way to enact or make visible important cultural ideas. The symbols used in any religion, such
as a cross or even a cow, can be interpreted or “read” by anthropologists to discern important cultural
values. At the same time, religious symbols reinforce values or aspirations in members of the religious
community. The Christian cross, which is associated with both death and resurrection, demonstrates
ideas about sacrifice and putting the needs of others in the community first. The cross also symbolizes
deeper ideas about the nature of life itself: that suffering can have positive outcomes and that there is
something beyond the current reality.
A symbolic approach to religion treats religious beliefs as a kind of “text” or “performance” that
can be interpreted by outsiders. Like the other theories described in this section, symbolic approaches
present some risk of misinterpretation. Religious beliefs involve complex combinations of personal
and social values as well as embodied or visceral feelings that cannot always be appreciated or even
recognized by outsiders. The persistently large gap between emic (insider) and etic (outsider) explanations for religious beliefs and practices makes the study of religion one of the most challenging
topics in cultural anthropology.

ELEMENTS OF RELIGION
Despite the wide variety of supernatural beliefs found in cultures around the world, most belief
systems do share some common elements. The first of these characteristic is cosmology, an explanation for the origin or history of the world. Religious cosmologies provide “big picture” explanations
for how human life was created and provide a perspective on the forces or powers at work in the
world. A second characteristic of religion is a belief in the supernatural, a realm beyond direct human experience. This belief could include a God or gods, but this is not a requirement. Quite a few
religious beliefs, as discussed below, involve more abstract ideas about supernatural forces. Most religions also share a third characteristic: rules governing behavior. These rules define proper conduct
for individuals and for society as a whole and are oriented toward bringing individual actions into
harmony with spiritual beliefs. A fourth element is ritual, practices or ceremonies that serve a religious purpose and are usually supervised by religious specialists. Rituals may be oriented toward the
supernatural, such as rituals designed to please the gods, but at the same time they address the needs
of individuals or the community as a whole. Funeral rituals, for instance, may be designed to ensure
the passage of a deceased person to the afterlife, but also simultaneously provide emotional comfort
to those who are grieving and provide an outlet for the community to express care and support.

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Religious Cosmologies
Religious cosmologies are ways of explaining the origin of the universe and the principles or
“order” that governs reality. In its simplest form, a cosmology can be an origin story, an explanation
for the history, present state, and possible futures of the world and the origins of the people, spirits,
divinities, and forces that populate it. The ancient Greeks had an origin story that began with an
act of creation from Chaos, the first thing to exist. The deities Erebus, representing darkness, and
Nyx, representing night, were born from Chaos. Nyx gave birth to Aether (light) and Hemera (day).
Hemera and Nyx took turns exiting the underworld, creating the phenomenon of day and night.
Aether and Hemera next created Gaia (Earth), the mother of all life, who gave birth to the sky, the
mountains, the sea, and eventually to a pantheon of gods. One of these gods, Prometheus, shaped
humans out of mud and gave them the gift of fire. This origin story reflects many significant cultural
ideas. One of these is the depiction of a world organized into a hierarchy with gods at the top and
humans obligated to honor them.
Traditional Navajo origin stories provide a different view of the organization of the universe. These
stories suggested that the world is a set of fourteen stacked “plates” or “platters.” Creation began at the
lowest levels and gradually spread to the top. The lower levels contained animals like insects as well
as animal-people and bird-people who lived in their own fully-formed worlds with distinct cultures
and societies. At the top level, First Man and First Woman eventually emerged and began making
preparations for other humans, creating a sweat lodge, hoghan (traditional house), and preparing
sacred medicine bundles. During a special ceremony, the first human men and women were formed
and they created those who followed.21 Like the Greek origin story, the Navajo cosmology explains
human identity and emphasizes the debt humans owe to their supernatural ancestors.
The first two chapters of the Biblical Book of Genesis, which is the foundation for both Judaism
and Christianity, describe the creation of the world and all living creatures. The exact words vary in
different translations, but describe a God responsible for creating the world and everything in it: “In
the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.” The six-day process began with the division of
light from darkness, land from water, and heaven from earth. On the fifth day, “God created the great
sea monsters and every living creature that moves, with which the waters swarmed after their kind,
and every winged bird after its kind; and God saw that it was good.”22 On the sixth day, “God created
man in His own image, in the image of God He created him; male and female He created them.”23
This cosmology differs from the others in describing an act of creation by a single deity, God, but
shares with the Greek and Navajo versions a description of creation that emphasizes the relationship
between people and their creator.
Reading these cosmologies also raises the question of how they should be interpreted. Are these
origin stories regarded as literal truth in the cultures in which they originated? Or, are the stories
metaphorical and symbolic? There is no simple answer to this question. Within any culture, individuals may disagree about the nature of their own religious traditions. Christians, for instance, differ
in the extent to which they view the contents of the Bible as fact. Cultural relativism requires that
anthropologists avoid making judgments about whether any cultural idea, including religious beliefs,
is “correct” or “true.” Instead, a more useful approach is to try to understand the multiple ways people
interpret or make sense of their religious beliefs. In addition it is important to consider the function
a religious cosmology has in the wider society. As Bronislaw Malinowski observed, a myth or origin
story is not an “idle tale, but a hard-worked active force.”24

Religion

7

Belief in the Supernatural
Another characteristic shared by most religions is a concept of the supernatural, spirits, divinities,
or forces not governed by natural laws. The supernatural can take many forms. Some supernatural
entities are anthropomorphic, having human characteristics. Other supernatural forces are more
generalized, seen in phenomena like the power of the wind. The amount of involvement that supernatural forces or entities have in the lives of humans varies cross-culturally.
Abstract Forces
Many cultures are organized around belief in an impersonal supernatural force, a type of religion
known as animatism. The idea of mana is one example. The word itself comes from Oceania and
may originally have meant “powerful wind,” “lightning” or “storm.” Today, it still refers to power,
but in a more general sense. Aram Oroi, a pastor from the Solomon Islands, has compared mana
to turning on a flashlight: “You sense something powerful but unseen, and then—click—its power
is made manifest in the world.”25 Traditionally, the ability to accumulate mana in certain locations,
or in one’s own body, was to become potent or successful.26 Certain locations such as mountains or
ancient sites (marae) have particularly strong mana. Likewise, individual behaviors, including sexual
or violent acts, were traditionally viewed as ways to accumulate mana for oneself.
Interestingly, the idea of mana has spread far beyond its original cultural context. In 1993, Richard
Garfield incorporated the idea in the card game Magic: The Gathering. Players of the game, which
has sold millions of copies since its introduction, use mana as a source of power to battle wizards and
magical creatures. Mana is also a source of power in the immensely popular computer game World of
Warcraft.27 These examples do show cultural appropriation, the act of copying an idea from another
culture and in the process distorting its meaning. However, they also demonstrate how compelling
animist ideas about abstract supernatural power are across cultures. Another well-known example of
animism in popular culture is “the Force” depicted in the George Lucas Star Wars films. The Force
is depicted as flowing through everything and is used by Luke Skywalker as a source of potency and
insight when he destroys the Death Star.
Spirits
The line between the natural and the supernatural can be blurry. Many people believe that humans
have a supernatural or spiritual element that coexists within their natural bodies. In Christianity,
this element is called the soul. In Hinduism, it is the atman.28 The Tausūg, a group who live in the
Philippines, believe that the soul has four parts: a transcendent soul that stays in the spiritual realm
even when a person is alive; a life-soul that is attached to the body, but can move through dreams;
the breath, which is always attached to the body, and the spirit-soul, which is like a person’s shadow.29
Many people believe that the spirit survives after an individual dies, sometimes remaining on Earth
and sometimes departing for a supernatural realm. Spirits, or “ghosts,” who remain on Earth may
continue to play an active role in the lives of their families and communities. Some will be well-intentioned and others will be malevolent. Almost universally, spirits of the deceased are assumed to
be needy and to make demands on the living. For this reason, many cultures have traditions for the
veneration of the dead, rituals intended to honor the deceased, or to win their favor or cooperation.
When treated properly, ancestor spirits can be messengers to gods, and can act on behalf of the living

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

after receiving prayers or requests. If they are
displeased, ancestor spirits can become aggravated and wreak havoc on the living through
illness and suffering. To avoid these problems,
offerings in the form of favorite foods, drinks,
and gifts are made to appease the spirits. In
China, as well as in many other countries, filial piety requires that the living continue to
care for the ancestors. 30 In Madagascar, where
bad luck and misfortune can be attributed to
spirits of the dead who believe they have been
neglected, a body may be repeatedly exhumed
and shown respect by cleaning the bones.31
If humans contain a supernatural spirit, essence, or soul, it is logical to think that
non-human entities may have their own
sparks of the divine. Religions based on the
idea that plants, animals, inanimate objects,
and even natural phenomena like weather
have a spiritual or supernatural element are called animism. The first anthropological description of
animism came from Sir Edward Burnett Tylor, who believed it was the earliest type of religious practice to develop in human societies. 32 Tylor suggested that ordinary parts of the human experience,
such as dreaming, formed the basis for spiritual beliefs. When people dream, they may perceive that
they have traveled to another place, or may be able to communicate with deceased members of their
families. This sense of altered consciousness gives rise to ideas that the world is more than it seems.
Tylor suggested that these experiences, combined with a pressing need to answer questions about the
meaning of life, were the basis for all religious systems.33 He also assumed that animist religions
evolved into what he viewed as more sophisticated religious systems involving a God or gods.
Today, Tylor’s views about the evolution of
religion are considered misguided. No belief
system is inherently more sophisticated than
another. Several animist religions exist today
and have millions of adherents. One of the
most well-known is Shintoism, the traditional religion of Japan. Shintoism recognizes
spirits known as kami that exist in plants,
animals, rocks, places and sometimes people.
Certain locations have particularly strong
connections to the kami, including mountains, forests, waterfalls, and shrines. Shinto
shrines in Japan are marked by torii gates that
mark the separation between ordinary reality
and sacred space (Figure 4).

Religion

9

Gods
The most powerful non-human spirits are gods, though in practice there is no universal definition
of a “god” that would be recognized by all people. In general, gods are extremely powerful and not
part of nature—not human, or animal. Despite their unnaturalness, many gods have personalities or
qualities that are recognizable and relatable to humans. They are often anthropomorphic, imagined
in human form, or zoomorphic, imagined in animal form. In some religions, gods interact directly
with humans while in others they are more remote.
Anthropologists categorize belief systems organized around a God or gods using the terms monotheism and polytheism. Monotheistic religions recognize a single supreme God. The largest monotheistic religions in the world today are Christianity, Islam, and Judaism. Together these religions
have more than 3.8 billion adherents worldwide.34 Polytheistic religions include several gods. Hinduism, one of the world’s largest polytheistic religions with more than 1 billion practitioners, has a
pantheon of deities each with different capabilities and concerns.35

Rules of Behavior
Religious beliefs are an important element of social control because these beliefs help to define
acceptable behaviors as well as punishments, including supernatural consequences, for misbehavior.
One well-known example are the ideas expressed in the Ten Commandments, which are incorporated in the teachings of Christianity, Islam, and Judaism and prohibit behaviors such as theft,
murder, adultery, dishonesty, and jealousy while also emphasizing the need for honor and respect
between people. Behavior that violates the commandments brings both social disapproval from other
members of the religious community and potential punishment from God.
Buddhism, the world’s fourth largest religion, demonstrates the strong connection between spiritual beliefs and rules for everyday behavior. Buddhists follow the teachings of Buddha, who was an
ordinary human who achieved wisdom through study and discipline. There is no God or gods in
Buddhism. Instead, individuals who practice Buddhism use techniques like meditation to achieve the
insight necessary to lead a meaningful life and ultimately, after many lifetimes, to achieve the goal of
nirvana, release from suffering.
Although Buddhism defies easy categorization into any anthropological category, there is an element of animatism represented by karma, a moral force in the universe. Individual actions have
effects on one’s karma. Kindness toward others, for instance, yields positive karma while acts that
are disapproved in Buddhist teachings, such as killing an animal, create negative karma. The amount
of positive karma a person builds-up in a lifetime is important because it will determine how the
individual will be reborn. Reincarnation, the idea that a living being can begin another life in a new
body after death, is a feature of several religions. In Buddhism, the form of a human’s reincarnation
depends on the quality of the karma developed during life. Rebirth in a human form is considered
good fortune because humans have the ability to control their own thoughts and behaviors. They can
follow the Noble Eightfold Path, rules based on the teachings of Buddha that emphasize the need for
discipline, restraint, humility, and kindness in every aspect of life. 36

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Rituals and Religious Practitioners
The most easily observed elements of any religious belief system are rituals. Victor Turner (1972)
defined ritual as “a stereotyped sequence of activities ... performed in a sequestered place, and designed to influence preternatural entities or forces on behalf of the actors’ goals and interests.”37 Rituals have a concrete purpose or goal, such as a wedding ritual that results in a religiously sanctioned
union between people, but rituals are also symbolic. The objects and activities involved in rituals
“stand in for” or mean more than what they actually are. In a wedding ceremony in the United States,
the white color of the wedding dress is a traditional symbol of purity.
A large amount of anthropological research has focused on identifying and interpreting religious
rituals in a wide variety of communities. Although the details of these practices differ in various cultural settings, it is possible to categorize them into types based on their goals. One type of ritual is a
rite of passage, a ceremony designed to transition individuals between life stages.38 A second type of
ritual is a rite of intensification, actions designed to bring a community together, often following a
period of crisis.39 Revitalization rituals, which also often follow periods of crisis in a community, are
ambitious attempts to resolve serious problems, such as war, famine, or poverty through a spiritual
or supernatural intervention.40
Rites of Passage
In his original description of rites of passage, Arnold Van Gennep (1909) noted that these rituals
were carried out in three distinct stages: separation, liminality, and incorporation. During the first
stage, individuals are removed from their current social identity and begin preparations to enter the
next stage of life. The liminal period that follows is a time in which individuals often undergo tests,
trials, or activities designed to prepare them for their new social roles. In the final stage of incorporation, individuals return to the community with a new socially recognized status. 41
Rites of passage that transition children into a new status as adults are common around the world.
In Xhosa communities in South Africa, teenage boys were traditionally transitioned to manhood
using a series of acts that moved them through each of the three ritual stages. In the separation stage,
the boys leave their homes and are circumcised; they cannot express distress or signs of pain during
the procedure. Following the circumcision, they live in isolation while their wounds heal, a liminal
phase during which they do not talk to anyone other than boys who are also undergoing the rite of
passage. This stressful time helps to build bonds between the boys that will follow them through their
lives as adult men. Before their journey home, the isolated living quarters are burned to the ground,
symbolizing the loss of childhood. When the participants return to their community, the incorporation phase, they are recognized as men and allowed to learn the secret stories of the community.42
Rites of Intensification
Rites of intensification are also extremely common in communities worldwide. These rituals are
used to bind members of the community together, to create a sense of communitas or unity that encourages people to see themselves as members of community. One particularly dramatic example of
this ritual is the Nagol land diving ceremony held each spring on the island of Pentecost in Vanuatu
in the South Pacific. Like many rituals, land diving has several goals. One of these is to help ensure
a good harvest by impressing the spirits with a dramatic display of bravery. To accomplish this, men

Religion

11

from the community construct
wooden towers sixty to eighty
feet high, tie ropes made from
tree vines around their ankles,
and jump head-first toward the
ground (Figure 5). Preparations
for the land diving involve almost every member of the community. Men spend a month or
more working together to build
the tower and collect the vines.
The women of the community
prepare special costumes and
dances for the occasion and everyone takes care of land divers who may be injured during the dive. Both the preparations for the
land diving and the festivities that follow are a powerful rite of intensification. Interestingly, the ritual
is simultaneously a rite of passage; boys can be recognized as men by jumping from high portions of
the tower witnessed by elders of the community.43
Rites of Revitalization
All rites of revitalization originate in difficult or even catastrophic circumstances. One notable
example is a ritual that developed on the island of Tanna in the South Pacific. During World War II,
many islands in the South Pacific were used by the U.S. military as temporary bases. Tanna was one
of these locations and this formerly isolated community experienced an extremely rapid transformation as the U.S. military introduced modern conveniences such as electricity and automobiles. In an
attempt to make sense of these developments, the island’s residents developed a variety of theories
about the reason for these changes. One possible explanation was that the foreign materials had been
given to the islanders by a powerful deity or ancestral spirit, an entity who eventually acquired the
name John Frum. The name may be based on a common name the islanders would have encountered
while the military base was in operation: “John from America.”
When the war ended and the U.S. military departed, the residents of Tanna experienced a kind
of trauma as the material goods they had enjoyed disappeared and the John Frum ritual began. Each
year on February fifteenth, many of the island’s residents construct copies of U.S. airplanes, runways,
or towers and march in military formation with replicas of military rifles and American blue jeans.
The ritual is intended to attract John Frum, and the material wealth he controls, back to the island.
Although the ritual has not yet had its intended transformative effect, the participants continue the
ritual. When asked to explain his continued faith, one village elder explained: “You Christians have
been waiting 2,000 years for Jesus to return to Earth, and you haven’t given up hope.”44 This John
Frum custom is sometimes called a cargo cult, a term used to describe rituals that seek to attract
material prosperity. Although the John Frum ritual is focused on commodities, or “cargo,” the term
cargo cult is generally not preferred by anthropologists because it oversimplifies the complex motivations involved in the ritual. The word “cult” also has connotations with fringe or dangerous beliefs
and this association also distorts understanding of the practice.

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Religious Practitioners
Since rituals can be extremely complicated and the outcome is of vital importance to the community, specialist practitioners are often charged with responsibility for supervising the details. In many
settings, religious specialists have a high social status and are treated with great respect. Some may
become relatively wealthy by charging for their services while others may be impoverished, sometimes deliberately as a rejection of the material world. There is no universal terminology for religious
practitioners, but there are three important categories: priests, prophets, and shamans.
Priests, who may be of any gender, are full-time religious practitioners. The position of priest
emerges only in societies with substantial occupational specialization. Priests are the intermediaries
between God (or the gods) and humans. Religious traditions vary in terms of the qualifications
required for individuals entering the priesthood. In Christian traditions, it is common for priests
to complete a program of formal higher education. Hindu priests, known as pujari, must learn the
sacred language Sanskrit and spend many years becoming proficient in Hindu ceremonies. They
must also follow strict lifestyle restrictions such as a vegetarian diet. Traditionally, only men from the
Brahmin caste were eligible to become pujari, but this is changing. Today, people from other castes,
as well as women, are joining the priesthood. One notable feature of societies that utilize full-time
spiritual practitioners is a separation between ordinary believers and the God or gods. As intermediaries, priests have substantial authority to set the rules associated with worship practice and to control
access to religious rites.45
The term shaman has been used for hundreds of years to refer to a part time religious practitioner.
Shamans carry out religious rituals when needed, but also participate in the normal work of the community. A shaman’s religious practice depends on an ability to engage in direct communication with
the spirits, gods, or supernatural realm. An important quality of a shaman is the ability to transcend
normal reality in order to communicate with and perhaps even manipulate supernatural forces in
an alternate world. This ability can be inherited or learned.46 Transcending from the ordinary to the
spiritual realm gives shamans the ability to do many things such as locate lost people or animals or
heal the sick by identifying the spiritual cause of illness.
Among the Chukchi, who live in northern Russia, the role of the shaman is thought to be a special
calling, one that may be especially appropriate for people whose personality traits seem abnormal in
the context of the community. Young people who suffer from nervousness, anxiety, or moodiness, for
example may feel a call to take up shamanistic practice.47 There has been some research suggesting
that shamanism may be a culturally accepted way to deal with conditions like schizophrenia.48 If
true, this might be because achieving an altered state of consciousness is essential for shamanic work.
Entering an altered state, which can be achieved through dreams, hallucinogenic drugs, rhythmic
music, exhaustion through dance, or other means, makes it possible for shamans to directly engage
with the supernatural realm.
Shamans of the upper Amazon in South America have been using ayahuasca, a drink made from
plants that have hallucinogenic effects, for centuries. The effects of ayahuasca start with the nervous
system:
One under the control of the narcotic sees unroll before him quite a spectacle: most lovely
landscapes, monstrous animals, vipers which approach and wind down his body or are
entwined like rolls of thick cable, at a few centimeters distance; as well, one sees who are
true friends and those who betray him or who have done him ill; he observes the cause of

Religion

13

the illness which he sustains, at the same time being presented with the most advantageous
remedy; he takes part in fantastic hunts; the things which he most dearly loves or abhors
acquire in these moments extraordinary vividness and color, and the scenes in which his life
normally develop adopt the most beautiful and emotional expression.49
Among the Shipibo people of Peru, ayahuasca is thought to be the substance that allows the soul
of a shaman to leave his body in order to retrieve a soul that has been lost or stolen. In many cultures,
soul loss is the predominant explanation for illness. The Shipibo believe that the soul is a separate
entity from the body, one that is capable of leaving and returning at will. Shamans can also steal souls.
The community shaman, under the influence of ayahuasca, is able to find and retrieve a soul, perhaps
even killing the enemy as revenge.50
Anthropologist Scott Hutson (2000) has described similarities between the altered state of consciousness achieved by shamans and the mental states induced during a rave, a large dance party
characterized by loud music with repetitive patterns. In a rave, bright lights, exhausting dance, and
sometimes the use of hallucinogenic drugs, induce similar psychological effects to shamanic trancing.
Hutson argues that through the rave individuals are able to enter altered states of consciousness characterized by a “self-forgetfulness” and an ability to transcend the ordinary self. The DJ at these events
is often called a “techno-shaman,” an interesting allusion to the guiding role traditional shamans play
in their cultures.51
A prophet is a person who claims to have direct communication with the supernatural realm
and who can communicate divine messages to others. Many religious communities originated with
prophecies, including Islam which is based on teachings revealed to the prophet Muhammad by
God. In Christianity and Judaism, Moses is an example of a prophet who received direct revelations
from God. Another example of a historically significant prophet is Joseph Smith who founded the
Church of Latter Day Saints, after receiving a prophecy from an angel named Moroni who guided
him to the location of a buried set of golden plates. The information from the golden plates became
the basis for the Book of Mormon.
The major distinction between a priest and the prophet is the source of their authority. A priest
gets his or her authority from the scripture and occupational position in a formally organized religious institution. A prophet derives authority from his or her direct connection to the divine and
ability to convince others of his or her legitimacy through charisma. The kind of insight and guidance
prophets offer can be extremely compelling, particularly in times of social upheaval or suffering.
One prophet who had enormous influence was David Koresh, the leader of the Branch Davidians,
a schism of the Seventh Day Adventist Church. The Branch Davidians were millenarians, people
who believe that major transformations of the world are imminent. David Koresh was extremely
charismatic; he was handsome and an eloquent speaker. He offered refuge and solace to people in
need and in the process he preached about the coming of an apocalypse, which he believed would be
caused by the intrusion of the United States government on the Branch Davidian’s lifestyle. Koresh
was so influential that when the United States government did eventually try to enter the Branch
Davidian compound in Waco, Texas in 1993 to search for illegal weapons, members of the group
resisted and exchanged gunfire with federal agents. Eventually, under circumstances that are still
disputed, a fire erupted in the compound and eighty-six people, including Koresh, were killed.52 Ultimately, the U.S. government helped to fulfill the apocalyptic vision of the group and David Koresh
became a martyr. The Branch Davidians evolved into a new group, “Branch, Lord our Righteousness,” and today many await Koresh’s return.53

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

CONCLUSION
Religion is of central importance to the lives of people in the majority of the world’s cultures; more
than eight-in-ten people worldwide identify with a religious group.54 However, it is also true that the
number of people who say that they have no religious affiliation is growing. There are now about
as many people in the world who consider themselves religiously “unaffiliated” as there are Roman
Catholics.55 This is an important reminder that religions, like culture itself, are highly dynamic and
subject to constant changes in interpretation and allegiance. Anthropology offers a unique perspective for the study of religious beliefs, the way people think about the supernatural, and how the values
and behaviors these beliefs inspire contribute to the lives of individuals and communities. No single
set of theories or vocabulary can completely capture the richness of the religious diversity that exists
in the world today, but cultural anthropology provides a toolkit for understanding the emotional,
social, and spiritual contributions that religion makes to the human experience.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. This chapter describes theories about religion developed by Durkheim, Marx, and Freud. What
are the strengths and weaknesses of each theory? Which theory would be the most useful if you
were attempting to learn about the religious beliefs of another culture?
2. Rites of passage and rites of intensification are an important part of many religious traditions,
but these same rituals also exist in secular (non-religious) contexts. What are some examples
of these rituals in your own community? What role do these rituals play in bringing people
together?
3. Durkheim argued that a distinction between the sacred and the profane was a key characteristic
of religion. Thinking about your own culture, what are some examples of ideas or objects that
are considered “sacred”? What are the rules concerning how these objects or ideas should be
treated? What are the penalties for people who do not follow these rules?

GLOSSARY
Animatism: a religious system organized around a belief in an impersonal supernatural force.
Animism: a religious system organized around a belief that plants, animals, inanimate objects, or
natural phenomena have a spiritual or supernatural element.
Anthropomorphic: an object or being that has human characteristics.
Cargo cult: a term sometimes used to describe rituals that seek to attract material prosperity. The
term is generally not preferred by anthropologists.
Collective effervescence: the passion or energy that arises when groups of people share the same
thoughts and emotions.
Cosmology: an explanation for the origin or history of the world.
Cultural appropriation: the act of copying an idea from another culture and in the process distorting its meaning.
Filial piety: a tradition requiring that the young provide care for the elderly and in some cases ancestral spirits.

Religion

15

Magic: practices intended to bring supernatural forces under one’s personal control.
Millenarians: people who believe that major transformations of the world are imminent.
Monotheistic: religious systems that recognize a single supreme God.
Polytheistic: religious systems that recognize several gods.
Priests: full-time religious practitioners.
Profane: objects or ideas are ordinary and can be treated with disregard or contempt.
Prophet: a person who claims to have direct communication with the supernatural realm and who
can communicate divine messages to others.
Reincarnation: the idea that a living being can begin another life in a new body after death.
Religion: the extension of human society and culture to include the supernatural.
Revitalization rituals: attempts to resolve serious problems, such as war, famine or poverty through
a spiritual or supernatural intervention.
Rite of intensification: actions designed to bring a community together, often following a period
of crisis.
Rite of passage: a ceremony designed to transition individuals between life stages.
Sacred: objects or ideas are set apart from the ordinary and treated with great respect or care.
Shaman: a part time religious practitioner who carries out religious rituals when needed, but also
participates in the normal work of the community.
Sorcerer: an individual who seeks to use magic for his or her own purposes.
Supernatural: describes entities or forces not governed by natural laws.
Zoomorphic: an object or being that has animal characteristics.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Sashur Henninger-Rener is an anthropologist with research in the fields of comparative religion
and psychological anthropology. She received a Master of Arts from Columbia University in the
City of New York in Anthropology and has since been researching and teaching. Currently, Sashur
is teaching with The University of LaVerne and the Los Angeles Community College District in the
fields of Cultural and Biological Anthropology. In her free time, Sashur enjoys traveling the world,
visiting archaeological and cultural sites along the way. She and her husband are actively involved in
animal rescuing, hoping to eventually found their own animal rescue for animals that are waiting to
find homes.

NOTES
1. See Jean Clottes, Cave Art (London: Phaidon, 2010)
2. O. Soffer, J. M. Adovasio, and D. C. Hyland “The ‘Venus’ Figurines: Textiles, Basketry, Gender, and Status in the Upper
Paleolithic” Current Anthropology 41 n. 4 (2000):511-537.
3. James Frazer, The Golden Bough (New York: Macmillan and Company, 1958[1890]),vii.
4. Edward B. Tylor, Primitive Culture (London: John Murray, 1871).
5. Emile Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of Religious Life, tr. Joseph R. Swain (London: George Allen and Unwin,
1965[1915]), 62.
6. Jack David Eller, Introducing Anthropology of Religion (New York: Rouledge, 2007), 9.
7. Ibid.

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

8. Marcel Mauss, A General Theory of Magic (London, Routledge, 1972[1902]), 24.
9. Bronislaw Malinowski, Culture (New York: MacMillan Publishing, 1931).
10. Bronislaw Malinowski, “Rational Mastery by Man of his Surroundings,” in Magic, Science, & Religion (New York: McGraw Hill, 1955).
11. George Gmelch, “Baseball Magic” Transaction 8(1971): 39-41.
12. Emile Durkheim, Elementary Forms of Religious Life (New York: The Free Press, 1912).
13. Ibid.
14. Kenneth D. Allan, Explorations in Classic Sociological Theory: Seeing the Social World, (Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge
Press, 2005).
15. Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger (London: Routledge, 1966).
16. Karl Marx, Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1970[1844]).
17. Charles Rycroft, A Critical Dictionary of Psychoanalysis (London: Puffin Press, 1995).
18. Sigmund Freud, Totem and Taboo (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1950).
19. Marvin Harris, Cows, Pigs, Wars and Witches: The Riddles of Culture (New York: Random House, 1974).
20. Clifford Geertz, “Religion as a Cultural System,” in The Interpretation of Cultures: Selected Essays, ed. Clifford Geertz, 87125 (London: Fontana Press, 1993), 90-91.
21. Sam D. Gill, Sacred Words: A Study of Navajo Religion and Prayer (Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing, 1981), 52.
22. Gen. 1:21 NASB
23. Gen. 1:27 NASB
24. Bronislaw Malinowski, Magic, Science and Religion and Other Essays (Westport, CT Greenwood Press, 1984[1926]), 199
25. The quote comes from Aram Oroi, “Press the button, mama!:”Mana and Christianity on Makira in the Solomon Islands”
(paper presented at the Australia and New Zealand Association of Theological Schools Conference held in Auckland, June/
July 2013). His work is cited in Alex Golub, “The History of Mana: How an Austronesian Concept Became a Video Game
Mechanic” The Appendix 2 no. 2 (2014) http://theappendix.net/issues/2014/4/the-history-of-mana-how-an-austronesianconcept-became-a-video-game-mechanic
26. Roger M. Keesing, “Rethinking ‘Mana’” Journal of Anthropological Research 40 no. 1 (1984):137-156.
27. Alex Golub, “The History of Mana.”
28. Jack David Eller, Introducing Anthropology of Religion.
29. Thomas M. Kiefer, The Tausūg: Violence and Law in a Philippine Moslem Society (New York: Holt Rinehart, 1972).
30. Charles Ikels, Filial Piety: Practice and Discourse in Contemporary East Asia (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2004.)
31. “Madagascar’s Dance with the Dead,” BBC, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/programmes/from_our_own_correspondent/7562898.stm.
32. Edward B. Tylor, Primitive Culture.
33. Edward B. Tylor, “The Limits of Savage Religion” Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 21(1892): 283–301.
34. Pew Research Center, “The Future of World Religions: Population Growth Projections, 2010-2050,” April 2, 2015 http://
www.pewforum.org/2015/04/02/religious-projections-2010-2050/
35. The characterization of Hinduism as polytheistic is contested. The deities in Hinduism can be viewed as a manifestation
of Brahman, the most significant supernatural force.
36. Andrew Skilton, A Concise History of Buddhism (New York: Barnes and Noble Publishing, 2000).
37. Victor Turner, “Symbols in African Ritual” Science 179 (1972): 1100-05.
38. Arnold Van Gennep, The Rites of Passage (Hove, UK: Psychology Press, 1960).
39. Eliot Dismore Chapple and Carleton Stevens Coon, Principles of Anthropology (New York: Henry Holt and Company,
1953).
40. Anthony F.C. Wallace, “Revitalization Movements” American Anthropologist 58 (1956): 264-281.
41. Victor W. Turner, “Betwixt and Between: The Liminal Period in Rites de Passage,” The Proceedings of the New American
Ethnological Society, 1964.
42. Casey Golomski, “Rites of Passage: 1900’s to Present: Africa,” in Cultural Sociology of the Middle East, Asia, & Africa: An
Encyclopedia (Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, 2012).
43. For more information see Marc Tabani, “The Carnival of Custom: Land Dives, Millenarian Parades and Other Spectacular
Ritualizations in Vanuatu” Oceania 80 no. 3 (2010): 309–329.
44. Paul Raffaele, “In John They Trust,” Smithsonian Magazine, http://www.smithsonianmag.com/people-places/in-johnthey-trust-109294882/?no-ist=&page=1.
45. Victor W. Turner, “Religious Specialists,” International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, 13(1972): 437-444.
46. Piers Vitebsky, “Shamanism,” Indigenous Religions: A Companion, ed. Graham Harvey(New York: Bloomsbury Academic,
2000).
47. Waldemar G. Bogoras, The Chukchi of Northeastern Asia American Anthropologist 3 no. 1(1901):80-108.
48. Rick Strassman, DMT: The Spirit Molecule (South Paris, ME: Park Street Press, 2000).
49. Avencio Villarejo, Asi es la selva (Lima, Peru: Centro de Estudios Teologicos de la Amazonia, 1988).
50. Robert L. Carneiro, “The Amahuaca and the Spirit World” Ethnology 3(1964): 6-11.

Religion

17

51. Scott R. Hutson, “The Rave: Spiritual Healing in Modern Western Subcultures,” Anthropological Quarterly 73(2000):
35-49.
52. Kenneth G.C. Newport, The Branch Davidians of Waco: The History and Beliefs of an Apocalyptic Movement (London:
Oxford University Press, 2006).
53. John Burnett, “Two Decades Later: Some Branch Davidians Still Believe,” National Public Radio http://www.npr.
org/2013/04/20/178063471/two-decades-later-some-branch-davidians-still-believe.
54. Pew Research Center, “The Global Religious Landscape,” December 18, 2012. http://www.pewforum.org/2012/12/18/
global-religious-landscape-exec/
55. Ibid.

Globalization
Lauren Miller Griffith, Texas Tech University

lauren.griffith@ttu.edu
https://www.depts.ttu.edu/sasw/People/Griffith.php

Jonathan S. Marion, University of Arkansas

marion@uark.edu
https://fulbright.uark.edu/departments/anthropology/directory/profile.php?uId=marion

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Define globalization and the 5
“scapes” that can be used to
characterize global flows or
exchanges.

• Explain the relationship between
globalization and the creation of
new “glocal” lifestyles and forms of
consumption.
• Describe some of the ways
people use agency to respond to
globalization including syncretism and
participation in alternative markets.
• Assess the relationship between
globalization, neoliberalism, and
neocolonialism.
• Evaluate the advantages and
disadvantages of the intensification of
globalization.
• Discuss the implications of
globalization for anthropology.

It is Tuesday on campus as you enter the dining hall. The
day’s hot lunch entrées include Caribbean jerk pork with
mango salsa and a side of collard greens. The next station
is offering made-to-order Asian stir-fry. At the sandwich
counter, tuna salad, an all-American classic, is being served
in a pita. Now, are these dishes authentic? That, of course,
depends on how you define authenticity.1 A similar question was asked at Oberlin College in December 2015 when
a group of students claimed that adapting foreign cuisines
constituted a form of social injustice.2 Their claim, which
raised a great deal of controversy, was that the cafeteria’s appropriation and poor execution of ethnic dishes was disrespectful to the cultures from which those recipes were taken.
Many people dismissed the students’ concerns as either an
overreaction or as an attempt to rephrase a perennial complaint (bad cafeteria food) in a politically loaded language
of social justice likely to garner a response from the administration. Regardless of what one thinks about this case, it is
revealing of how college campuses—as well as the larger societies in which they are situated—have changed over time.
The fact that dishes like sushi and banh mi sandwiches are
even available in an Ohio college cafeteria suggests that globalization has intensified. The fact that the students would
be reflexive enough to question the ethical implications of
appropriating foreign cuisine suggests that we are truly in a
new era. But what, in fact, is globalization?

OVERVIEW AND EARLY
GLOBALIZATION
Globalization is a word commonly used in public discourse, but it is often loosely defined in today’s society
(much like the word “culture” itself ). First appearing in the
English language in the 1940s, the term “globalization” is
now commonplace and is used to discuss the circulation of
goods, the fast and furious exchange of ideas, and the movement of people.3 Despite its common use, it seems that the

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

many people using the term are often not defining it in the same way. Some treat globalization as
simply an economic issue while others focus more on the social and political aspects. What is clear,
however, is that globalization has influenced many different facets of contemporary social life. This
actually makes globalization an ideal topic of study for anthropologists, who pride themselves on
taking a holistic approach to culture (see the Development of Anthropological Ideas chapter). For
our purposes, we adopt political scientist Manfred Steger’s definition of globalization: “the intensification of worldwide social relations which link distant localities in such a way that local happenings
are shaped by events occurring many miles away and vice versa.”4
It is challenging to determine precisely when globalization began. Although some people discuss
globalization as if it was an entirely new process without historical antecedents, in truth its precursors
have been going on for a very long time. In this chapter, we argue that the distinguishing feature
of globalization in the contemporary era is the speed, rather than the scope, of global interactions.
Early modern technological innovations hastened globalization.5 For instance, the invention of the
wheel created a need for permanent roads that would facilitate transport of animal drawn carts. These
wheeled vehicles increased people’s mobility, which in turn facilitated the sharing of both goods
and ideas. Even before the invention of the wheel, the creation of written communication systems
allowed ideas to be shared between people in distant locations.
Certainly extensive empires have existed at various times throughout human history, including
Chinese dynasties (the Han dynasty, 206 BCE-220 CE, for instance, reached the same size the Roman Empire achieved much later); the Ottoman Empire, and the Roman Empire. Most recently in
world history, European colonial expansion into Africa, Asia and the Americas marked another landmark of globalization. As discussed in the Development of Anthropological Ideas chapter, colonialism
refers to the political, social, economic, and cultural domination of a territory and its people by a
foreign power for an extended period of time. Technically, colonialism can be practiced by any group
that is powerful enough to subdue other groups—and this certainly would be an accurate term for
Ottoman and Roman imperial expansion—but as a term, colonialism is typically associated with the
actions of European countries starting in the 1500s and lasting through the 1900s. During this period, European colonial powers divvied up “unclaimed” land with little regard for ethnic groups who
already lived in those places, their political structures, belief systems, or lifeways. By 1914, European
nations ruled more than 85 percent of the world, and it is not by accident that the image of the world
most often seen on conventional maps continues to be very Eurocentric in its orientation (see map).
Colonialism in the Americas was the result of European conquest of newly “discovered” territories
during the Age of Exploration. Columbus was likely not the first explorer to reach the Americas,
but his “discovery” intensified Europeans’ desires to colonize this “new” territory. European leaders
began expanding their spheres of influence in Europe before turning their attention to lands further
afield; the successes they had in colonizing nearby lands, amplified by a growing demand for trade
items found in “the Orient,” fueled their enthusiasm for exploration outside the region. The Catholic
Church also supported this economically motivated mission, as it coincided with a weakening of
their religious-stronghold in places like England, Germany, and France.
One of the most devastating features of the colonial period was the forced labor of both indigenous
Americans and Africans who were enslaved and shipped off as chattel. Between 1525 and 1866, 12.5
million slaves were sent to the New World from Africa. Treated as chattel, only 10.7 million Africans
survived until arriving in the Americas. The U.S. imported approximately 450,000 of these slaves. It
is not by coincidence that the ethically irredeemable shipment of slaves to the Americas corresponded
to massive shipments of goods to Europe and down the west coast of Africa. As far as the total scope

Globalization

3

of international flows, however, European colonialism pales in comparison to the scope of globalization that has transpired since the 1990s.
Contemporary globalization, at least in terms of economics, is perhaps best pinpointed as coinciding with the conclusion of World War II and the Bretton Woods Conference.6 The agreements made
at the Bretton Woods Conference led to the creation of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) as
well as the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, which later became the World
Bank (WB). It also laid the groundwork for the World Trade Organization (WTO). Taken together,
these three organizations have had a tremendous role in accelerating globalization and in shaping
the lives of people in the developing world. The very idea of governing bodies like the United Nations, or regulatory institutions like the IMF and WB, that exist outside the confines of a specific
nation-state—now widely referenced as Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)—contributes to
undermining local sovereignty.7 Although local, regional, and national identities and affiliations retain salience in the global era, their importance has shifted relative to the growing sense many people
have of being citizens of the world.

THE ACCELERATION OF GLOBALIZATION
The 5 “Scapes” of Globalization
As we have already established, globalization refers to the increasing pace and scope of interconnections crisscrossing the globe. Anthropologist Arjun Appadurai has discussed this in terms of five
specific “scapes” or flows: ethnoscapes, technoscapes, ideoscapes, financescapes, and mediascapes.
Thinking of globalization in terms of the people, things, and ideas that flow across national boundaries is a productive framework for understanding the shifting social landscapes in which contemporary
people are often embedded in their daily lives. Questions about where people migrate, their reasons
for migration, the pace at which they travel, the ways their lives change as a result of their travels, and
how their original communities change can all be addressed within this framework. Questions about
goods and ideas that travel without the accompaniment of human agents can also be answered using
Appadurai’s notion of scapes.
Ethnoscape refers to the flow of people across boundaries. While people such as labor migrants or
refugees (see case study below) travel out of necessity or in search of better opportunities for themselves and their families, leisure travelers are also part of this scape. The World Tourism Organization,
a specialized branch of the United Nations, argues that tourism is one of the fastest growing commercial sectors and that approximately one in eleven jobs is related to tourism in some way.8 Tourism typically puts people from developed parts of the world in contact with people in the developing world,
which creates both opportunities and challenges for all involved. While there is the potential for
tourists to be positively affected by their experiences with “the Other” while travelling, the tourism
industry has also received its share of criticisms. Individuals from wealthier countries like the U.S.,
even if they are not wealthy themselves by the standards of the United States, are able to indulge in
luxuries while traveling abroad in poorer nations like those found in the Caribbean. There is a fine
line between a) tourists expecting service while on vacation and b) tourists treating local people like
servants. This latter scenario exemplifies the unequal power relationships that develop in these kinds
of situations, and such power relationships concern responsible social scientists.9
Technoscape refers to flows of technology. Apple’s iPhone is just one example of how the movement of technologies across boundaries can radically affect day-to-day life for people all along the

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

commodity chain. Sales records are surpassed with each release of a new iPhone, with lines of customers spilling out of Apple stores and snaking around the block. Demand for this new product
drives a fast and furious pace of production. Workers who are struggling to keep up with demand are
subjected to labor conditions most iPhone users would find abhorrent; some even commit suicide as
a result. The revenue associated with the production and export of technological goods is drastically
altering the international distribution of wealth. As the pace of technological innovation increases, so
does the flow of technology. This is not, of course, an entirely new phenomenon; earlier technologies
have also drastically and irrevocably changed the human experience. For example, the large-scale
production and distribution of the printing press throughout Europe (and beyond) dramatically
changed the ways in which people thought of themselves—as members not only of local communities, but of national communities as well.10
Ideoscape refers to the flow of ideas. This can be small-scale, such as an individual posting her
or his personal views on Facebook for public consumption, or it can be larger and more systematic.
Missionaries provide a key example. Christian missionaries to the Amazon region made it their explicit goal to spread their religious doctrines. As the experiences of missionary-turned-anthropologist
Daniel Everett show, however, local people do not necessarily interpret the ideas they are brought in
the way missionaries expect.11 In addition to the fact that all people have agency to accept, reject, or
adapt the ideologies that are introduced to or imposed on them (see syncretism below). The structure
of the language spoken by the Pirahã makes it difficult to provide direct translations of the gospel.12
Financescape refers to the flow of money across political borders. Like the other flows discussed
by Appadurai, this phenomenon has been occurring for centuries. The Spanish, for example, conscripted indigenous laborers to mine the silver veins of the Potosí mines of Bolivia. The vast riches
extracted from this region were used to pay Spain’s debts in northern Europe. The pace of the global
transfer of money has only accelerated and today transactions in the New York Stock Exchange, the
Nikkei index, and other such finance hubs have nearly immediate effects on economies around the
world.
Mediascape refers to the flow of media across borders. In earlier historic periods, it could take
weeks or even months for entertainment and education content to travel from one location to another. From the telegraph to the telephone, and now the Internet (and myriad other digital communication technologies), media are far more easily and rapidly shared regardless of geographic borders.
For example, Brazilian telenovelas may provide entertainment on long-distance African bus trips,
Bollywood films are shown in Canadian cinemas, and people from around the world regularly watch
mega-events such as the World Cup and the Olympics from wherever they may live.
While the five scapes defined by Appadurai provide useful tools for thinking about these various
forms of circulation, disentangling them in this way can also be misleading. Ultimately, the phenomena studied by most anthropologists will involve more than one of these scapes. Take clothing for
instance. Kelsey Timmerman, an author whose undergraduate concentration was in anthropology,
was inspired to find out more about the lives of the people who made his clothing.13 In a single day,
he found, the average American might be wearing clothes made in Honduras, Bangladesh, Cambodia, and China. Something as seemingly simple as a T-shirt can actually involve all five of Appadurai’s
scapes. The transnational corporations responsible for the production of these shirts themselves are
part of capitalism, an idea which has become part of the international ideoscape. The financescape
is altered by a company in the U.S. contracting a production facility in another country where labor
costs are cheaper. The equipment needed to create these T-shirts is purchased and delivered to the
production facility, thus altering the technoscape. The ethnoscape is affected by individuals migrating

Globalization

5

from their homes in rural villages to city centers, often disrupting traditional residence patterns in the
process. Finally, the mediascape is involved in the marketing of these T-shirts.

SELECTIVE IMPORTATION AND ADAPTATION
Glocalization
Globalization most certainly changes the landscape of contemporary social life (see our discussion of Appadurai above). Yet it would be a mistake to think of globalization as a state that emerges
without human agency. In most cases, people make decisions regarding whether or not they want
to adopt a new product or idea that has been made available to them via globalization. They also
have the ability to determine the ways in which that product or idea will be used, including many
far different from what was originally intended. A cast-off Boy Scout uniform, for example, may be
adopted by a Maasai village leader as a symbol of his authority when dealing with Tanzanian government officials.14
First emerging in the late 1980s, the term glocalization refers to the adaptation of global ideas
into locally palatable forms.15 In some instances, this may be done as a profit-generating scheme by
transnational corporations. For example, McDonald’s offers vastly different menu items in different
countries. While a Big Mac may be the American favorite, when in India you might try a McAloo
TikkiTM (a breadcrumb-coated potato and pea patty), in Hong Kong mixed veggies and egg mini
twisty pasta in a chicken broth for breakfast, in Thailand corn pies or pineapple pies, or a Steak Mince
‘N’ Cheese pie in New Zealand. In other cases, people rather than corporations find innovative ways
to adopt and adapt foreign ideas. The Zapotec of Oaxaca, Mexico, for example, have found a way to
adapt globally available consumer goods to fit their longstanding cultural traditions. Traditionally,
when a member of the community dies, that individual’s relatives have an obligation to ease his or
her passing to the afterlife. One part of this obligation is making an extraordinary number of tamales for the mourners who come to pay their respects at the home altar that has been erected for the
deceased. These tamales are intended to be taken home and were once shared in traditional earthen
containers. Rather than disrupting this tradition, the introduction of modern consumer goods like
Tupperware has made the old tradition of sharing food easier.16 In this case, Zapotec culture is not
threatened by the introduction of foreign goods and ideas because the community incorporates new
things into their pre-existing practices without completely trading old ideas for new ones. Practices
like these provide evidence that fears about globalization leading to nothing but cultural homogenization may be exaggerations. Yet, other communities refuse these products precisely because they
equate modernization and globalization with culture loss. For example, Nobel Peace Prize recipient
Dr. Rigoberta Menchu recounts how adamantly the Maya elders where she was raised warned the
youth away from consuming Coca-Cola or even using modern corn mills rather than the traditional
mano and metate.17
Case Study: Both Global and Local –Salsa Dancing Around the World
While there are a variety of texts regarding the histories of salsa music and dancing, as it
exists today the salsa scene is inseparable from the five flows of globalization described
above.18 Take for instance the vast number of salsa “congresses” and festivals held worldwide throughout the year. People from near and far travel to these events as dance stu-

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
dents, social participants, performers, and instructors (the ethnoscape). Travel to and from
these events, often internationally, depends on modern transportation (the technoscape).
What is being taught, shared, and communicated at these events is, primarily ideas about
different dancing style and techniques (the ideoscape). In addition to the costs of gas/parking/airfare or the like, registration, hotel rooms, lessons, DJs/bands, and other services are
all available because they are being paid for (the financescape). Finally, these events could
not exist as they do today without online advertising (see Figure 1 for an example), workshop and performance schedules, and event registration, let alone video-clips of the featured teachers and performers (the mediascape).
Indeed, the very fact that dancers can come from
disparate locations and all successfully dance
with each other—even in the absence of a common spoken language—testifies to the globalization involved in such dance forms today.19
The widely shared patterning of movement to
music in this dance genre does not, however, negate the very real differences between local iterations. Featured in the very title of ethnomusicologist Sydney Hutchinson’s recent edited volume,
Salsa World: A Global Dance in Local Contexts,
real differences between local contexts, practices, and meanings are shown in chapters dedicated to the salsa scenes in New York, New Jersey,
Los Angeles, rural America, Cuba, Puerto Rico,
Colombia (Cali), Dominican Republic (Santo Domingo), France, Spain (Barcelona), and Japan.20
Learning to dance at family gatherings is different from learning in a studio. Learning to dance
to music that plays in every building on the street
is different from learning in a setting with entirely
different local instruments. Learning to dance is
different when everyone comes from the same
general socioeconomic and ethnic background
compared to learning in extremely heterogeneous urban settings. This set of comparisons
could continue for quite some time. The point is
that even global forms take on local shapes.21

Lifestyle, Taste, and Conspicuous Consumption
While some aspects of globalization are best studied at the societal level, others are best examined
at smaller scales such as the trends visible within specific socio-economic strata or even at the level of
individual decision-making. The concept of “lifestyle” refers to the creative, reflexive, and sometimes
even ironic ways in which individuals perform various social identities (see the Performance chapter in this volume). Sociologist David Chaney describes lifestyles as “characteristic modes of social
engagement, or narratives of identity, in which the actions concerned can embed the metaphors at
hand.”22 The lifestyles we live and portray, then, can be seen as reflexive projects (see the Fieldwork

Globalization

7

chapter for more information about reflexivity) in the sense that they display both to ourselves and to
our audiences who we think we are, who we want to be, and who we want to be seen to be.
Chaney argues that people only feel the need to differentiate themselves when confronted with
an array of available styles of living.23 Societies organized via organic solidarity (versus mechanical)
are predicated on different goods, skills, and tasks. Within this framework, the rise of a consumerist
economy enables individuals to exhibit their identities through the purchase and conspicuous use
of various goods.24 Globalization has increased the variety of goods available for individuals to purchase—as well as people’s awareness of these products—thus expanding the range of identities that
can be performed through their consumption habits (see the Gender and Sexuality chapter for more
on performance of identity). In some situations, identity is an individual project, with conspicuous
consumption used to display one’s sense of self. For example, a student who feels alienated by the
conservative, “preppy,” students at her East Coast school can cultivate an alternative identity by
growing dreadlocks, wearing Bob Marley T-shirts, and practicing djembe drumming, all of which are
associated with the African diaspora outside the United States.
Critics have argued that a consequence of globalization is the homogenization of culture. Along
similar lines, some have worried that the rapid expansion of the leisure market would decrease the
diversity of cultural products (e.g. books, movies) consumed by the populace. The disappearance of
small-scale shops and restaurants has certainly been an outcome of the rise of global conglomerates,
but the homogenization of culture is not a foregone conclusion.25 Globalization enables individuals
in far-flung corners of the world to encounter new ideas, commodities, belief systems, and voluntary
groups to which they might choose to belong. At times these are at the expense of existing options,
but it is also important to acknowledge that people make choices and can select the options or
opportunities that most resonate with them. The concept of lifestyle thus highlights the degree of
decision-making available to individual actors who can pick and choose from global commodities,
ideas, and activities. At the same time as individual choices are involved, the decisions made and
the assemblages selected are far from random. Participating in a lifestyle implies knowledge about
consumption; knowing how to distinguish between goods is a form of symbolic capital that further
enhances the standing of the individual.26
How much free will, freedom of choice, or autonomy an individual actually has is an age-old
question far beyond the scope of this chapter, but in many cases a person’s consumption patterns are
actually a reflection of the social class in which she or he was raised—even when an individual thinks
he or she is selectively adopting elements from global flows that fit with his or her unique identity.
In other words, an individual’s “taste” is actually an outgrowth of his or her habitus, the embodied
dispositions that arise from one’s enculturation in a specific social setting.27 Habitus results in a feeling of ease within specific settings. For example, children who have been raised in upper-class homes
are able to more seamlessly integrate into elite boarding schools than classmates on scholarships who
might find norms of dining, dress, and overall comportment to be unfamiliar.28 Habitus, the generative grammar for social action, generates tastes and, by extension, lifestyles.29
Recall the vignette that opened this chapter. The fact that the students of this prestigious liberal
arts college are in the position to critique the ethical implications of specific recipes suggests that
their life experiences are far different from the roughly one in seven households (totaling 17.5 million
households) in the United States with low or very low food security.30 Inevitably then, what people
choose to consume from global offerings—and the discourses they generate around those consumption choices—are often indicative of their social status. Once a commodity becomes part of these
global flows, it is theoretically available to all people regardless of where they live. In actual practice,

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

however, there are additional gatekeeping devices that ensure continued differentiation between social classes. Price will prevent many people from enjoying globally traded goods. While a Coca-Cola
may seem commonplace to the average college student in the U.S., it is considered a luxury good
in other parts of the world. Likewise, although Kobe steaks (which come from the Japanese wagyu
cattle) are available in the U.S., it is a relatively small subgroup of Americans who would be able and
willing to spend hundreds of dollars for a serving of meat. Having the knowledge necessary to discern
between different goods and then utilize them according to socially prescribed norms is another mark
of distinction between social classes, as anthropologist Pierre Bourdieu’s work on taste made clear.31

GLOBALIZATION IN EVERYDAY LIFE
Although some within the discipline argue that anthropologists should report objectively on the
cultures and social phenomena they study, given the structure of the discourse surrounding globalization, it is increasingly difficult to avoid being pigeonholed as “pro” or “anti” globalization. In truth
though, globalization has had both positive and negative impacts.

Advantages of the Intensification of Globalization
As optimists, we will start with the “glass-half-full” interpretation of globalization. Political Scientist Manfred Steger has argued that “humane forms of globalization” have the potential to help
us deal with some of the most pressing issues of our time, like rectifying the staggering inequalities
between rich and poor or promoting conservation.32 The mediascape has made people in the Global
North increasingly aware of the social injustices happening in other parts of the world. In his book
on the global garment industry, Kelsey Timmerman highlights the efforts undertaken by activists
in the U.S., ranging from public demonstrations decrying the fur industry to boycotts of products
produced in socially unsustainable ways.33 While many of these efforts fall short of their intended
outcome—and typically overlook the complexities of labor situations in the Global South where
families often rely upon the labor of their children to make ends meet—such examples nonetheless
underscore the connections people in one location now feel with others (who they will likely never
meet) through the commodity chains that link them.
Globalization has also facilitated the rise of solidarity movements that would not have been likely
in an earlier era. To take a recent example, within hours of the 2015 terrorist attacks in Paris, individuals from different nations and walks of life had changed their Facebook profile pictures to include
the image of the French flag. This movement was criticized because of its Eurocentrism; the victims
of a bombing in Beirut just the day before received far less international support than did the French
victims. Shortcomings aside, it still stands as a testament to how quickly solidarity movements can
gain momentum thanks to technological innovations like social media.
Micro-loan programs and crowd-source fundraising are yet more ways in which individuals from
disparate circumstances are becoming linked in the global era. Kiva, for example, is a microfinance
organization that enables anyone with an Internet connection to make a small ($25) donation to an
individual or cooperative in various parts of the developing world. The projects for which individuals/groups are seeking funding are described on the Kiva website and donors choose one or more
specific projects to support. The recipient must then repay the loan to Kiva with interest.
Crowd-source fundraising follows a similar principle, though without the requirement that money
be paid back to the donors. One small-scale example involves funds gathered in this way for a faculty

Globalization

9

led applied visual research class in Dangriga, Belize in 2014. By generating a small pool of additional
funding, 100 percent of the students’ project fees could be dedicated to producing materials for local
community partners (compared to other groups, who used some of these fees for student lunches or
other items). As a result, the team was able to over-deliver on what had been promised to the community. The Sabal Cassava Farm (Belize’s sole commercial cassava farm) had requested a new road
sign as well as full-color marketing flyers. The Austin Rodriguez Drum Shop—a cultural resource
center, and producer of traditional
Garifuna drums—had wanted help updating their educational poster (see
Figure 2a and 2b). For both groups the
team was able to a) provide digital
frames with all the research images (so
that the local community partners had
something “in hand” and could use as
they wanted; b) use higher grade production materials, and c) start work on
large-format, coffee-table style documents to be provided to each family
and also copies to be donated to the
local Gulisi Garifuna Museum.
Advances in transportation technologies, combined with an increased
awareness of humanitarian crises
abroad (an awareness that is largely
facilitated by advances in communication technologies) also create new
ethnoscapes. Programs like the Peace
Corps have a relatively long history of
sending Westerners into foreign nations
to assist with humanitarian efforts on a
regular basis. Other volunteers are mobilized in times of crisis. Medical professionals may volunteer their services
during a disease epidemic, flocking to
the regions others are trying to flee.
Engineers may volunteer their time
to help rebuild cities in the wake of
natural disasters. And even lay people
without a specialized skill set may lend
their energy to helping others in the aftermath of a disaster, or by collecting
and/or donating goods to be used in various relief efforts. In 2010, a devastating, 7.0 magnitude
earthquake struck Haiti, affecting an estimated three million people. Thanks to widespread coverage
of the crisis, the international response was immediate and intense with more than twenty countries
contributing resources and personnel to assist in the recovery efforts. Clearly, then, there are also
benefits facilitated by globalization.

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Disadvantages of the Intensification of Globalization
In the previous section, we concluded by noting how the intensification of globalization can bring
benefits to people in times of crisis. Yet it bears remembering and reiterating that sometimes such
crises are themselves brought about by globalization. The decimation of indigenous tribes in the
Americas, who had little to no resistance to the diseases carried by European explorers and settlers,
is but one early example of this. Such changes to the world’s ethnoscapes may also be accompanied
by changes to local health. As epidemic after epidemic wreaked havoc on the indigenous peoples of
the Americas, death rates in some tribes reached as high as 95 percent. Addressing a current instance,
the research program on Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) coordinated by
the University of Copenhagen in Denmark, has called attention to the role of human-caused climate
change in creating the current Syrian refugee crisis (see case study by Laurie King below).34
Similarly, a current example of how globalization can spell disaster from a public health standpoint
would be the concern in 2014 about infected airplane passengers bringing the Ebola virus from Africa to the U.S. In March 2014, the country of Guinea experienced an outbreak of the Ebola virus.
From there, it spread into many countries in the western part of Africa. Medical professionals from
the U.S. traveled to West Africa to assist with patient care. In October 2014, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) confirmed that a man who traveled from Liberia to the U.S. while
asymptomatic became ill several days after reaching the U.S. and eventually succumbed to the disease. Several health workers in the U.S. also became ill with the virus, but were successfully treated.
In response to this outbreak, the CDC increased screening efforts at the major ports of entry to the
U.S.35 However, these precautions did not quell the fears of many Americans who heatedly debated
the possibility of instituting travel bans to and from countries with confirmed cases of Ebola.
The debates about travel bans to and from West Africa were a reminder of the xenophobic attitudes held by many Americans even in this age of globalization. There are many reasons for this.
Racial prejudice is still very much a reality in today’s world (see the Race and Ethnicity chapter) as
is prejudice against other religions, non-normative gender identity, the differently abled, and others.
In some ways, these fears have been heightened by globalization rather than diminished. Especially
after the global recession of 2008, some nation-states have become fearful for their economic security
and have found it easy to use marginalized populations as scapegoats. While advances in communication technology have enabled social justice focused solidarity movements (as discussed above),
unfortunately the same media have been used as a platform for hate-mongering by others. Social media enables those who had previously only been schoolyard bullies to broadcast their taunts further
than ever before. Terrorists post videos of unspeakable violence online and individuals whose hateful
attitudes might have been curbed through the informal sanctions of gossip and marginalization in
a smaller-scale society can now find communities of like-minded bigots in online chat rooms. By
foregrounding the importance of the hypothetical “average” person, populist politics has engaged in
scapegoating of minority ethnic and religious groups. This has been most apparent in the successful
campaigns for the British Brexit vote on June 23, 2016 and the election of Donald Trump as President in the United States.
A portmanteau of “British” and “exit,” Brexit refers to the vote to leave the European Union.
(Headquartered in Brussels, Belgium, the European Union is an economic and political union of 28
nation-states founded on November 1, 1993 in Maastricht, Netherlands.) Both this and the election
of Donald Trump as the 45th president of the U.S. represent backlash against some of the inequities
generated by globalization. At the world scale, the Global North continues to extract wealth from the

Globalization

11

Global South. More tellingly though is the widening wealth-gap even in “rich” countries. Without
sufficient social protection, capitalism—a system wherein profit motivates political and economic
decision making—has led to a situation in which the world’s eight richest men (note the gendering)
now control as much wealth as the bottom 50 percent of the entire world’s population. In other
words, eight men now have just as much money as 3.75 billion people combined and no nation in the
world has a larger wealth-gap (the difference between those with the most and the least in a society)
than the United States. So, while globalization has facilitated advantages for some, more and more
people are being left behind. Social scientists often use the term “re-entrenchment” to describe efforts
people make to reassert their traditional values and ways of life. While this impulse is understandable,
many of these people are susceptible to the rhetoric of scapegoating: being told some other group is at
fault for the problems they are facing. This is the double-edged sword of globalization. Additionally,
in some cases globalization is forced on already marginal populations in peripheral nations through
institutions like the IMF and World Bank. In these instances, globalization facilitates and amplifies
the reach and impact of neoliberalism, a multi-faceted political and economic philosophy that emphasizes privatization and unregulated markets (see below).

GLOBALIZATION AND NEOLIBERALISM
Latin America provides a good example of how the shift from colonialism to neoliberalism has
been disseminated through and exacerbated by globalization. By the beginning of the twentieth
century, the Latin American colonies’ independence from Spain and Portugal was secure, but the relations of power that prevailed during the colonial period had largely been replicated with local elites
controlling the means of production. During this period, citizens individually and collectively endeavored to establish a new national identity. Despite nominal commitments to democracy throughout the region, patron/client relationships functioned as the primary political mechanism. Internal
divisions ran deep in many Latin American countries, with the supporters (or clients) of rival elites
periodically drawn into violent contests for rule on behalf of their patrons. In the last decade of the
1800s and the first decade of the 1900s, people in Latin America began to question the right of the
elites to rule, as well as the hidden costs of modernization. Peasant uprisings, like the one that took
place at Canudus in Brazil in 1896, were evidence of the shifting political framework. People also
saw the imperialistic tendencies of the U.S. as a negative force of modernization which they hoped
to avoid. Together, this led to a situation in which people in Latin America sought a national identity
that resonated with their sense of self.
During this same period there was a slight but significant change in the economic structure of the
region. The economy was still based on exports of agriculture and natural resources like minerals,
and the profits remained in the hands of the elite. What was new, however, was the introduction and
modest growth of manufacturing in the cities, which created new job opportunities. Economic diversification led to a more complex class structure and an emerging middle class. Unfortunately, this
period of relative prosperity and stability soon ended. Because of the plentiful natural resources and
the captive labor source “available” for exploitation in Latin America, wealthy landowners were able
to undersell their European competitors on agricultural products and provide “exotic” minerals. The
privileged position of Latin American landowner compared to European farmers led to widespread
poverty among farmers in Europe, which led to out-migration and political instability in Europe. As
locally born Latin American peasants migrated from the countryside to the cities and the cities filled

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

with European immigrants, the landowning elite began to lose control, or at least the kind of power
they used to hold over the farmers who worked their land and had no other work options.
While city living provided certain opportunities, it also introduced new challenges. In the city,
for instance, people rarely had access to land for subsistence agriculture. This made them far more
vulnerable to economic fluctuations, and the vulnerability of city living necessitated the adoption
of new political philosophies. Urban poverty and desperation created a climate in which many people found socialist philosophies appealing, starting as early as the 1920s in some places like Brazil.
Initially, union leaders and European immigrants who spread socialist ideas among the urban poor
were punished by the state and often deported. Eventually such repressive tactics proved insufficient
to curtail the swelling disruptions caused by strikes and related actions by the unions. Faced with a
new political reality, the elite co-opted the public rhetoric of the urban masses. Realizing the need to
cast themselves as allies to the urban workforce, the elites ushered in a period of modest reform with
more protection for workers.
During this period, and as an extension of their work-related activism, the middle class also clamored for expansions of the social services provided by the state. Pressure from the middle class for
more social services for citizens unfortunately played into growing xenophobia (fear of foreigners)
resulting from the immigration of so many foreigners and faulty ideas about racial superiority communicated through a growing discourse of nationalism. In some places, the elites aligned with the
middle classes if they saw it as politically advantageous. In other places, however, elites resisted incorporating the middle classes into the ruling structure and the elites’ power ultimately was wrested
away though military coups. While emerging leaders from the middle class continued relying on the
export economic model, they directed a greater percentage of the profits back into social programs.
Only after the stock market crash of the 1930s—and the resulting global recession—did those in
power start to question the export model.
In the early part of the 1900s, Latin American countries largely supported free trade because they
believed they had a competitive advantage. They believed that by producing the products their country/region was best suited to produce they would prosper on the world market. However, changing
world circumstances meant that Latin American countries soon lost their advantage; average family
size in industrialized countries began to decrease, lowering demand for Latin American commodities.
When other countries with similar climates and topography began to grow the same crops, a global
oversupply of agricultural products led to lower prices and worsened the decline of Latin America’s
financial status in the world market.
This economic downturn was amplified by the loss of British hegemony after World War II. Before the war, Great Britain and Latin America had enjoyed a stable exchange relationship with Latin
America sending agricultural goods to Great Britain and the British sending manufactured goods
to Latin America. As the U.S. rose in global power, Americans looked to Latin America as a new
market for U.S. manufactured goods. In contrast to Great Britain though, the U.S. did not need to
import Latin American agricultural goods because the U.S. produced enough of its own, production
that was further protected by high import tariffs. Even if a consumer wanted to buy Latin American
commodities, the commodities would be more expensive than domestic ones—even if actual costs
were lower. Overall, Latin America sold its agricultural goods to Europe, including Great Britain, but
Latin American exporters had to accept lower prices than ever before.
The United States’ economic strategy toward Latin America was different than Great Britain’s had
been. For those commodities that could not be produced in the U.S., like bananas, U.S. companies
went to Latin America so they could directly control the means of production. Although these com-

Globalization

13

modities were grown and/or produced in Latin America, the profits were taken by foreign companies
rather than local ones. This same process also happened with mining interests like tin and copper;
U.S. companies purchased the mines in order to extract as much profit as possible. American companies were in a position to exploit the natural resources of these countries because the U.S. had the
financial capital local communities lacked and the technological expertise needed to sustain these
industries. This pattern curtailed the rate of economic growth throughout Latin America as well as in
other regions where similar patterns developed.
The late 1920s through the 1950s saw many Latin American countries turning to nationalism—
often through force—as both a cultural movement and an economic strategy. The middle classes
were in a favor of curtailing the export economy that had been preferred by the elites, but did not
have the political clout to win elections. Indeed, their agenda was regularly blocked by the elites who
used their influence (i.e. with their clients) to press their interests, especially in the rural areas. With
time, however, middle class men increasingly came to occupy military officer positions and used
their newfound authority to put nationalist leaders in the presidencies. Nationalists argued that an
over-dependence on agriculture had led to Latin America’s vulnerable position in the international
economy and called for a build-up of industry. They hoped to start producing the goods that they
had been importing from the U.S. and Europe. Their goal: industrial self-sufficiency.
The state was instrumental in this economic reorganization, both helping people buy local goods
and discouraging them from buying foreign goods. Doing this was far from as easy as it may sound.
The state imposed high duties on goods destined for the export market in order to entice producers to
sell their goods at home. At the same time, the state imposed high tariffs on the imports they wanted
to replace with local products. With time (and struggle) these measures had their intended effects,
making the locally produced goods comparatively more affordable—and therefore appealing—to
local consumers.
As already noted, developing factories required capital and technological expertise from abroad,
which in turn made the goods produced much more expensive. To help people afford such expensive
goods, the state printed more money, generating massive inflation. (In some places this inflation
would eventually reach 2,000 percent!) The combination of chronic inflation with high foreign debt
emerged as an enduring problem in Latin America and other parts of the Global South. Countries
crippled by high inflation and debt have turned to international institutions like the IMF and WB for
relief and while the intentions may be good, borrowing money from these global institutions always
comes with strings attached. When a country accepts a loan from the IMF or the WB, for instance,
they must agree to a number of conditions such as privatizing state enterprises (see the case study on
Bolivia’s water crisis, below) and cutting spending on social services like healthcare and education.
Borrowing countries are also required to adopt a number of policies intended to encourage free trade,
such as the reduction or elimination of tariffs on imported goods and subsidies for domestically produced goods. Policies are put into place to encourage foreign investment. Transnational corporations
have now reached the point that many of them rival nations in terms of revenue. In fact, as of 2009,
“forty-four of the world’s hundred largest economies are corporations.”36 It is an understatement to
note that the policies forced on countries by lenders are often disruptive—if not entirely destructive—of locally preferred lifeways and preferences. Although the IMF and WB measures are intended
to spark economic growth, the populace often winds up suffering in the wake of these changes. Colonialism has given way to a neocolonialism in which economic force achieves what used to require
military force with transnational corporations benefiting from the exploitation of poorer nations.

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
Case Study: Privatization and Bolivia’s Water Crisis
In 2000, Bolivians in the city of Cochambamba took to the streets to protest the exploitative
practices of a transnational company that had won the right to provide water services in
the city.37 Anti-globalization activists celebrated this victory of mostly poor mestizo and
indigenous people over capitalist giants, but the situation on the ground today is more
complicated.
Water is one of the most essential elements on this planet. So how is it that a foreign
company was given the right to determine who would have access to Bolivian water supplies and what the water would cost? The answer serves to highlight the fact that many
former colonies like Bolivia have existed in a perpetual state of subordination to global
superpowers. When Bolivia was a colony, Spain claimed the silver and other precious
commodities that could be extracted from Bolivia’s landscape, but after Bolivia became
independent structural adjustment policies mandated by the International Monetary Fund
and World Bank paved the way for foreign companies to plunder the country’s natural
resources. In other words, colonial style relationships have been replicated in a global
system that forces impoverished countries to sell resources to satisfy creditors; “resource
extraction is facilitated by debt relations.”38
Like many countries in the Global South, Bolivia is deep in debt. A failed program of
social reforms, coupled with government corruption, was worsened by a severe drought
affecting Bolivian agriculture. In order to pay its debts in the 1980s, Bolivia agreed to structural adjustments mandated by the conditions of the country’s World Bank and International Monetary Fund loans. One of the mandates of these loans was privatization of state-run
enterprises like the water system. Proponents of privatizing such resources argue that the
efficiency associated with for-profit businesses will also serve to conserve precious natural
resources. Some have gone so far as to suggest that increases in water prices would help
customers better grasp the preciousness of water and thereby encourage conservation. Of
course, if customers conserve water too much the company managing water delivery will
fail to make a profit, thus initiating a dangerous cycle. When companies anticipate that they
will not see a return on their investment in infrastructure, they simply refuse to extend services to certain areas of the community.
What made the privatization of water in Bolivia so disastrous for the people of urban
areas like Cochabamba was the rapid population growth they experienced starting in the
latter half of the twentieth century (growth that continues in the present). Population pressures layered on top of the scarcity of water in the Bolivian natural environment makes
access to potable water a perennial concern. Migration to urban areas was hastened by
many different factors including land reform, privatization of mines and resultant layoffs,
and severe droughts. This influx of migrants put pressure
on urban infrastructure. To make matters worse, climate
change led to a decline in the amount of surface water
available. In 2015, Lake Poopó, the second largest lake in
Bolivia, went dry and researchers are doubtful it will ever
fully recover (see Figure 3).39
In Cochabamba, organizing began in late 1999. Community members formed an organization called Coordinator for the Defense of Water and for Life, which was
run using a direct form of democracy wherein everyone
had an equal voice. This was empowering for peasants
who were accustomed to being silenced and ignored in

Globalization

15

a centuries-old social hierarchy. This organization, in contrast, coordinated actions that
cut across ethnic and class lines. As the situation came to a head, activists blockaded the
roads in and out of the city and riot police were brought in from the capital. After several
days of confrontations between the people and the military, local activists ousted the transnational company and reclaimed their water source.
Despite local’s reclaiming control, however, they still lacked the infrastructure needed to
effectively deliver what was once again “their” water. This forced them to look to international donors for assistance, which could recreate the very situation against which they so
recently fought. Access to increasingly scarce water supplies is a growing problem. For
example, plans to seize surface water from lakes creates conflicts with rural peasants who
depend on these water sources for agricultural purposes. Unfortunately, such problems
have emerged in many other places as well (such as throughout Africa and the Middle
East), and are increasing in prevalence and severity amidst ongoing climate change. The
question of whether or not water is a human right remains one that is heatedly debated by
activists, CEOs, and others. (See a discussion of the position taken by Nestlé Chairman
Peter Brabeck, who argues for the privatization of water, a position clearly at odds with the
position taken by the United Nations General Assembly which, in 2010, recognized water
and sanitation as human rights.)

RESPONSES TO GLOBALIZATION
Cultures are dynamic and respond to changes in both the social and physical environments in
which they are embedded. While culture provides a template for action, people are also active agents
who respond to challenges and opportunities in a variety of ways, some of which may be quite creative and novel. As such, it would be inaccurate to only see globalization as an impersonal force dictating the lives of people in their various localities. Rather, people regularly use a variety of strategies
in responding to global forces. While a comprehensive catalog of these strategies is beyond the scope
of this chapter, here we outline two key responses.

Syncretism
Syncretism refers to the combination of different beliefs—even those that are seemingly contradictory—into a new, harmonious whole. Though syncretism arises for a variety of reasons, in many
cases it is as a response to globalization. In this section, we use the example of Candomblé as a way of
demonstrating that syncretism is a form of agency used by people living under oppression.
Most often, anthropologists discuss syncretism within the context of religion. Anthropologists
define religion as the cultural knowledge of the spiritual realm that humans use to cope with the ultimate problems of human existence (see the Religion chapter). Candomblé is an Afro-Brazilian spirit-possession religion, in which initiates serve as conduits between the human and supernatural
realm. It is also an excellent example of a syncretic religion. The many gods in Candomblé, known as
orixás, are personified: they all have personalities; experience the full range of human emotions like
love, hatred, jealousy, and anger; and have individual histories that are known to practitioners. Each
orixá is associated with a particular color, and practitioners of the religion often wear bead necklaces
that correspond to the specific deity with whom they feel a connection (see Figure 4). Unlike Christianity (a monotheistic religion), Candomblé does not stress the duality of good and evil (or heaven
and hell). Although on the surface these two religious traditions may seem very different, in actual

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

practice, many adherents of Candomblé also identify as Christians, specifically Catholics. So how can
this be?
Much like the orixás, Catholic saints
are personified and have unique roles
within the Catholic tradition. This feature of Catholicism—more so than any
other major Christian denomination—
facilitated a fairly seamless overlay with
orixá worship. For example, Iemanja,
the orixá who rules over the seas and
is associated with fertility, is syncretized
with Our Lady of Conception. Ogum,
whose domain is war and whose ritual
implements are the sword and shield, is
syncretized with Saint Anthony.
Just to be clear, syncretism is in no
way unique to Brazil or the African Diaspora; it frequently occurs when one group is confronted with and influenced by another (and typically one with more power). The reason syncretism is particularly common within Latin American
religious systems is due to 1) the tenacity with which African slaves clung to their traditional beliefs;
2) the fervor of the Spanish and Portuguese belief that slaves should receive instruction in Catholicism, and 3) the realities of colonial life in which religious instruction for slaves was haphazard at
best. This created the perfect climate within which African slaves could hide their traditional religious
practices in plain sight.
Syncretism serves as a response to globalization insofar as it mediates overlapping frameworks.
It would be unnecessary if people lived in a world where boundaries were clearly defined with no
ideological exchanges taking place across those boundaries (if such a world ever existed). Since that
is far from the lived reality for most people though, syncretism often serves as what James C. Scott
categorizes as a “weapon of the weak”—a concept referring to the ways in which marginalized peoples
can resist without directly challenging their oppressors (which could incite retaliation).40 Examples
might include mocking the elite behind their backs, subtle subversion, sabotage, or participation in
alternative economies that bypass the elite. In the classroom, it can be rolling one’s eyes behind the
professor’s back, or thinking that you are “getting away with something” when texting in class. So
too in the case of Candomblé. Syncretism allowed the slaves and their descendants, who continue
the tradition today, to create a façade of compliance with mandated worship within the Catholic
tradition, while still continuing to pay homage to their own beliefs—and thus perpetuate their own
ethnic identity—behind closed doors.

Participation in Alternative Markets
As discussed earlier, structural adjustments mandated by international bodies like the IMF and
WB have left farmers in developing nations particularly vulnerable to the whims of global markets.
Within this framework, “fair trade” has emerged as a way for socially-conscious consumers to support small farmers and artisans who have been affected by these policies. To be certified as fair trade,
vendors must agree to a “fair” price, which will be adjusted upwards if the world market price rises

Globalization

17

above the fair trade threshold. If the world market price drops, fair trade farmers still make a decent
living, which allows them to continue farming rather than abandon their fields for wage labor. While
admirable in its intent, and unassailably beneficial to many, anthropological research reminds us that
every situation is complex and that there is never a “one size fits all” perfect solution.
As you read about in the Fieldwork chapter, and have seen demonstrated throughout this text,
anthropologists focus on the lived experience of people closest to the phenomenon they are studying.
In the case of fair trade, then, anthropologists focus primarily on the farmers or artisans (although
an anthropologist could also study the consumers or people who import fair trade goods or facilitate
their sale). Looked at from farmers’ perspectives, setting and maintaining fair wages for commodities
like coffee or bananas ensures that farmers will not abandon farming when the world market prices
drop. On the plus side, this helps ensure at least some stability for producers and consumers alike.
One of the key features of fair trade is the social premium generated by fair trade contracts: the commitment that a certain percentage of the profit goes back into beneficial community projects such as
education, infrastructure development, and healthcare. But, in order for this to be successful, it is the
local community and not an outside entity (however well intentioned) that must get to decide how
these premiums are used.
Although fair trade is very appealing, it bears remembering that not everyone benefits from fair
trade in the same way. Individuals in leadership positions within fair trade cooperatives tend to have
stronger relationships with the vendors than do average members, leading them to have more positive
associations with the whole business of fair trade.41 Similarly, people with more cultural and social
capital will have more access to the benefits of fair trade. A cacao farmer with whom Lauren works
in Belize, for example, pointed out that farmers with less education will always be taken advantage of
by predatory traders, which is why they need the assistance of a well-structured growers’ association
when entering the free trade market. Also of concern is that in some communities fair trade disrupts
traditional roles and relationships. For example in a Maya village in Guatemala, traditional gender
roles were compromised, with men becoming even more dominant because their commodity (coffee)
had a fair trade market whereas the women’s main commodity (weaving) did not.42
In addition to the challenge of finding a market for one’s goods, there are additional barriers to becoming involved in fair trade. For example, it used to be that farmers could sell relatively low quality
coffee to fair trade organizations interested in social justice. Now, however, fair trade coffee must be
of exceptional quality to compete with specialty coffees.43 In and of itself this is not a bad thing, but
remember that some of the elite coffee producers of today were once the low quality producers of
old. In other words, the first generation of fair trade coffee farmers benefited from the many ways in
which fair trade companies invested in their farms, their processing equipment, and their education
in a way that newer participants cannot replicate. Indeed, once these initial farmers achieved a high
quality coffee bean, there was less incentive for fair trade vendors to invest in new farms. Now that
the bar has been set so high, it is much more difficult for new farmers to break into the fair trade
market because they lack the equipment, experience, knowledge, and networks of farmers who have
more longstanding relationships with fair trade companies.
Also worth noting are the many situations in which global standards conflict with local norms of
decision making. To be labeled as fair trade within the European Union banana market, for example,
bananas must be of an exceptionally high quality. Banana farms must conform to a number of other
guidelines such as avoiding pesticides and creating a buffer zone between the banana trees and water
sources. While this all may make sense in theory, it can be problematic in practice, such as in parts of
the Caribbean where land is customarily passed from one generation to the next without being sub-

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

divide into individual parcels. In these cases, decisions about land use have to be made collectively. If
some of the landowners want to farm according to fair trade guidelines but other individuals refuse
to meet these globally mandated standards, the whole family is blocked from entering the fair trade
market.44

IMPLICATIONS FOR ANTHROPOLOGY
As has been argued throughout this text, culture is dynamic. So too is anthropology as the field of
study dedicated to culture. Although many students of anthropology (let alone the public at large)
may have romantic visions of the lone ethnographer immersing her or himself in the rich community life of a rural village in a remote land, this is not the reality for most anthropologists today. An
increasing number of anthropologists find themselves working in applied settings (see the Seeing
Like an Anthropologist chapter), but even many of the more strictly identified “academic” anthropologists—those employed at colleges and universities—have begun working in settings that might
well be familiar to the average person. Now that anthropologists understand the importance of global
flows of money, people, and ideas the importance of doing research everywhere that these issues play
out—at home (wherever that may be) as much as abroad—is clear.

Urban Anthropology
Globalization has become a powerful buzzword in contemporary society and it would be difficult
to find anyone who has not been affected by it in at least some small way. The widespread influence
of globalization on daily life around the world—whether directly (such as through multinational
businesses) or indirectly (such as via climate change)—raises a number of questions that anthropologists have begun to ask. For example, an anthropologist might investigate the effects of global
policies on people in different regions of the world. Why is it that the monetary policies of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank typically result in rich countries getting richer and the
poor countries getting poorer? In her book Beautiful Flowers of the Maquiladora (1997), for example,
Norma Iglesias Prieto gives an up-close portrait of the lives of Mexican women working in factories
in the infamous border zone of Tijuana.45 Although the working conditions in these factories are
dangerous and the women are subjected to invasive scrutiny by male supervisors, many of the women
profiled in the book nonetheless appreciate the little luxuries afforded by their work. Others value the
opportunity to support their household or gain a small degree of financial independence from the
male figures in their life. Unable to offer any artificially flat answer concerning whether globalization
has been “good” or “bad” for such individuals, anthropologists focus on the lived experience of the
people most affected by these global forces. What is it like to live in such environments? How has it
changed over time? What have been the costs and benefits?
Especially amidst the overlapping flows of people and ideas, questions concerning mobility, transnationalism, and identity have all become increasingly important to the field of anthropology. Although some exceptions exist (see quinoa case study below), the general trend is for globalization
to result in urbanization. With neoliberalism comes the loss of state-funded programs and jobs, the
unsustainability of small farms, and the need for economic alternatives that are most commonly
found in urban areas. While anthropologists have long studied cities and urban life, the concentration of populations in urban centers has added increasing importance to anthropologies of the city/
metropolis in recent years.46 Indeed, the term urban anthropology came into use to describe expe-

Globalization

19

riences of living in cities and the relationships of city life to broader social, political, and economic
contexts including issues of globalization, poverty, and neoliberalism.47 The heightened focus on the
city in global context has also heightened awareness of and attention to issues of transnationalism:
the understanding that people’s lives may be lived and/or significantly influenced by events that cross
the geopolitical borders of nation states.48
Case Study: Global Demand for Quinoa
When a group of people is afforded little status in a society, their food is often likewise denigrated.49 Until recently, this held true for quinoa in Bolivian society, which was associated
with indigenous peasants.50 Mirroring “first world” patterns from the U.S. and Europe, city
dwellers preferred foods like pasta and wheat-based products. Conspicuous consumption
of these products provided them with an opportunity to showcase their “sophisticated”
choices and tastes. Not surprisingly, there was little local demand for quinoa in Bolivian markets. Further undercutting the appeal of producing quinoa, the Bolivian government’s adoption of neoliberal policies eliminated the meager financial protections available
to peasant farmers. If that was not bad enough, a significant drought in the early 1980s
spelled disaster for many small farmers in the southern Altiplano region of Bolivia. As a
result of these overlapping and amplifying obstacles, many people moved to 1) cities, like
La Paz; 2) nearby countries, like Chile, and even 3) to Europe.
The situation faced by Bolivian peasants is not unique. More than half of the world’s
people currently live in cities. This is the result of widespread urbanization that began at the
end of World War II and stretched into the 1990s. As a result, many peasants lost access
to their traditional modes of subsistence. Although migration to the city can provide benefits like access to education, infrastructure, and wage-labor, it can also result in a loss of
identity and many peasants who migrate into cities are forced to subsist on the margins in
substandard conditions, especially as they most often arrive without the social and cultural
capital necessary to succeed in this new environment.
Fortuitously for indigenous Bolivians, the structural adjustments adopted by their government coincided with foreigners’ growing interest in organic and health foods. Although
it is often assumed that rural peasants only produce food for their own subsistence and for
very local markets, this is not always the case. In some situations, peasants may bypass
local markets entirely and export their commodities to places where they have more cultural capital, and hence financial value (see discussion of taste above). In the 1970s, the introduction of tractors to the region enabled farmers to cultivate quinoa in the lowlands in addition to the hillside terraces they had previously favored. In the 1980s, cooperative groups
of farmers were able to find buyers in the Global North who were willing to import quinoa
(see Figure 5). These cooperatives researched the best ways to expand production and
invested in machines to make the process more efficient. Now, quinoa is such a valuable
commodity that many of those individuals who had previously abandoned the region are
now returning to the Altiplano. Yet this is not a simple success story, especially because
there are serious issues associated with the re-peasantization of the Bolivian countryside
and with the fact that a healthy local crop has been removed from many people’s regular
diets since it can be sold to the Global North.
Another serious issue raised by the reverse migration from the cities back to the Altiplano concerns environmental sustainability. It is easier to grow large quantities of quinoa in
the flat lowlands than it is on the steep hillsides, but the lowland soil is much less conducive
to its growth. The use of machinery has helped a great deal, but has also led to a decline

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
in the use of llamas, which have a symbiotic relationship with quinoa. Farmers must now
invest in fertilizer rather than using manure provided by their own animals. The global quinoa boom also raises questions about identity and communal decision-making. Conflict
has arisen between families that stayed in the region and those that are returning from the
cities. Pedro, a farmer who stayed in the region, says of the others “those people have
returned – but as strangers.”51 The two groups often clash in terms of what it means to respect the land and how money from this new cash crop should be used.
So has the international demand for quinoa been a good thing for rural Bolivian peasants? In some ways yes, but in other ways no.; on the whole, it may be too soon to know
for sure.

Changes in How—and “Where”—We Conduct Research
Globalization has changed not only what anthropologists research, but also how they approach
those topics. Foregrounding the links between global processes and local settings, multi-sited ethnography examines specific topics and issues across different geographic field sites.52 Multi-sited ethnography may be conducted when the subject of one’s study involve and/or impact multiple locations
and can be best understood by accounting for those multiple geographic contexts. For example, in
her study of yoga, Positioning Yoga: Balancing Acts Across Cultures, Sarah Strauss (2005) found that her
study would be incomplete if she focused only on Indians studying yoga. To understand this transnational phenomenon, she recognized the importance of also focusing on non-Indian practitioners
of yoga who had gone to study yoga in its homeland.53 Work such as that of Swedish anthropologist
Ulf Hannerz, who studies news media correspondents, highlights the ways that people can be on
the move, creating a community of study that is both multi-sited and multilocal.54 Further work
has expanded on these models, highlighting various translocal fieldsites: “locations” that cannot be

Globalization

21

geographically defined. Such models include calls for an activity-based anthropology (where it is the
activity itself that is the “site” of the culture and/or the basis of the community)55 and digital anthropology (where the field site exists online).56
Globalization in Application: The Syrian Situation Today (courtesy of
Laurie King)
Syria today presents us with an apocalyptic landscape: major cities such as Homs have
been reduced to rubble and anyone remaining there is starving. Since 2011, over 250,000
civilians have been killed by barrel bombs, shelling, internecine terrorist attacks, drone
strikes, the use of chemical weapons, and Russian aerial assaults. Well-armed and
well-funded Islamist militias control large swathes of the country and have, for all intents
and purposes, erased the border between Syria and Iraq, thereby undoing the 1916
Sykes-Picot agreement that established the new nation-states of the modern Middle East
after the fall of the Ottoman Empire.
The so-called Islamic State (IS/Da`esh) has destroyed world heritage sites such as Palmyra (Tadmur), ethnically cleansed non-Muslim towns, enslaved women, and flooded the
global media with horrific images of beheadings, immolations, and mass executions. Aleppo, a city of stunning architectural beauty with a rich multi-cultural heritage, is now damaged beyond repair and largely uninhabitable as the result of fighting between IS, Syrian
regime forces, and a diverse but largely Islamist Syrian opposition.
Farming in the Syrian countryside has come to a virtual halt. Since 2003, Syrian agriculture had been suffering from a prolonged drought, pushing many rural families into urban
centers such as Damascus and Aleppo.57 In 2015, the Svalbard Global Seed Vault (the
“Doomsday Seed Vault”) in Norway was accessed for the first time to obtain seeds needed
for crops to feed the Syrian population.58 Meanwhile, as any glance at the evening news
demonstrates, millions of refugees continue to flow out of the country, mostly through the
Syrian-Turkish border, before making dangerous trips in unsafe boats to Greece, hoping to
get their families to Europe and away from the hell-scape that their country has become.
Five years ago, no scholar of Syrian society and politics could have predicted the dire
conditions Syria now faces. Given the Assad regime’s iron grip on all aspects of Syrian
society since 1970, the dramatic transformations of the last five years were inconceivable
at the beginning of 2011. The scapes and flows of globalization enumerated by Appadurai
were largely absent from Syria over the last 40 years. The hardline Baathist regime of
Hafez al-Assad, who came to power in 1970 through a bloodless coup, was profoundly
insular and not open to the world—whether regionally or internationally—in the realms of
finance and commerce. Never a major petroleum power, and not blessed with vast tracts
of fertile land for farming, Syria’s economy centered largely on industry and commerce.
Up until the mid-1980s, Syria had a highly centralized economy that eschewed private
ownership of industry or services. With the end of the Cold War (during which Syria had
been a client state of the USSR), and the ensuing dramatic shifts in regional power dynamics—most notably the 1991 Iraq war, which saw the rout of Saddam Hussein’s forces from
Kuwait and the diminution of the Iraqi Baathist regime’s power—Syria emerged as a key
regional player capable of leveraging concessions from other Arab states as well as the
West. In exchange for joining the US-led coalition against Iraq, the United States and the
international community raised no objections to Syria asserting direct and indirect control
over its neighbor (and former mandatory province) Lebanon, where a series of interconnected civil, regional, and global wars had raged for fifteen years.

22

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
Syrian political and military control effectively put the Lebanese wars into a deep freeze
between 1992 and 2005. While freedom of speech in Lebanon declined significantly under
Syria’s tutelage, an unregulated market economy flourished, centering on the massive
post-war reconstruction boom. The Syrian economic elite—largely co-terminous with the
regime—benefited significantly from business deals in Lebanon, while thousands of Syrian
workers flooded into Lebanon to do construction work on the new city center and infrastructural repairs. The influx of money from Lebanon strengthened and entrenched the
patron-client ties between the Syrian regime (whose members were also relatives by blood
or marriage) and a growing class of wealthy businessmen, who owed their wealth to the
regime. As Bassam Haddad notes, the insularity of and corruption within the regime and
big business blurred the line between private and public domains, while sharpening class
divisions within Syria.59 Any attempts to foster political reform, economic transparency,
and international commerce were viewed suspiciously by Syria’s political, commercial, and
military/intelligence elite.
In June 2000, Hafez Al-Assad died. His son Bashar, an ophthalmologist who had lived
in London for many years, succeeded him. Local and international observers wondered if
the new, foreign-educated young president would launch an era of economic reform and
political decentralization. Bashar seemed keen to bring Syria into the Internet era, and
his first years in power witnessed relatively free discussion of the need for economic and
political reforms, heralded by the closing of the infamous Mezzeh prison, where many political prisoners had been tortured and killed. But power remained in the hands of the few
in the upper reaches of the Baath party, some of whom did not know whether or not to trust
Bashar, who lacked the steely reserve and unquestioned authority of his father.
Although Syria lacked the sort of material and financial capital enjoyed by its neighbors,
such as the oil-rich Gulf states, it enjoyed the benefits of symbolic capital as the sole, frontline Arab nationalist state opposing Israel and resisting any normalization of ties with the
Jewish state in the post-Cold war era, even as the Palestinian Liberation organization and
Jordan joined Egypt in establishing peace treaties with Israel. In the hope that Syria would
come into the fold, the United States did not make harsh demands on Syria for internal
reforms or regional economic integration.
In February 2005, in the wake of growing Lebanese dissatisfaction with Syria’s control of
the country, Prime Minister Rafiq Al-Hariri and over a dozen of his colleagues were killed
in a massive suicide bomb while traveling in a motorcade through downtown Beirut. (To
this day, no one knows decisively who was behind the car bomb, though many suspect
Syrian involvement.) Massive, largely peaceful, demonstrations erupted in Beirut immediately, and within a matter of weeks, Syria was forced to end its occupation of Lebanon
and retreat.
While Syria had not experienced a significant flow of people and wealth in and out of
its borders for years, media and technology flows were growing in the first decade of the
twenty-first century. The flow of ideas and images from Tunisia and Egypt in the wake of
the Arab Spring uprisings of 2010-11 heralded Syria’s first sustained experience with the
dynamics of globalization, described in this text by political scientist Manfred Steger as:
“the intensification of worldwide social relations which link distant localities in such a way
that local happenings are shaped by events occurring many miles away, and vice versa.”60
In February 2011, the regime lifted the ban on Facebook and You Tube following unprecedented street protests on January 26, the day after the Egyptian protests began. (Before
this, Syrians contravened the ban through proxy servers.) Soon, Facebook groups were
organizing and even calling for a “Day of Rage” and encouraging people to come out to the

Globalization
streets to protest against the regime. Nothing came of this, though. Despite garnering thousands of “likes,” no one seemed to be following the directives of the new Facebook pages.61
The Internet’s impact in the Arab world has built upon the phenomenon of satellite television, particularly that of Al-Jazeera, which opened up new spaces of discourse and debate
about political and human rights issues in the Arab world, thereby undermining the legitimacy and validity of state-owned news programs and the power structures underpinning
them. While Al Jazeera instilled a powerful reformist spirit, blogs were particularly crucial
in advancing and fortifying Arab activism efforts.
Before blogs, there were chat rooms, listservs, and email communication, all of which
enhanced and expanded a cyber world of public discourse in some Arab states, but not
in Syria. Some Egyptian bloggers called the Internet and social media “our lungs. If they
cut them off, we will suffocate.” As a result of Internet communications technology (ICT),
social isolation in the Arab world began to give way to the formation of communities of
conversation and debate, which ultimately evolved into social movements that took to the
streets and made history in the real world. Our “networked society,” to use Manuel Castell’s
phrase, connects us horizontally and allows us not only to communicate, but to self-communicate and self-create.62 We not only consume the news, we now evaluate, filter, and
respond to the news. We not only read headlines, our networked actions and reactions to
breaking news can ripple out across countries and continents and make headlines.
While Western media paid considerable attention to Egypt’s uprising, the Syrian uprisings were not as well covered. Perhaps this is because Egypt is part of the West’s cultural
imaginary. (Hollywood movies such as Raiders of the Lost Ark and popular culture depictions of pyramids, pharaohs, and the Valley of the Kings are all evidence of this.) Syria,
a tightly controlled authoritarian state, had not been a destination for Western tourists,
scholars, film producers, or even journalists for decades, so its street protests and popular
struggles did not loom large in Western media coverage. While every major American
news agency covered the uprising in Tahrir Square in Cairo in real time, news of protests
and civil society activism in Syria did not always reach the rest of the world.
It seems that the Syrian regime underestimated its ability to channel or harness public
opinion by lifting the ban on social media. Vigils, protests, and marches, all initially peaceful, began to appear on Syria’s streets, drawing larger and larger crowds. The response of
the regime, unaccustomed to public political expression, was quick and brutally repressive.
Rather than scaring people into silence, the regime now confronted an armed opposition.
Within just one year, social media protests had become street protests, which became
street battles between pro- and anti-regime forces. Globalization, as experienced in Syria,
has revealed the limits of an authoritarian regime’s ability to control and constrain social
action in the age of social media.
Syria is now experiencing flows of people across borders. Syrians are escaping to Turkey, Europe, Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq by the millions, creating the world’s worst refugee
crisis. Meanwhile, drawn to the message of the Islamic State (IS), young men and women
from across the Middle East and as far afield as Europe and North America are traveling
to the IS controlled territories of eastern Syria and Western Iraq to join in a “global jihad.”
As the high-quality and gory video productions of IS demonstrate, technological and
media resources, skills, and knowledge are flowing in and out of Syria’s borders. Financial flows in oil wealth are now in the hands of IS, and food resources are flowing into the
country when possible from international non-governmental organizations such as Mercy
Corps. Syria is an example of the disadvantages of globalization, as well as an illustration
of how quickly one country’s crises can become global crises.

23

24

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

CONCLUSION
The term “globalization” is not simply a verbal shortcut for talking about contact, transmission,
and transportation on the global scale. This chapter has shown that contact has existed across disparate locations throughout much of human history. As it is used and understood today, however,
globalization is about much more than the total scope of contact; it references the speed and scale
of such contact. Understood in this way, globalization is a modern phenomenon; it is not just how
many places are connected, but in how many ways and with what frequency.
Where people once had to rely on horses or sail-driven ships to bring them to new locations, mass
transportation (especially air travel) makes such commutes a part of many people’s daily lives, and
someone who had never seen a TV one week might end up visiting Jakarta, Cairo, or Toronto the
next. News, which might have raced ahead via carrier pigeons can now be transmitted in a virtual
instant, and information once confined to physical libraries can now be accessed on the smart phones
carried by peoples around the world. Neither “good” nor “bad,” globalization is a fact of life today.
Whether a business woman flies between international hubs on a weekly basis or a man tends his
garden on a remote plateau, both of their lives may be equally influenced by how a specific crop is
received on the world market. Providing both opportunities and constraints, globalization now serves
as the background—if not the stage—for how life gets lived, on the ground, by us all.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. In his research, Kelsey Timmerman discovered that the average American is wearing clothes
made in many different countries. This demonstrates how everyday items can involve all five
of Arjun Appadurai’s scapes. Choose another product that is part of your everyday life. How
many scapes can you connect it to?
2. Globalization makes new forms of consumption possible, but the effects of globalization on an
individual’s lifestyle vary based on many factors including socioeconomic status. In what ways
is globalization experienced differently by people from wealthy countries compared to people
in developing countries? How are producers of commodities like clothing or food affected
differently by globalization than consumers?
3. In Latin America, globalization and neoliberalism have led to the development of policies, such
as the privatization of the water supply, that reduce local control over important resources. In
what ways is globalization a “double-edged” sword that brings both benefits and problems to
developing countries?
4. Globalization presents the possibility of engaging in activity-based anthropology, where it is
the activity itself that is the ‘“site”’ studied, or digital anthropology, where the field site exists
online. What kinds of activities or digital environments do you think would be interesting to
study using this approach?

GLOSSARY
Commodity chain: the series of steps a food takes from location where it is produced to the store
where it is sold to consumers.
Ethnoscape: the flow of people across boundaries.
Financescape: the flow of money across political borders.

Globalization

25

Glocalization: the adaptation of global ideas into locally palatable forms
Habitus: the dispositions, attitudes, or preferences that are the learned basis for personal “taste” and
lifestyles.
Ideoscape: the global flow of ideas.
Mediascape: the flow of media across borders.
Neoliberalism: the ideology of free-market capitalism emphasizing privatization and unregulated
markets.
Syncretism: the combination of different beliefs, even those that are seemingly contradictory, into a
new, harmonious whole.
Technoscape: the global flows of technology.
Global North: refers to the wealthier countries of the world. The definition includes countries that
are sometimes called “First World” or “Highly Developed Economies.”
Global South: refers to the poorest countries of the world. The definition includes countries that are
sometimes called “Third World” or “Least Developed Economies.”

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Dr. Lauren Miller Griffith is an assistant professor of anthropology
at Texas Tech University. Her research agenda focuses on the intersections of performance, tourism, and education in Brazil, Belize, and the
USA. Specifically, she focuses on the Afro-Brazilian martial art capoeira
and how non-Brazilian practitioners use travel to Brazil, the art’s homeland, to increase their legitimacy within this genre. Dr. Griffith’s current interests include the links between tourism, cultural heritage, and
sustainability in Belize. She is particularly interested in how indigenous
communities decide whether or not to participate in the growing tourism industry and the long-term effects of these decisions.
Dr. Jonathan S. Marion is an associate professor in the Department of Anthropology and a member of the Gender Studies Steering Committee at the University of Arkansas, and the author of
Ballroom: Culture and Costume in Competitive Dance (2008), Visual Research: A Concise Introduction
to Thinking Visually (2013, with Jerome Crowder), and Ballroom
Dance and Glamour (2014). Currently the President of the Society for Humanistic Anthropology, and a Past-president of the
Society of Visual Anthropology, Dr. Marion’s ongoing research
explores the interrelationships between performance, embodiment, gender, and identity, as well as issues of visual research
ethics, theory, and methodology.

NOTES
1. See Charles Lindholm, Culture and Authenticity (New York: Wiley, 2007).
2. Robby Soave, “Oberlin College Students: Cafeteria Food is Racist,” The Daily Beast, December 20, 2015 http://www.
thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/12/20/oberlin-students-cafeteria-food-is-racist.html

26

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

3. Manfred Steger, Globalization: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013).
4. Steger, Globalization, 13.
5. Steger, Globalization.
6. Ibid.
7. Ibid.
8. United Nations World Tourism Organization, “Why Tourism,” http://www2.unwto.org/content/why-tourism
9. To be fair, responsible policy makers and businesses, local communities, and travelers themselves may also be concerned
with these issues.
10. See Benedict R. Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (London: Verso,
1983).
11. Daniel L. Everett, Don’t Sleep, There Are Snakes: Life and Language in the Amazonian Jungle (New York: Vintage Books,
2009).
12. Daniel L. Everett, “What Does Pirahã Grammar Have to Teach Us About Human Language and the Mind?” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science 3 no. 6 (2012): 555-63.
13. Kelsey Timmerman, Where Am I Wearing? (Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2012).
14. Robin Schmidt and Morten Vest, Maasai on the Move, Film, directed by Robin Schmidt and Morten Vest (2010, Danish
Broadcasting Corporation).
15. See Chanchal Kumar Sharma, “Emerging Dimensions of Decentralisation Debate in the Age of Globalisation” Indian
Journal of Federal Studies 19 no. 1 (2009): 47–65.
16. Anya Peterson Royce, Becoming an Ancestor: The Isthmus Zapotec Way of Death (Albany: State University of New York
Press, 2011).
17. Rigoberta. I Menchu, Rigoberta Menchu: An Indian Woman in Guatemala, trans. Ann Wright (London: Verso, 1984).
18. See, for instance, Peter Wade, Music, Race and Nation: Musica Tropical in Colombia (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2000). Or, Lise Waxer, The City of Musical Memory: Salsa, Record Grooves, and Popular Culture in Cali, Columbia (Middletown,
CT: Wesleyan University Press, 2002).
19. For more on traveling to train at such congresses and festivals—whether salsa, or any other embodied practice—see
Griffith and Marion, Apprenticeship Pilgrimage: Developing Expertise through Travel and Training (Lexington: forthcoming).
20. Sydney Hutchinson, Salsa World: A Global Dance in Local Contexts (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2013).
21. Also see Lise Waxer, Situating Salsa: Global Markets and Local Meanings in Latin Popular Culture (New York: Routledge,
2002).
22. David Chaney, Lifestyles (London: Routledge, 1996), 92.
23. Chaney, Lifestyles.
24. Ibid.
25. Ibid., 24.
26. Ibid., 57.
27. Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgment of Taste, trans. Richard Nice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1984).
28. Shamus Rahman Khan, Privilege: The Making of an Adolescent Elite at St. Paul’s School (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2012).
29. Chaney, Lifestyles, 60.
30. Economic Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, “Food Security Status of U.S. Households in 2014”
http://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/food-nutrition-assistance/food-security-in-the-us/key-statistics-graphics.aspx
31. Pierre Bourdieu, Distinction.
32. Manfred Steger, Globalization, xiii.
33. Kelsey Timmerman, Where Am I Wearing?.
34. Bruce Campbell and Lisa Goddard, “Climate Change, Food Security and the Refugee Crisis: Connecting the Dots to
Avoid Future Tragedy.” https://ccafs.cgiar.org/blog/climate-change-food-security-and-refugee-crisis-connecting-dots-avoidfuture-tragedy#.Vt1JXJMrLu4
35. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa.” http://www.cdc.gov/vhf/ebola/
outbreaks/2014-west-africa/index.html.
36. Steger, Globalization, 54.
37. This case study is based on the work of Nicole Fabricant and Kathryn Hicks, “Bolivia’s Next Water War: Historicizing the
Struggles over Access to Water Resources in the Twenty-First Century” Radical History Review 116 (2013): 130-45.
38. Ibid., 131.
39. Thomson Reuters, “Lake Poopo, Bolivia’s 2nd-Largest Lake, Dries Up” December 18, 2015, http://www.cbc.ca/news/
technology/lake-poopo-bolivia-dries-up-1.3371359.
40. James C. Scott, Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1985).
41. Sarah Lyon and and Mark Moberg, eds. Fair Trade and Social Justice (New York: New York University Press, 2010).

Globalization

27

42. Sarah Lyon, “A Market of Our Own: Women’s Livelihoods and Fair Trade Markets,” in Fair Trade and Social Justice, ed.
Sarah Lyon and Mark Moberg (New York: New York University Press, 2010).
43. Julia Smith, “Fair Trade and the Specialty Coffee Market: Growing Alliances, Shifting Rivalries,” in Fair Trade and Social
Justice.
44. Mark Moberg, “A New World? Neoliberalism and Fair Trade Farming in the Eastern Caribbean,” in Fair Trade and Social
Justice.
45. Norma Iglesias Prieto, Beautiful Flowers of the Maquiladora: Life Histories of Women Workers in Tijuana, trans. Michael
Stone and Gabrielle Winkler (Austin: University of Texas Press, 1985).
46. See, especially, Setha M. Low, “The Anthropology of Cities: Imagining and Theorizing the City” Annual Review of Anthropology 25 (1996):383-409 and Ulf Hannerz, Exploring the City: Inquiries toward an Urban Anthropology (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1980).
47. For the Oxford Bibliography of “Urban Anthropology,” see http://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/view/document/obo9780199766567/obo-9780199766567-0026.xml. For a brief online overview, please see http://www.indiana.edu/~wanthro/
URBAN.htm (prepared by Layla Al-Zubaidi).
48. See Andrew Irving, “Cities: An Anthropological Perspective” Anthropology Matters 6 no. 1 (2004):1-4. http://www.anthropologymatters.com/index.php/anth_matters/article/viewFile/105/207
49. This case study is based on the work of Tanya M. Kerssen, “Food Sovereignty and the Quinoa Boom: Challenges to Sustainable Re-Peasantisation in the Southern Altiplano of Bolivia” Third World Quarterly 36, no. 3 (2015): 489-507.
50. See Richard Wilk, “‘Real Belizean Food’: Building Local Identity in the Transnational Caribbean” American Anthropologist
101 no. 2 (1999): 244-55.
51. Quoted in Tanya M. Kerssen, “Food Sovereignty and the Quinoa Boom.”
52. George E. Marcus, “Ethnography in/of the World System: The Emergence of Multi-Sited Ethnography.” Annual Review
of Anthropology, 24 (1995): 95-117. http://www.dourish.com/classes/readings/Marcus-MultiSitedEthnography-ARA.pdf. For
a more recent perspective, see M.A. Falzon, Multi-Sited Ethnography: Theory, Praxis and Locality in Contemporary Research
(Farnham, UK: Ashgate Publishing Limited, 2012).
53. Sarah Strauss, Positioning Yoga: Balancing Acts across Cultures (Oxford, UK: Berg, 2005).
54. Ulf Hannerz, “Being there… and there… and there! Reflections on Multi-Site Ethnography” Ethnography 4 no. 2 (2003):
201-216.
55. Jonathan S. Marion, “Beyond Ballroom: Activity as Performance, Embodiment, and Identity” Human Mosaic 36
no. 2 (2006): 7-16, 2006. Also see Jonathan S. Marion, Ballroom: Culture and Costume in Competitive Dance (Oxford,
UK: Berg Publishing, 2008) and Jonathan S. Marion, “Circulation as Destination: Considerations from the Translocal
Culture of Competitive Ballroom Dance” Journal for the Anthropological Study of Human Movement 17 no. (2012).
56. See Tom Boellstorff, Coming of Age in Second Life: An Anthropologist Explores the Virtually Human (Princeton University
Press, 2009). For more on theory and method see Tom Boellstorff, Bonnie Nardi, Celia Pearce, and T. L. Taylor, Ethnography
and Virtual Worlds: A Handbook of Method (Princeton University Press, 2012); Heather A. Horst and Daniel Miller, eds.
Digital Anthropology (London, UK: Bloomsbury, 2012); and Sarah Pink, Heather Horst, John Postill, Larissa Hjorth, Tania
Lewis, and Jo Tacchi, Digital Ethnography: Principles and Practice. (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2015).
57. Bassam Haddad, “The Syrian Regime’s Business Backbone,” Middle East Report, 262 no. 42 (2012). http://www.merip.
org/mer/mer262/syrian-regimes-business-backbone
58. Alister Doyle, “Syrian War Spurs First Withdrawal from Doomsday Arctic Seed Vault” Reuters September 21, 2015.
http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-seeds-idUSKCN0RL1KA20150921 The report states: “Grethe Evjen, an
expert at the Norwegian Agriculture Ministry, said the seeds had been requested by the International Center for Agricultural
Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA). ICARDA moved its headquarters to Beirut from Aleppo in 2012 because of the war.
‘ICARDA wants almost 130 boxes out of 325 it had deposited in the vault.’”
59. Haddad, “The Syrian Regime’s Business Backbone.”
60. Manfred Steger, Globalization: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013).
61. Joshka Wessels, “Syria Lifts Ban on Facebook and Youtube, Reflections on the ‘Egypt Effect’ in Syria” Sapiens Productions
February 11, 2011, https://sapiensproductions.wordpress.com/2011/02/11/syria-lifts-ban-on-facebook-and-youtube-reflections-on-the-“egypt-effect”-in-syria-by-joshka-wessels/
62. Manuel Castells, “Communication, Power and Counter-power in the Network Society” International Journal of Communications 1 (2007): 238-266.

Culture and Sustainability:
Environmental Anthropology
in the Anthropocene
Christian T. Palmer, Windward Community College
ctpalmer@hawaii.edu

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Identify the methods and theories
anthropologists use to examine
human interactions with the
environment.
• Define political ecology and explain
its relationship to anthropology.
• Describe the Anthropocene and
discuss how anthropology contributes
to understanding the human role in
environmental destruction.
• Explain how anthropology contributes
to public discussions and the creation
of public policy with lawmakers,
activists, corporations, and others
regarding major environmental
challenges.

LIVING IN THE ANTHROPOCENE
We live on a planet where the climate—winds, precipitation, weather, temperatures—is being modified by the collective impact of the human species. I arrived at anthropology through an interest in understanding human impacts
on the environment. I began by studying ethnobotany as
an undergraduate and received a master’s degree in environmental science. As I researched human-environmental dynamics, I realized that scientists had largely identified what
needed to be done to address many of the world’s pressing environmental problems, but few of the recommended
changes had been adopted, thwarted by political, cultural,
and economic forces. Anthropologists’ approach is holistic;
they seek to simultaneously understand all of the interactions of political, cultural, and economic factors to fully explore the complexity of human-environmental interactions.
Thus, I felt that anthropology provided a good place to start
to understand and begin to address some of the most important questions facing our species. For example, how can
we provide for basic human needs while not sacrificing the
welfare of other species? Why do many people say that they
care about protecting the environment but then do nothing about it? What political, economic, and cultural factors
are prohibiting world leaders from agreeing on solutions to
global environmental challenges? To answer such questions,
we must understand how humans think and act as groups,
our socially and culturally mediated ways of interacting
with each other, other species, and the world around us.

Arriving at Environmental Anthropology
In many ways, anthropology as a discipline is only now
starting to address these questions. In December 2014,
Bruno Latour, a French anthropologist, spoke to a standing-room-only audience at the American Anthropological

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Association annual meeting in Washington, D.C., to discuss the relationship between the Anthropocene and anthropology.1 Anthropocene is a term used to describe the period (or epoch) in geological
time in which the effects of human activities have altered the fundamental geochemical cycles of
the earth as a result of converting forests into fields and pastures and burning oil, gas, and coal on a
large scale. Because human activities have changed the earth’s atmosphere, anthropologists can make
important contributions to studies of geology, chemistry, and meteorology by considering the effects
of humans and their cultural systems. As Latour noted, the discipline of anthropology is uniquely
qualified to provide insight into key components of current environmental crises by determining the
reasons behind choices various groups of humans make, bridging the social and natural sciences, and
studying contradictions between cultural universals (traits all humans have in common) and particularities (interesting cultural differences).
This chapter summarizes how anthropologists have contributed to analysis and resolution of environmental concerns. I begin with a brief overview of anthropological analysis of human interactions
with the environment and then explore how anthropological perspectives toward human-environmental interactions have changed over time. I end the chapter with a call to action—an invitation for
students to use lessons they have learned from anthropology to challenge the kinds of thinking that
have produced current environmental crises and see where those anthropological approaches take
them. Environmental anthropology is an exciting subfield that will grow in importance as questions
of environmental sustainability become increasingly central to scientific and popular conversations
about the future of our species and the planet.

Humans and the Environment
If we think about anthropology from the classic four-field approach, which includes both physical
anthropology and archaeology, many of the questions with which those disciplines have historically
wrestled were related to our species’ long-term relationship with the environment. Around two million years ago, climate changes decreased the amount of forest and expanded grasslands in Africa,
which led to the early Hominin radiation (the geographic expansion of multiple Hominin species).
It also led hominin species to walk upright, which freed their hands to make and use tools. Subsequent climate changes, particularly expansions and contractions of glaciers associated with ice ages,
also contributed to Homo sapiens expanding to new parts of the globe.
Fast-forwarding to the beginning of human agriculture roughly 10,000 years ago, we can see how
the global expansion of Homo sapiens and their first permanent settlements and urban centers led
to the development of agriculture, a profound new way of interacting with the environment. The
ability of early humans to shape the landscape, first by simply encouraging wild plants to grow and
later by planting and irrigating crops and domesticating plants and animals, set humans on the path
toward our current problematic relationship with the planet. Archaeologists’ questions about human
diets, tools, and architecture inevitably explore how ancient civilizations interacted with their environments. For example, archaeologists examine the relative frequency of different kinds of pollen and
tree rings over thousands of years to understand how landscapes changed over time through both
human and natural processes.
Many archaeologists credit increased productivity that came with agriculture as the foundation of
civilization, allowing humans to live in larger settlements, specialize in craft production, and develop
social hierarchies and eventually math, writing, and science. From this perspective, the seeds of social
complexity were contained within the first grains domesticated in the hills surrounding the Fertile

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

3

Crescent. Others have questioned the idea that the effects of agriculture were purely beneficial. For
example, Marshall Sahlins called foraging (hunter-gatherer) societies “the original affluent societies”
and noted that hunter-gatherers had more leisure time, healthier diets, more time to socialize, and
greater social equality than agricultural or even industrial societies.2 He also noted that they were affluent not because they had everything, but because they could easily meet their basic needs of food,
shelter, and sociality. Others have looked at the advances in science, medicine, and communication
technology and disagreed with Sahlins, arguing that we are better off with the developments brought
by agriculture. Sahlins’ critique of agriculture (and subsequently of civilization) should not be seen as
a suggestion to deindustrialize; rather, it is a challenge to assumptions that Western civilization and
its technological developments necessarily represent improvements for human societies. Perhaps the
strongest argument against capitalism and industrialization is the real possibility of environmental
collapse that those systems have brought.
Sahlins’ analysis calls into question the idea that humans as a species are necessarily progressing
through history and encourages us to think about how “necessities” are culturally constructed. Do we
really need cars or cell phones to be happy? How about books and vaccines? Because many of our
innovations in technology, agriculture, and transportation have come at the expense of the natural
systems that support us, we need to think about human “progress” in relationship to its impact on
the environment. The impacts of climate change from our dependence on fossil fuel, toxic byproducts from expanding chemical industries, and pollution of land, soil, and water from industrialized
agriculture are a significant challenge to a vision of human history in which we expect things to get
better and better.
Archaeological evidence of collapses of earlier societies—Harappan cities in the Indus River Valley,
the Maya in Central America, and the Rapa Nui of Easter Island, for example—provides a sobering

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

warning as many pre-historic cultures’ practices were, at some level, environmentally unsustainable,
leading to deforestation, soil salinization, or erosion.
For example, archaeologists have explored the collapse of a number of Maya cities from an environmental perspective.3 After examining samples of pollen from nearby lakebeds, they determined
the relative abundance of various ecosystems, such as cornfields and pine forests, over time. They
found that deforestation in the uplands associated with an expanding population around the Maya
city of Copan was one of the factors that led to the city’s decline. Land was cleared to increase agricultural production and to harvest wood for the construction of houses, fueling cooking fires, and
producing lime, which was used to make plaster for large-scale construction projects. The study
suggests that prehistoric groups’ lack of adequate environmental management systems could have
affected their ability to maintain their complex urban societies—a warning for society today.
Another fascinating story of the complex relationships between culture, plants, and the economy
relates to development of sugar cane plantations in the Caribbean. Anthropologist Sidney Mintz
documented how our sweet tooth led to development of the slave trade, industrialization, capitalism,
and colonization in the Americas.4 He examined how sugar went from being a luxury good associated
with the upper class as a spice and medicine to a regular staple for factory workers. The increased
consumption of sugar associated with industrialization provided financial incentives for continuing
slavery and colonization projects in the Americas. Mintz’s work is not usually described as environmental anthropology, but his careful documentation of the relationship between people and sugar
cane clearly demonstrates the importance of certain species of plants in shaping human history.
The question of how humans interact with their environment through hunting and gathering,
agriculture, and deforestation is central to understanding how human groups meet their basic needs
and continue to survive and develop. By examining these past and present cultural configurations
critically and carefully, anthropology provides a valuable perspective from which to understand such
environmental questions.

Sustainability and Public Anthropology
Environmental anthropology provides an opportunity for anthropologists to engage in larger public debates. The American Anthropological Association, for example, recently issued a Statement
on Humanity and Climate Change meant to “to recognize anthropological contributions to global
climate change-related issues, articulate new research directions, and provide the American Anthropological Association with actions and recommendations to support and promote anthropological
investigation of these issues including the development of course curricula and application of anthropological theory and methods to the issues.”5 Such statements emphasize the importance of
anthropological contributions to current scientific and political debates.
Anthropologists have become involved in environmental causes around the world. In Brazil, for
example, they have worked with indigenous groups to maintain land claims, prevent deforestation,
and organize against construction of large hydropower projects that threaten the river ecosystems.6
Others have challenged development of parks throughout the world as a major conservation strategy
for biodiversity and explored the impacts of those parks on local communities.7 Studies of these
diverse topics benefit from incorporation of an ethnographic perspective that emphasizes the importance of identity politics, connection to place, and cultural beliefs for understanding how groups of
people interact with their environment. This work also reminds us that environmentalism and con-

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

5

servation are grounded in sets of beliefs, assumptions, and world views developed in Western Europe
and North America and must be translated as environmentalists work in other cultures.
Environmental anthropology naturally lends itself to use of anthropological perspectives to inform
and engage in public policy decisions, land-use management, and advocacy for indigenous communities, urban minorities, and other groups that are often under-represented in places of power and
in traditional environmental movements. In that sense, environmental anthropology is a way to
inform and connect with a variety of other disciplines that address similar questions of sustainability.
Regardless of whether you decide to study anthropology, understanding the value of anthropological
insights for environmental questions will allow you to better appreciate and understand the complexity of environmental questions in modern society and potential solutions. The next section examines
the diverse ways that anthropologists have historically looked at the human-environmental dynamic,
highlighting some of the key theories, methods, and approaches and how they have developed over
time.

CULTURAL ECOLOGY
Early Cultural Ecologists
One of the earliest anthropologists to think systematically about the environment was Leslie
White. His work built on earlier anthropological concepts of cultural evolution—the idea that cultures, like organisms, evolve over time and progress from simple to more complex. White described
how cultures evolved through their ability to use energy as they domesticated plants and animals,
captured the energy stored in fossil fuels, and developed nuclear power.8 From this perspective, “human cultural evolution was best understood as a process of increasing control over the natural environment” through technological progress.9 White’s conclusions are at odds with Franz Boas’ historical particularism, which rejected theories based on evolution that labeled cultures as more advanced
or less advanced than others and instead looked at each society as a unique entity that had developed
based on its particular history. Like earlier anthropologists, White viewed anthropology as a natural
science in which one could generate scientific laws to understand cultural differences. His model
is useful, however, when exploring the nature of change as our society increasingly harnessed new
sources of energy to meet our wants and needs. He was writing at a time when the U.S. economy
was booming and our technological future seemed promising, before the environmental movement
raised awareness about harm caused by those technologies.
How the Future Looked 50 Years Ago
This National Public Radio Planet Money episode captures the enthusiasm for technological progress at the 1964 World’s Fair, when little was known about the environmental
damage such technologies would cause. How did people see the future in 1964? How is
their idea of the future different from ours today?

Anthropologist Julian Steward first used the term cultural ecology to describe how cultures use
and understand their environments. His fieldwork among the Shoshone emphasized the complex
ways they had adapted to the dry terrain of the Great Basin between the Sierra Nevada and Rocky
Mountain ranges. He described how a hunting and gathering subsistence economy that relied on

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

pine nuts, grass seeds, berries, deer, elk, sheep, antelope, and rabbits shaped Shoshone culture. Their
detailed knowledge of various microclimates and seasonal variations in resource availability structured their migration patterns, social interactions, and cultural belief systems.10 Rather than looking
for single evolutionary trajectories for cultures as White had done, Steward looked for multiple evolutionary pathways that led to different outcomes and stressed the variety of ways in which cultures
could adapt to ecological conditions.
Both White and Steward were influenced by materialism, a Marxist concept that emphasized the
ways in which human social and cultural practices were influenced by basic subsistence (economic)
needs. Both were trained as scientists, which shaped how they looked at cultural variation. Steward
was also influenced by processual archaeology, a scientific approach developed in the 1960s that
focused primarily on relationships between past societies and the ecological systems they inhabited.
The shift in anthropology represented by White and Steward’s work led to increased use of scientific
methods when analyzing and interpreting data. In subsequent decades, movements in both anthropology and archaeology criticized those scientific perspectives, challenging their objectivity, a process
I examine in greater detail later in this chapter.

Pigs and Protein
Subsequent anthropologists built on the work of White and Steward, looking for ecological explanations for cultural beliefs and practices. They also drew on newly developed computer science to
think about dynamic feedback systems in which cultural and ecological systems self-regulate to promote social stability—homeostasis. Some fascinating examples of this work include Roy Rappaport’s
work in Papua New Guinea and Marvin Harris’ work in India.
Marvin Harris examined Hindu religious
beliefs about sacred cattle from functional and
materialist perspectives. Among Hindus in India, eating beef is forbidden and cows are seen
as sacred animals associated with certain deities.
From the perspective of a Western beef-loving
country, such beliefs may seem irrational. Why
would anyone not want to eat a juicy steak or
hamburger? Rejecting earlier academics who regarded the Hindu practice as illogical, Harris argued that the practice makes perfect sense within
the Hindu ecological and economic system. He
argued that cows were sacred not because of cultural beliefs; instead, the cultural beliefs existed
because of the economic and ecological importance of cows in India. Thus, Hindu restrictions
regarding cows were an “adaptive” response to
the local ecological system rather than the result
of Hindu theology.11 Harris explored the importance of cattle for milk production, dung for fuel
and fertilizer, labor for plowing, and provision
of meat and hides to the lowest caste, untouch-

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

7

ables, who were able to slaughter and eat cows and tan their hides because they were already seen as
ritually impure.
Roy Rappaport examined subsistence practices of the Tsembaga in Highland New Guinea, a group
that planted taro, yams, sweet potatoes, and sugar cane and raised pigs. Rappaport used scientific
terms and concepts such as caloric intake, carrying capacity, and mutualism to explain methods used
by the Tsembaga to manage their resources. A population of pigs below a certain threshold provided
a number of benefits, such as keeping villages clean by eating refuse and eating weeds in established
gardens that had relatively large fruit trees that would not be damaged by the pigs. Once the population reached the threshold, the pigs ate more than weeds and garbage and began to create problems
in gardens. In response, the people used periodic ritual feasts to trim the population back, returning
the ecological system to equilibrium. Rappaport, like Harris, used ecological concepts to understand
the Tsembaga subsistence practices, thus downplaying the role of cultural beliefs and emphasizing
ecological constraints.
These early cultural ecologists viewed cultures as trying to reach and maintain social and ecological
equilibrium. This idea aligned with ecological thinking at the time that emphasized the balance of
nature and the importance of the various components of an ecosystem in maintaining that balance.
However, environments and cultures were rapidly changing as colonization, globalization, and industrialization spread throughout the world. In many of those early cases, anthropologists had ignored
these larger processes.
As ecologists began to develop more-complex models of how ecosystems change through longterm dynamic processes of succession and disturbances (such as storms, droughts, and El Niño
events), anthropological approaches to the environment also changed. The next sections examine
those shifts in anthropology as environmental movements developed in response to increasing degradation of natural environments.
Early anthropologists were notable for their attempts to understand how different groups of people interacted with their environments over time. Their work paved the way for future environmental anthropologists even though they generally were not directly concerned with environmental
problems associated with modernity, such as pollution, tropical deforestation, species extinctions,
erosion, and global warming. As people around the world became more familiar with such issues,
environmental anthropologists took note and began to analyze those problems and accompanying
conservation movements, especially in the developing world, which was still the primary focus of
most anthropological research.

ETHNOECOLOGY
Slash-and-Burn versus Swidden Cultivation
Traditionally, anthropologists studied small communities in remote locations rather than urban
societies. While much of that work examined rituals, political organizations, and kinship structures,
some anthropologists focused on ethnoecology: use and knowledge of plants, animals, and ecosystems by traditional societies. Because those societies depended heavily on the natural world for food,
medicine, and building materials, such knowledge was often essential to their survival.
As anthropologists, Harris and Rappaport worked to make the strange familiar by taking seemingly bizarre practices such as ritual slaughtering of pigs and sacredness of cows in India and explaining
the practices within the context of the people’s culture and environment. This work explains not only

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

how and why people do what they do, but also the advantages of their systems in the environments in
which they live. An indigenous practice long demonized by the media, environmental activists, and
scientists is slash-and-burn agriculture in which small-scale farmers, mostly in tropical developing
countries, cut down a forest, let the wood dry for a few weeks, and then burn it, clearing the land
for cultivation. Initially, the farmers plant mostly perennial crops such as rice, beans, corn, taro, and
manioc. Later, they gradually introduce tree crops, and the plot is left to regrow trees while they open
new fields for crops. Every year, as the soil’s fertility declines and insects become a problem in the
original plot, new land is cleared to replace it. Environmentalists and developers have decried slashand-burn cultivation as a major cause of deforestation, and governments in many tropical countries
have prohibited farmers from cutting and burning forests.
Anthropologists have challenged these depictions and have documented that slash-and-burn cultivators possess detailed knowledge of their environment; their agricultural processes are sustainable
indefinitely under the right conditions.12 When there is a low population density and an adequate
supply of land, slash-and-burn cultivation is a highly sustainable type of elongated crop rotation in
which annuals are planted for a few years, followed first by tree crops and then by forest, rebuilding
soil nutrients and mimicking natural processes of forest disturbance in which tree falls and storms
periodically open up small patches of the forest. They used the term swidden cultivation instead of
slash and burn to challenge the idea of the practice as inherently destructive. The surrounding forest
allows the fields to quickly revert to forest thanks to seeds planted in the cleared area as birds roost in
the trees and defecate into the clearing and as small rodents carry and bury the seeds. Furthermore,
by mimicking natural processes, the small patches can enhance biodiversity by creating a greater variety of microclimates in a given area of forest.
The system breaks down when cleared forests are not allowed to regrow and instead are replaced
with industrial agriculture, cattle raising, or logging operations that transform the open fields into
pasture or permanent agricultural plots.13 The system can also break down when small-holders are
forced to become more sedentary because the amount of land they control
is reduced by arrival of new migrants
or government land seizures. In that
case, local farmers must replant areas
more frequently and soil fertility declines. A desire to plant cash crops for
external markets can also exacerbate
these changes because food is no longer grown solely for local consumption
and more land is put into agriculture.
Anthropologists’ studies uncovered
the sustainability of these traditional
practices, which were destructive only
when outside forces pressured local
farmers to modify their traditional
farming systems.

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

9

Plants, People, and Culture
One branch of ethnoecology is ethnobotany, which studies traditional uses of plants for food,
construction, dyes, crafts, and medicine. Scientists have estimated that 60 percent of all of the current medicinal drugs in use worldwide were originally derived from plant materials (many are now
chemically manufactured). For example, aspirin came from the bark of willow trees and an important
muscle relaxant used in open-heart surgery was developed from curare, the poison used on arrows
and darts by indigenous groups throughout Central and South America. In light of such discoveries,
ethnobotanists traveled to remote corners of the world to document the knowledge of shamans,
healers, and traditional medical experts. They have also looked at psychoactive plants and their uses
across cultures.
What The People of the Amazon Know That You Don’t
This TED talk by ethnobotanist Mark Plotkin describes some important cases of knowledge of medicinal plants learned from indigenous people in the Amazon.

Ethnobotanical work is interdisciplinary, and while some ethnobotanists are anthropologists,
many are botanists or come from other disciplines. Anthropologists who study ethnobotany must
have a working knowledge of scientific methods for collecting plant specimens and of botanical
classification systems and basic ecology. Similarly, archaeologists and paleobotanists study prehistoric
people’s relationships and use of plants, especially in terms of domestication of plants and animals.
The Kayapó project is a famous ethnobotanical study organized by Darrell Posey and a group of
twenty natural and social scientists who examined how the Kayapó people of Brazil understood,
managed, and interacted with the various ecosystems they encountered as the region was transformed
from a dry savanna-like Cerrado to Amazonian rainforest.14 By documenting Kayapó names for different ecosystems and methods they used to drop seeds and care for certain plants to expand islands
of forest in the savanna, the project illustrated the complex ways in which indigenous groups shape
the environments in which they live by documenting how the Kayapó cared for, managed, and enhanced forests to make them more productive.
Posey was also an activist who contributed to drafting of the Declaration of Belem, which called
for governments and corporations to respect and justly compensate the intellectual property rights
of indigenous groups, especially regarding medicinal plants. He accompanied Kayapó leaders to
Washington, D.C., to protest construction of a large dam using funds from the World Bank. Pressure
from numerous international groups led to a halt in the dam’s construction (plans for the dam have
recently been resurrected). Posey’s identification of the Kayapó as guardians of the rainforest provided
a powerful symbol that resonated with Western ideas of indigeneity and the moral high ground of
environmental conservation.
In recent years, some anthropologists have questioned whether the idea of indigenous people having an innate positive connection to the environment—what some call the myth of the ecologically
noble savage—is accurate.

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

The Myth of the Ecologically Noble Savage
The image of the noble savage developed many centuries ago in Western culture. From the beginning of European exploration and colonialism, Europeans described the “natives” they encountered
primarily in negative terms, associating them with sexual promiscuity, indolence, cannibalism, and
violence. The depictions changed as Romantic artists and writers rejected modernity and industrialization and called for people to return to an idealized, simpler past. That reactionary movement also
celebrated indigenous societies as simple people living in an Eden-like state of innocence. French
painter Paul Gauguin’s works depicting scenes from his travels to the South Pacific are typical of this
approach in their celebration of the colorful, easygoing, and natural existence of the natives. The
continuing influence of these stories is evident in Disney’s portrayal of Pocahontas and James Cameron’s 2009 film Avatar in which the primitive Na`vi are closely connected to and defenders of an
exotic and vibrant natural world. Cameron’s depiction, which includes a sympathetic anthropologist,
criticizes Western capitalism as willing to destroy nature for profit.
Disney’s Pocahontas: Colors of the Wind Song
Disney’s Pocahontas presents many of the stereotypes of the ecologically noble savage.
What are these stereotypes? Where else do we see these kinds of depictions?

Despite its positive portrayals of indigenous groups, the idea of the ecologically noble savage tends
to treat indigenous peoples as an imagined “other” constructed as the opposite of Western culture
rather than endeavoring to understand the world views and complexities of indigenous cultures.
Similarly, a naive interpretation of indigenous environmentalism may merely project an imaginary
Western ideal onto another culture rather than make a legitimate observation about that culture on
its own terms.
The Kayapó in the Amazon and another group known as the Penan, who live in the Indonesian
rainforest, were both confronted in the past by plans to open logging roads in their traditional territories and build dams that would flood vast amounts of their land. These indigenous communities
organized, sometimes with the aid of anthropologists who had connections to media and environmental organizations, to protect the forest. The combination of two causes—rainforest conservation
and indigenous rights—was powerful, successfully grabbing media attention and raising money for
conservation. Their success led to later instances of indigenous groups joining efforts to halt largescale development projects. These movements were especially powerful symbolically because they
articulated the longstanding Western idea of the environmentally noble savage as well as growing
environmental concerns in Europe and North America.15
Some anthropologists have noted that these alliances were often fragile and rested on an imagined
ideal of indigenous groups that was not always accurate. The Western media, they argue, imagined
indigenous groups as ecologically noble savages, and the danger in that perspective is that the indigenous communities would be particularly vulnerable if they lost that symbolic purity and the power
that came with it. The image of ecologically noble savages could break down if they were seen as
promoting any kind of non-environmental practices or became too involved in messy national politics. Furthermore, indigenous groups’ alliances with international activists tended to cast doubt on
their patriotism and weaken their position in their own countries. Though these indigenous groups

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

11

achieved visibility and some important victories, they remained vulnerable to negative press and
needed to carefully manage their images.
It is important to note that depictions such as the ecologically noble savage rely on an overly simplistic portrayal of the indigenous “other.” For example, some indigenous groups have been portrayed
as inherently environmentalist even when they hunt animals that Western environmentalists want to
preserve. Often, the more important questions for indigenous groups revolve around land rights and
political sovereignty. Environmental concerns are associated with those issues rather than existing
separately. The ramifications of these differences are explained in the next section, which discusses
the people-versus-parks debate.

Land Claims and Mapping
One way that anthropologists have successfully used traditional ecological knowledge to advance
indigenous rights is through advocacy on behalf of indigenous groups seeking to establish legal ownership or control over their traditional lands. This was first done in Alaska and Canada in the 1960s
and 1970s. Indigenous groups wanted to map their seasonal movements for hunting, gathering, and
other subsistence practices. The maps would demonstrate that they used the land in question and
that it was important for their continued physical and cultural survival.
Since then, communities throughout the developing world have adopted similar strategies with the
help of geographers and anthropologists to demarcate their lands. Often, lands used by indigenous
groups are seen as empty because their population densities are quite low, and developers imagine the
land as unused and open for taking. The production of maps by indigenous communities challenges
those notions by inscribing the landscape with their names, relationships, and the human histories
that mark their claim to the land. The maps become important symbols and tools for organizing local
resistance against large development projects.
The non-governmental organization (NGO) Native Lands, for example, assisted in mapping the
Mosquitia region of Honduras. Although the area, which consisted of 20,000 square kilometers,
included 170 communities, most government maps showed it as practically empty. Earlier, in a backroom deal, the entire area had been granted as a logging concession to Stone Container Corporation,
a Chicago-based company that made cardboard boxes and paper bags.16 When Native Lands became
involved in the early 1990s, mapping was used to bring the diverse communities in the region together to communicate their presence and advocate for an end to the logging concession. The power of
maps to communicate the presence of indigenous people on the land is critical, especially when the
indigenous groups lack legal ownership.

POLITICAL ECOLOGY
Questioning Science
In the 1960s, theoretical movements in the social sciences and humanities began to challenge
the presumed benefits of modernity and science. These movements were led in part by feminist
and post-colonial theorists who saw science as part of a patriarchal system that was complicit in
the subjugation of women and colonized people throughout the world. In environmental sciences,
this move to question the objectivity of science can be seen in political ecology, a diverse field that
includes many anthropologists along with geographers, political scientists, sociologists, and other

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

social scientists. Political ecology’s primary message is the importance of examining environmental
questions that seem, at first glance, to be strictly scientific (i.e., apolitical). Questions of cause and effect, for instance, are comprised of political and economic agendas that can be masked by a seemingly
neutral language of scientific objectivity. By focusing our attention on the power dynamic in political
dimensions of conservation, principally in the developing world, political ecologists illustrate why
conservation efforts so often fail to achieve the desired goals.
In an early an influential study of political ecology, Piers Blaikie and others argued that soil erosion
was not caused by many of the factors blamed by state governments, including overpopulation, bad
farming practices, and environmental stresses. Instead, they found that state policies such as taxes
forced farmers into capitalist economic systems that encouraged unsustainable farming practices.17
From this perspective, soil erosion, which seemed to be primarily a local problem, was actually connected to national politics and needed to be addressed in that larger context. Once attention had
been drawn to the relationship between state policies and soil erosion, the solution to the problem
could no longer come from simply teaching small-scale farmers better soil conservation techniques.
It required eliminating government practices and economic conditions that provided an incentive to
use unsustainable farming practices.
Political ecology often focuses on the impacts of governments and corporations in establishing political and economic systems that constrain local behavior and challenges standard narratives regarding environmental destruction and conservation. Learning about political ecology can be difficult for
environmentally minded people because it requires them to rethink many of their own positions and
the science that supports them.

Revisionist Environmental History
Some of my favorite work in political ecology challenges the causes and effects of tropical deforestation. James Fairhead and Melissa Leach, for example, looked at tropical deforestation in the West
African country of Guinea. 18 The state’s forestry department and later conservation organizations
described the savanna as containing only small fragments of a once extensive tropical forest. Administrators, foresters, and botanists had created forest policies based on the idea that this degradation was caused by local villagers as they cleared and burned forests to create fields for agriculture.
Through careful study of historical archives, oral histories, and historical aerial photographs, Fairhead
and Leach challenged these narratives. Instead, they argued that the remaining fragments of forest
had been planted by local villagers who had gradually planted useful species around their villages,
improving the soil for planting and generating other positive ecological changes. Rather than being
the cause of the deforestation in areas that was previously forest, the villagers were creating the forest
in an area that had previously been savanna through generations of hard work, turning the colonial
narrative on its head.
Another fascinating tale comes from William Balee’s work in the Amazon. Balee was a friend of
Darrell Posey, and their work together got Balee thinking about the extent to which the Amazon
rainforest is a product of human productive activities and not entirely natural processes. Balee disagreed with earlier anthropologists who had described how primitive groups were forced to adapt to
the constraints imposed by fragile tropical ecosystems, such as declining soil fertility, a lack of plants
and animals that provided protein, and other limiting factors that constrained their behavior. Balee
examined a wide variety of ecosystems in the Amazon that seemed to have been created or significantly modified by human activity, including the forest islands of the Kayapó discussed by Posey,

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

13

babassu palm forests, bamboo forests, Brazil nut forests near Maraba, and liana forests. His conservative estimated was that at least 12 percent of the Amazon, the largest rainforest on the planet, was a
product of indigenous intervention. This conclusion challenged two major assumptions made about
the rainforest and the people who lived there. First is the notion that indigenous groups were forced
to adapt to the harsh environment of the rainforest. Instead, Balee found that they were resource
managers who had developed ecosystems to better provide for their needs. Second is the notion that
the Amazon was primeval, untouched, and pristine.19 If we extend this analysis to other regions and
ecosystems, it challenges the entire notion of “untouched nature.” If the wildest, least populated, and
largest rainforest in the world is already highly anthropogenic, or shaped by humans, what can we
say about supposed ideas of wilderness in other places?
Environmental historian William Cronon tackled this question directly in his essay, “The Trouble
with Wilderness, or Getting Back to the Wrong Nature.”20 Cronon argued that, by celebrating a
nature supposedly untouched by human hands, we tend to forget about preserving the nature with
which we come in contact every day. If we focus exclusively on a concept of wilderness, which
excludes humans and human activities by definition, we may ignore ways to help humans better interact with nature, leading to conservation policies that try to create parks without anyone inside of
them and do not fully consider agricultural and urban areas. It means that one must leave civilization
behind to be in contact with nature. Cronon ended his essay with a plea:
If wildness can stop being (just) out there and start being (also) in here, if it can start being
as humane as it is natural, then perhaps we can get on with the unending task of struggling
to live rightly in the world, not just in the garden, not just in the wilderness, but in the home
that encompasses them both.21
Cronon’s call to action is for humans to consider themselves fully part of nature and to look for
ways to behave responsibly in that relationship. In a way, his message is similar to Bruno Latour’s
about the Anthropocene. By recognizing that nature does not exist outside of human activities, we
must come to terms with the impacts of our lifestyles on the environment. Some may believe that this
cheapens nature, making it less sacred and significant, but understanding the diverse ways in which
humans have affected the environment should make us better able to appreciate and evaluate our
interactions with it. Instead of seeing nature as outside of human activities, we need to consider how
our food production, transportation, and habitation systems affect the environment.

People versus Parks
Generally, when we think of nature, we tend to think of national parks and other kinds of protected areas set aside for conservation under various categories. In the United States, these include
national and state parks, forests, wilderness areas, recreation areas, and wildlife conservation areas. In
most cases, people are allowed to visit these areas for recreational or scientific purposes but cannot
live directly in them, and regulations control the kinds of activities allowed. Protected areas developed from the Western vision of nature that separates it from culture and assumes that one must
exclude humans to conserve nature. This model of setting aside protected areas has been exported to
the rest of the world and persists as the most common strategy for numerous environmental goals,
including protection of watersheds, endangered plants and animals, and providing space for people
to interact with nature.

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

The most common example of a protected area
is a national park. In the United States, national
parks are so popular that they have been called
“America’s Best Idea.” While I am an enthusiastic
fan of national parks, I also recognize problems
associated with the concept. We often forget, for
example, that the “natural” state of such parks
is mostly a recent phenomenon. Many Native
American groups were systematically removed
from parks (and rarely compensated) to make
the parks “natural,” and some parks, such as Mt.
Rushmore in the Black Hills of South Dakota
and Devil’s Tower in Wyoming, are directly on
top of sacred sites for Native Americans. In other areas of the world, especially in developing
countries, most protected areas are occupied by
groups of people who have lived there for decades or centuries and have legitimate claims to
the land. Some may not be aware that their land
is being transformed into a park and, once informed, are shocked by all of the new regulations
they are expected to obey. In worst-case scenarios, they are evicted without compensation, becoming environmental refugees. From the perspective of such groups, the government seems
to value elephants, tigers, or scenic vistas more than the people living on the land.
The conflicts that have developed between local communities in and around protected areas and
state conservation officials and international conservation NGOs that advocate for the parks is referred to as the “people-versus-parks debate.”22 Communities, rather than seeing parks as preserving
a public good that benefits everyone, view creation of a park as an effort by government officials to
extend their power to remote rural areas. And those negative views can thwart conservation efforts
when locals resent preferential treatment of animals and choose to poach or simply ignore the new
regulations.
Conservation groups have begun to recognize that they must support economic development
of local communities to get them on board with conservation efforts. When local residents benefit
from jobs as park guards, tour guides, and research assistants, they recognize the positive economic
benefits of conservation and support the initiatives. This approach aims to combine conservation and
development, bringing together typically different objectives. Initially, this approach was a response
to development policies associated with building infrastructure such as roads and dams that had huge
environmental impacts and created negative press for the World Bank, the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), and other institutions that funded the projects. Now, most conservation projects incorporate development objectives, and the environmental impacts of development
projects usually must be assessed. In addition, the failure of many of these projects has inspired
governments and NGOs to include local communities in planning and operating conservation and
development schemes.

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

15

Conservation and Sustainable Development
Since the early 1990s, environmental conservation organizations such as the Nature Conservancy
and Conservation International and development organizations such as the World Bank and USAID
have been working to bring conservation and development together. The structures and success of
these approaches vary widely. Some aim to help local communities develop industries that depended
on rainforests in nondestructive ways, such as non-timber forest products like rattan, rubber, medicines, and fruit. By assisting local communities in developing and marketing such products, the programs have provided them with economic alternatives that encourage people to preserve rainforests
instead of chopping them down, a form of sustainable development.
The conservation and development project with which I am most familiar is related to extractive
reserves in the Brazilian Amazon. I spent a summer doing research for my master’s thesis on extractive reserves established by Brazilian rubber tappers in Acre, which is in the northwestern corner
of the Brazilian Amazon. These rubber tappers live in the rainforest and tap natural rubber by scraping a long thin cut into the bark of the tree and returning later in the day to collect the sap that had
dripped into a small container hung on the tree. Rubber trees do not grow together; they are spread
out throughout the forest, requiring rubber tappers to walk several trails each day. Many also collect
and sell Brazil nuts, which fall from ancient trees that live for centuries. Brazil nuts cannot be commercially grown so they must be collected from rainforests. Both of these economic activities require
a healthy, mature forest. And although rubber can be produced synthetically, natural rubber is stronger, longer lasting, more flexible, and more resistant to heat than synthetic alternatives, making it
ideal for use in medical and aeronautic industries where high-quality material is essential.
As cattle ranching expanded in the Amazon, rubber tappers were being evicted because they did
not have formal title to the land on which they
lived and worked. Led by local activist Chico
Mendes, the rubber tappers organized and petitioned the government for the right to remain
on the land. Mendes was eventually assassinated by owners of some of the cattle ranches who
were unhappy about his activism, but ultimately,
the movement was successful. Environmentalists
who were worried about Amazonian deforestation joined forces with the rubber tappers, who
were worried about their livelihoods, and together they created extractive reserves—protected areas owned by the federal government but
managed by local communities of rubber tappers
who could stay on the land indefinitely as long
as they followed the environmental regulations
they established. The model was successful and
has since been expanded to include millions of
hectares throughout the Amazon.
As with many conservation and development
projects, the economic benefits of the extractive
reserves were slow to accrue. When rubber prices

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

fell in response to international commodity markets, many families stopped tapping rubber and
focused on subsistence agriculture. In fact, some turned to cattle ranching, mimicking on a smaller
scale many of the destructive processes they had originally protested. Because the regulations were
poorly enforced, a number of families gradually turned old swidden fields into pastures instead of
letting the fields revert to rainforest.
Despite these challenges, development of the land was significantly reduced relative to the original
plan of allowing owners of large tracts to move in and convert large areas to pasture and soy plantations. Likewise, the rubber tappers, though still poor, had access to greater resources than they would
if they have been evicted and forced to move to urban slums. Extractive reserves succeeded because
they were implemented across vast areas of the Brazilian Amazon and provided rights to thousands
of small landholders.
Significant challenges remain for organizations working to improve the standard of living of rubber tappers in Brazil and conserve biodiversity, and this case study illustrates many of the problems
associated with conservation and development models. Often, the economic gains are limited and
require compromises in terms of conservation benefits. Usually, neither local communities nor environmentalists are completely happy with the models and their results but also agree that compromise
is better than the rampant destruction averted by a reserve. Research on political ecology from such
case studies forces us to recognize that the debates are not solely about environmental ethics; they also
involve control over valuable resources such as land, timber, and oil. Political ecology invites us to
think about the local political and cultural processes that shape the outcomes of conservation projects
and determine who benefits from such projects.

First World Political Ecology
A significant challenge for political ecologists is that most of the research so far has been done in
the developing world; relatively few studies have been conducted in the United States and Europe.
Some newer studies are aiming to showcase what political ecology might look like when applied to
similar questions in the developed world. One such study came from the Sierra Nevada foothills in
California. There, a participatory conservation project was being developed that would have included
local conservation organizations, government offices, and other groups. Their goal was to create an
environmental management plan for the region that would limit development and urban growth.
They tried to bring together a variety of environmental and pro-development groups to dialogue
but were met with an intense political backlash. Pro-development forces, rather than participating,
mobilized politically to remove supporters of the plan from county government seats and derail
the process. In first world countries, local groups can mobilize significant political and economic
resources to influence the fate of a project. This is an unlikely scenario in the developing world where
conservation organizations are generally more powerful than local communities.23
Clashes between environmentalists, who are often exurban migrants who moved from urban
to rural areas for outdoor activities and scenic nature, and longtime residents who are involved in
extractive industries such as mining, ranching, and agriculture are common in the western United
States. In many cases, communities are bitterly divided over the importance of nearby public lands
and the role of the federal government in managing those lands. In developing countries, political
ecologists as a group tend to side with local communities and against government intervention. In
the United States, left-leaning and environmental sympathies can push them to side with government intervention at the expense of local communities. Some political ecologists have noted this

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

17

contradiction and called for local movements and their pushes against extension of states power to be
taken more seriously, including in the United States.24
Another fascinating political ecology associated with the first world is a study by Paul Robbins and
Julie Sharp that looked at the American lawn, noting that 23 percent of urban land in the United
States is dedicated to lawns and that urban areas are growing at a rate of 675,000 hectares a year.25
In addition, the vast majority of those lawns are sprayed with fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides.
Because these chemicals wash into waterways, lawns have an enormous collective environmental
impact. Robbins and Sharp analyzed advertisements for lawn care products and interviewed and
surveyed households across the country, leading to some startling discoveries. One of the strongest
indicators of intensive and toxic lawn care was not a lack of knowledge about the environmental
impacts of the products, but how well they knew the names of their neighbors. They describe the
moral economy of a turf grass commons in which maintaining a healthy lawn signified important
values of being connected to the community, your family, and nature. The aesthetics and family
values associated with lawns outweighed concerns about environmental impacts, suggesting that
water conservation activists must understand and address underlying cultural ideas about lawns in
the United States.

Where’s the Ecology?
Political ecologists Andrew Vayda and Bradley Walters have noted that the field of political ecology
seems to be increasingly political, overemphasizing how different groups use environmental issues to
gain control over land and resources and ignoring important ecological considerations.26 They argue
that political ecologists need to take the limits, constraints, and challenges associated with natural
systems more seriously and research those systems in addition to local cultural and political systems.
In a study of the destruction of mangrove forests in the Philippines, they examined both the role
of local communities in the destruction and management of mangrove ecosystems and the natural
limits that impede replanting in the area. The next section presents examples of anthropologists who
thought creatively about how to integrate theories from the natural sciences back into anthropology
while simultaneously questioning whether science provides unbiased objective results. This requires
a careful balancing act but is necessary to generate an approach that respects the contributions of
scientific and anthropological knowledge.

ADDITIONAL APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Eco-justice: Race, Gender, and Environmental Destruction
Many environmental justice advocates are anthropologists and political ecologists. They examine
environmental questions from the perspective of social equality, identifying impacts and risks associated with environmental damage that have disproportionately affected socially marginalized groups.
For example, on the Hawaiian island of Oahu the trash incinerator and landfill are on the west side
of the island where many native Hawaiians and other low-income groups live.27 Locating landfills,
incinerators, chemical plants, industrial factories, nuclear waste storage, and other environmentally
hazardous facilities near communities of color, Native American reservations, and relatively poor
communities is not accidental. A lack of economic and political power prevents residents of such

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

communities from influencing the large industries and government agencies that determine where
such facilities are placed.
The same process is at work when environmentally toxic jobs and waste storage facilities are outsourced. For example, many computers and other electronic appliances that contain toxic components made from heavy metals are shipped to West Africa for disassembly and recycling.28 This
arrangement makes economic sense for consumers in relatively rich countries in North America and
Europe, but the workers in Africa are out of sight and out of mind, often working without proper
protection from the toxic metals or even training on their dangers. And as global supply chains have
expanded, consumers in the United States rarely know where the clothes, electronics, and toys they
purchase are made, the impacts of that production, or what happens to them after they dispose of
them. By looking at these long complex commodity or supply chains, which cover products from
their cradle to grave, social scientists interested in eco-justice can create awareness of these issues.
Anthropologists also work to connect ecocide (environmental destruction) with ethnocide (cultural destruction). In many indigenous communities worldwide, cultural activities and beliefs are
connected to specific landscapes and ecologies. Consequently, as a logging or mining company moves
in, it destroys both the environment and culture. Eco-justice studies call attention to these connections and seek to protect both culture and the environment and the relationship between them.
Barbara Rose Johnston’s work with Marshallese Islanders in Micronesia documented the impact of
U.S. atomic bomb testing on the atolls and supported their claims for compensation from the United
States for damage by carefully documenting the relationship between their culture and the contaminated landscapes ruined by nuclear testing.29
Anthropologists are often involved in these kinds of research projects because they are on the
ground in remote locations around the world and share a disciplinary interest in raising awareness of
cultural differences and inequality. They are also trained to examine categories of race, class, nationality, and other social factors that differentiate groups of people and are the basis for unequal treatment.
While valuing cultural diversity, anthropologists also argue for a holistic perspective that universally
values human life regardless of such differences.

Science and Technology Studies
The study of science and technology is a diverse field that uses social science methods to analyze
the culture of science in industrialized and modern societies. Like political ecology and ethnoecology,
science and technology studies question the objectivity of modern science to some extent and view
science as a product of specific cultural understandings. These studies often look to the history of a
science to understand its development in a specific cultural, political, and economic context.
An early developer of the discipline is Bruno Latour, who introduced the idea of the Anthropocene
discussed at the beginning of this chapter. Latour’s earlier work included a study, Laboratory Life: The
Social Construction of Scientific Facts (1979), written with Steve Woolgar, that used the ethnographic
technique of participant observation in a laboratory at the Salk Institute for Biological Sciences to
determine how scientific knowledge is produced and challenged dominant narratives about the scientific method.30 Other studies have examined concepts of race and indigeneity in the Human Genome
Project and how remote sensing technologies shape how anthropologists interact with ecosystems in
the Guatemalan rainforest.31 As science and technology become increasingly important parts of our
lived experiences and our understanding of the environment around us, anthropologists naturally
analyze those connections.

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

19

Many anthropologists who study science and technology endeavor to make sure they do not throw
the baby out with the bath water. They do not deny the important contributions of science and the
scientific method. However, they also pay attention to the limitations and biases inherent in those
methods.

Multispecies Ethnographies
Multispecies ethnographies challenge the centrality of humans in the world. Most of the stories
we tell about ourselves and our place in the world and especially stories told by anthropologists revolve around Homo sapiens. Increasingly, though, some anthropologists have begun to think about
how other species make decisions and exercise a degree of agency that can influence history. For
example, Donna Haraway writes about dogs and how the relationship between dogs and humans has
evolved over time. She criticizes people who anthropomorphize dogs and challenges her readers to
understand dogs on their own terms.32
We can also think about the role of bacteria in human evolution and cultural development and
remind ourselves that diseases, parasites, and symbiotic gut bacteria that allow us to eat certain kinds
of foods have been very influential in shaping human history and cultural development over time.
Other works have, for example, re-examined plant and animal domestication from non-human perspectives and explored how forests “think.”33 By carefully considering other species and ecological
processes, we decenter our increasingly human-centered focus. Much of the work on multispecies
ethnography has been done by feminist anthropologists who have already been at work for decades
on similarly decentering male-focused histories of our species.

APPLYING ANTHROPOLOGY IN CONSERVATION
Reforestation
Anthropological analyses of the environment may seem overly theoretical and abstract, far removed from actual practices and the work of learning to live with and within our environment.
Anthropologists may be seen as hidden in ivory towers of academia, disconnected from real world
issues and problems. However, applied and activist anthropology offer avenues for anthropologists
to tackle problems on the ground and make a direct difference. Applied anthropologists often work
with conservation and development organizations to implement projects that depend on an accurate
understanding of local cultures and practices to succeed.
Anthropologist Gerald Murray’s doctoral dissertation examined land tenure among small-holders
in Haiti. After finishing his dissertation work, Murray delivered a presentation to USAID on a Haitian reforestation project. He joked that if they gave him “a jeep and carte blanche access to a $50,000
checking account” he could prove his “anthropological assertions about peasant economic behavior
and produce more trees on the ground than their multi-million-dollar Ministry of Agriculture charade.”34 USAID program officers accepted his challenge, inviting him to head a $4 million project to
reforest Haiti. Using his understanding of Haitian small-holders, he drastically changed the USAID’s
approach. Instead of trying to convince small-holders that trees were valuable for their environmental
services, he emphasized fast-growing species that could be sold for firewood, charcoal, and lumber.
By giving the trees to the small-holders and allowing them to harvest and sell them whenever they
wanted, he motivated them to plant and care for the seedlings like any other valuable cash crop. In

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

prior projects, tree-cutting was prohibited and the trees belonged to the government. Consequently,
no one took care of the trees and they were eventually destroyed by livestock or neglect and rarely
reached maturity. Treating the trees as a cash crop motivated farmers to plant trees on their own land,
thus meeting USAID’s goals of stabilizing the soil and reducing illegal tree cutting (since farmers had
access to stands of their own) and providing a direct economic benefit from selling wood. The project
was a stunning success—20 million trees were planted in the first four years. By understanding local
farmers’ perspectives, Murray was able to work with Haitian small-holders instead of seeing them as
an impediment to reforestation efforts.
A number of anthropologists are working with conservation and development organizations to
assist them in understanding local cultures and implementing conservation and develop projects.
This work is often done in teams in which anthropologists join with foresters, conservation biologists, agronomists, and others to implement projects. Because they often speak the local language,
understand the peoples’ perspectives, and are interested in close, on-the-ground observations, anthropologists make valuable contributions in support of conservation and economic development.

Climate Change
In 2014, the American Anthropological Association’s Global Climate Change Task Force submitted a report on climate change that summarized anthropology’s engagement with the issue. Currently, climate change is perhaps the single most important environmental issue worldwide, and our
responses to it will shape the future of our species on the planet. The report identified the human
causes and contributions to climate change and emphasized that climate change is already having an
impact as rising sea levels are forcing residents of places such as Kiribati to flee their island homes and
melting ice shelves threaten the subsistence practices and the lifestyle of Inuit groups in Alaska. These
examples illustrate how the impacts of climate change will disproportionately affect groups who have
contributed the least to the accumulation of greenhouses gases, highlighting the social inequality of
impacts of climate change around the world.
The report analyzed drivers of climate change, focusing on consumption, land use, energy, and
population growth. An anthropological analysis of consumption reminds us that the categories of
“necessities” and “luxuries” are cultural constructs. For example, Western societies now accept cell
phones as necessities despite the fact that humans survived perfectly well for thousands of years
without them. As the global middle class expands and places new demands on ecosystems, a cultural
understanding of social classes and related consumption practices will be increasingly important to
analyses the causes of climate change and potential solutions.
The report also criticized much of the language of climate change and its focus on concepts of
adaptation, vulnerability, and resilience that elided the differential impacts of climate change on
different groups of people. The task force noted that proposed global solutions focused on top-down
management strategies that did not take existing social issues of “poverty, marginalization, lack of
education and information, and loss of control over resources” that structure vulnerability of different populations to the impacts of a warming planet into account. 35 The report also illustrates the
power of language to shape certain debates and potential solutions to problems, an important piece
of anthropological analysis.
At the end of the report, the task force recommended actions anthropologists could take to contribute to efforts to address global climate change, including reducing the carbon footprint of anthropological meetings, working with interdisciplinary research teams to continue research, and main-

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

21

taining a research agenda that stresses the importance of anthropological contributions to discussions
of climate change. Perhaps most interesting is their conclusion that many of the most innovative and
creative approaches to addressing and mitigating the effects of climate change were occurring at local
and regional levels, recognizing communities’ innovative efforts to bypass national and international
gridlock and develop approaches that reflect local realities and address local problems. The anthropological focus on local communities is a welcome change of perspective when, by definition, the scale
of global climate change seems to preclude local involvement and solutions.

Anthropologists at Work in Conservation Organizations
Anthropologists work for international conservation organizations like Conservation International, The Nature Conservancy, and the World Wildlife Fund and with government agencies like
the National Park Service, the Peace Corps, and USAID. They also work for smaller conservation
organizations, urban planning initiatives, environmental education groups, environmental activist
networks, and other initiatives aimed at reducing our negative impact on the planet.

Cultural Resources Management
Management of cultural resources is a growing field of anthropology that catalogs and preserves archaeological sites and historic places threatened by development, bringing together various principles
developed in anthropology over the years. First, it recognizes the need to preserve both “natural” ecosystems and ecosystems shaped by past human activities. By connecting natural and human diversity,
anthropologists recognize humans’ interdependence with the environment over time. Second, cultural resource managers recognize the need for continuing involvement of indigenous communities
with archaeological sites and seek their input to inform management plans and practices. As cultural
resource management has become standard operating procedure, archaeologists have begun to meet
with members of the local community and others who have a stake in their research. These interactions improve archaeological research and create the kind of cross-cultural bridges that strengthen the
discipline. Finally, destruction of historical places and archaeological sites is a form of environmental
destruction that, like climate change and species extinctions, requires us to critically examine the
cultural values underlying that destruction.

CONCLUSION
The discipline of anthropology provides a unique perspective on human-environmental interactions and thus generates valuable insights into the social, political, and cultural complexity of
modern environmental problems. Anthropologists are hard at work with governments, conservation
organizations, and community groups to understand and solve complex environmental problems. I
hope this discussion has challenged you to think about the environment and conservation in a new
way, allowing you to help reframe these debates and develop innovative solutions to the complex
problems that confront us.

22

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. In what ways have anthropologists examined human interactions with the environment over
time?
2. What is the myth of the ecologically noble savage? What are some recent examples of this myth?
What is the impact of this idea on indigenous people?
3. How has research in political ecology challenged traditional conservation efforts? What are some
of the problems with promoting parks or ecological reserves as solutions to environmental problems?
4. What is the Anthropocene? How has research in anthropology contributed to an improved
understanding of how humans interact with the “natural” world?
5. What insights from anthropology do you think would be most useful to the public, environmental activists, and government officials when considering policies related to current environmental challenges?

GLOSSARY
Anthropocene: a term proposed to describe the current moment (or epoch) in geological time in
which the effects of human activities have altered the fundamental geochemical cycles of the earth.
There is some disagreement about when the Anthropocene period began—most likely, it began with
industrialization.
Anthropogenic: environments and pollutants produced by human activities.
Cultural ecology: a subfield of cultural anthropology that explores the relationship between human
cultural beliefs and practice and the ecosystems in which those beliefs and practices occur.
Cultural evolutionism: a theory popular in nineteenth and early twentieth century anthropology
suggesting that societies evolved through stages from simple to advanced. This theory was later shown
to be incorrect.
Ecocide: destruction of an environment, especially when done intentionally by humans.
Eco-justice: a movement to recognize and remedy the adverse relationship between social inequality
and the harms and risks that come from environmental destruction and pollutants.
Ethnocide: destruction of a culture, often intentionally, through destruction of or removal from
their territory, forced assimilation, or acculturation.
Ethnoecology: the relationships between cultural beliefs and practices and the local environment.
Components include ethnobiology, ethnobotany, and ethnozoology.
Extractive reserves: community-managed protected areas designed to allow for sustainable extraction of certain natural resources (such as fish, rubber, Brazil nuts, and rattan) while maintaining
key ecosystems in place.
Exurban: a term that describes the migration of generally affluent people from urban areas to rural
areas for the amenities of nature, recreation, and scenic beauty associated with rural areas.
Historical particularism: the theory that every culture develops in a unique way due to its history,
including the interaction of people with the natural environment.

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

23

Homeostasis: the movement of a particular system (a human body, an ecosystem) towards equilibrium. In ecology this is associated with the idea that ecosystems should remain at the climax (stable)
ecosystem associated with an area.
Hominin: Humans (Homo sapiens) and their close relatives and immediate ancestors.
Materialism: a Marxist theory emphasizing the ways in which human social and cultural practices
are influenced by basic subsistence (economic) needs.
Multispecies ethnographies: an ethnographic approach in which anthropologists include non-human species as active participants in a society or culture and study their influence and actions.
Political ecology: an interdisciplinary field of research that emphasizes the political and economic
dimensions of environmental concerns.
Processual archaeology: a shift in archaeological studies toward scientific methods, testing of hypotheses, quantitative analysis, and theory-driven approaches and away from an earlier emphasis on
typologies and descriptive analysis.
Protected areas: lands set aside for conservation of the environment for their scenic beauty, biodiversity, recreational value, and other reasons.
Succession: changes in types of species in an area over time. For example, it would describe the different ecosystems that gradually replace one other after a forest fire.
Sustainable development: development that can meet present needs without damaging the environment or limiting the potential for future generations.
Swidden: an agricultural practice, also called shifting cultivation and slash-and-burn, in which fields
are cleared, burned, and planted for several seasons before being returned to fallow for an extended
period.
Wilderness: a natural area that is untouched or unchanged by human activities and often seen as a
cultural construct of the American West.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
I grew up hiking and surfing in Hawaii and became interested in the environment and conservation. I studied Biology and International Cultural
Studies at Brigham Young University-Hawaii as an undergraduate, including
research on how traditional Hawaiian healers adapted to introduced plant
species and diseases. My master’s degree is in Environmental Science from
the Yale School of Forestry and Environmental Studies where I researched
extractive reserves in the Brazilian Amazon. My Ph.D. in Cultural Anthropology at the University of California, Santa Cruz focused on tourism, urban development, and conservation in a small fishing town in Northeastern Brazil that was transitioning to a tourist economy.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Balee, William. Cultural Forests of the Amazon: A Historical Ecology of People and Their Landscapes. Tuscaloosa,
AL: University of Alabama Press, 2013.
Cronon, William. “The Trouble with Wilderness: Or, Getting Back to the Wrong Nature.” Environmental History (1996): 7–28.

24

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Fiske, Shirley J., Susan A. Crate, Carole L. Crumley, Kathleen Galvin, Heather Lazrus, George Luber, Lisa Lucero, Anthony Oliver-Smith, Ben Orlove, Sarah Strauss, and Richard R. Wilk. “Changing the Atmosphere:
Anthropology and Climate Change.” Final Report for the AAA Global Climate Change Task Force. Arlington,
VA: American Anthropological Association, 2014.
Murray, Gerald F. “The Domestication of Wood in Haiti: A Case Study in Applied Evolution.” Anthropological
Praxis (1987): 218.
Sahlins, Marshall. “The Original Affluent Society.” In The Politics of Egalitarianism: Theory and Practice, edited
by Jacqueline Solway, 79-98. New York: Berghahn Books, 2006.
White, Leslie. “Energy and the Evolution of Culture.” In Anthropological Theory: An Introductory History, edited
by R. Jon McGee and Richard L. Warms. Mountain View, CA: Mayfield Publishing Company, 2000.

NOTES
1. Bruno Latour, “Anthropology at the Time of the Anthropocene: A Personal View of What Is to be Studied,” (paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Anthropological Association, Washington, D.C., December 2014) http://www.
bruno-latour.fr/sites/default/files/139-AAA-Washington.pdf
2. Marshall Sahlins, “The Original Affluent Society,” in The Politics of Egalitarianism: Theory and Practice, ed. Jacqueline Solway
(New York: Berghahn Books, 2006), 79-98.
3. Elliot M. Abrams and David J. Rue, “The Cause and Consequences of Deforestation among the Prehistoric Maya,” Human
Ecology 16 no. 4 (1988): 377–395.
4. Sidney Mintz, Sweetness and Power: The Place of Sugar in Modern History (New York: Viking and Penguin, 1985).
5. S.J. Fiske, S.A. Crate, C.L. Crumley, K. Galvin, H. Lazrus, G. Luber, L. Lucero, A. Oliver-Smith, B. Orlove, S. Strauss, and
R. Wilk, “Changing the Atmosphere: Anthropology and Climate Change,” Final Report for the AAA Global Climate Change
Task Force (Arlington, VA: American Anthropological Association, 2014).
6. Simone Athayde, “Introduction: Indigenous People, Dams, and Resistance,” Tipiti: Journal of the Society for Anthropology of
Lowland South America 12 no. 2 (2014): 80–92.
7. Paige West, James Igoe, and Dan Brockington, “Parks and People: The Social Impact of Protected Areas,” Annual Review of
Anthropology 35 (2006): 251–277.
8. Maria Panakhyo and Stacy McGrath, “Ecological Anthropology,” in Anthropological Theories: A Guide Prepared by
Students for Students (University of Alabama), http://anthropology.ua.edu/cultures/cultures.php?culture=Ecological%20
Anthropology
9. Leslie White, “Energy and the Evolution of Culture,” in Anthropological Theory: An Introductory History. eds. R. Jon McGee
and Richard L. Warms (Mountain View, CA: Mayfield Publishing Company, 2000), 249.
10. Julian Steward, “The Patrilineal Band,” in Anthropological Theory: An Introductory History, eds. R. Jon McGee and Richard
L. Warms (Mountain View, CA: Mayfield Publishing Company, 2000), 228–242.
11. Marvin Harris, “The Cultural Ecology of Indian’s Sacred Cattle,” in Anthropological Theory: An Introductory History, eds. R.
Jon McGee and Richard L. Warms (Mountain View, CA: Mayfield Publishing Company, 2000), 287.
12. Harold Conklin, Hanunoo Agriculture. A Report on an Integral System of Shifting Cultivation in the Philippines (New York,
United Nations, 1957).
13. Richard Reed, “Forest Development and the Indian Way,” in Conformity and Conflict: Reading in Cultural Anthropology,
eds. James Spradley and David McCurdy, 105-115 (New York: Pearson, 2011).
14. Darrell A. Posey, Kayapó Ethnoecology and Culture (New York: Routledge, 2003).
15. Beth A. Conklin and Laura R. Graham, “The Shifting Middle Ground: Amazonian Indians and Eco‐Politics,” American
Anthropologist 97 no. 4 (1995): 695–710.
16. Mac Chapin, “Indigenous Land Use Mapping in Central America,” Yale Forestry and Environmental Science Bulletin 98
(1995): 195–209.
17. Piers Blaikie, The Political Economy of Soil Erosion in Developing Countries (London: Longman, 1985).
18. Melissa Leach and James Fairhead, “Fashioned Forest Pasts, Occluded Histories? International Environmental Analysis in
West African Locales,” Development and Change 31 no. 1 (2000): 35–59.
19. For more on this research see William Balee, Cultural Forests of the Amazon: A Historical Ecology of People and Their Landscapes (Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press, 2013).
20. William Cronon, “The Trouble with Wilderness: Or, Getting Back to the Wrong Nature,” Environmental History (1996):
7–28.
21. Ibid., 28.
22. Paige West, James Igoe, and Dan Brockington, “Parks and People: The Social Impact of Protected Areas,” Annual Review
of Anthropology 35 (2006): 251–277.

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the Anthropocene

25

23. Peter A. Walker and Patrick T. Hurley, “Collaboration Derailed: The Politics of ‘Community-Based’ Resource Management in Nevada County,” Society and Natural Resources 17 no. 8 (2004): 735–751.
24. Peter A Walker, “Reconsidering ‘Regional’ Political Ecologies: Toward a Political Ecology of the Rural American West,”
Progress in Human Geography 27 no. 1 (2003): 7–24.
25. Paul Robbins and Julie T. Sharp, “Producing and Consuming Chemicals: The Moral Economy of the American Lawn,”
Economic Geography 79 no. 4 (2003): 425–451.
26. Andrew P. Vayda and Bradely B. Walters, “Against Political Ecology,” Human Ecology 27 no. 1 (1999): 167–179.
27. Rachel Harvey and Annette Koh, “Landfill in Paradise: Politics of Waste Management and Environmental Justice in Hawaii,” Anthropology News 53 no. 8 (2012):1-16.
28. Richard Grant and Martin Oteng-Ababio, “Mapping the Invisible and Real ‘African’ Economy: Urban E-waste Circuitry,”
Urban Geography 33 (1): 1–21.
29. Barbara Rose Johnston, “An Anthropological Ecology? Struggles to Secure Environmental Quality and Social Justice,”
Kroeber Anthropological Society 101 no. 1 (2013): 3–21.
30. Bruno Latour and Steve Woolgar, Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific Facts (Princeton University Press, 2013).
31. See for instance Jenny Reardon, “The Human Genome Diversity Project: A Case Study in Coproduction,” Social Studies
of Science 31 no. 3 (2001): 357–388 and Micha Rahder, “But Is It a Basin? Science, Controversy, and Conspiracy in the Fight
for Mirador, Guatemala,” Science as Culture (2015): 1–26.
32. Donna Haraway, The Companion Species Manifesto: Dogs, People, and Significant Otherness (New York: Paradigm, 2003).
33. See for instance, Eben, Kirksey, ed. The Multispecies Salon (Duke University Press, 2014) and Eduardo Kohn, How Forests
Think: Toward an Anthropology Beyond the Human (Berkeley, CA, University of California Press, 2013).
34. Gerald F. Murray, “The Domestication of Wood in Haiti: A Case Study in Applied Evolution,” Anthropological Praxis
(1987): 218.
35. S.J. Fiske, et al. “Changing the Atmosphere,” 6.

Performance
Lauren Miller Griffith, Texas Tech University

lauren.griffith@ttu.edu
https://www.depts.ttu.edu/sasw/People/Griffith.php

Jonathan S. Marion, University of Arkansas

marion@uark.edu
https://fulbright.uark.edu/departments/anthropology/directory/profile.php?uId=marion

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Identify cultural performances and
performances of culture in various settings.
• Explain the various reasons that
anthropologists study performance.
• Describe the role of performance in both
reflecting and contributing to social
change.
• Define “presentation of self.”
• Articulate the relationship between
performance and cultural constructions
of gender.
• Analyze social conflicts using a theatrical
lens.
• Differentiate between descriptive and
performative utterances.
• Evaluate the outcomes of performance,
especially as they relate to hegemonic
discourses.
• Recall framing devices that are used to
mark the boundaries of performance.
• Define intertextuality.

It’s finally here—after weeks of waiting, your favorite
band is playing in concert tonight! Driving in, parking,
passing by all the vendors, and getting to your seats is all
a swirl of sights, sounds, smells, and textures. Your view
is temporarily blocked and then opens up again amidst
the jostling bodies all around. You smell the cologne of
someone nearby and smoke on someone else, all as you
yell over the opening band’s tunes to steer your friends
to the correct seats. You’ d set up two of your friends on
a blind date for this concert, Jayden and Dakota, and
from their grooming to their outfits to their flirtatious
banter, both seem invested. The concert lives up to
all your expectations! However, based on all the little
cues—from leaning in toward each other to sideways
glances—it looks like it was an even better night for
Jayden and Dakota.
As you learned in earlier chapters, whether a night out
is a “concert” or a “date” (and the appropriate behavior
for each) is part of the learned and shared system of ideas
and behaviors that comprise culture. The events—sporting
events, shows, rituals, dances, speeches, and the like—are
clearly cultural performances. At the same time, though,
these activities and the interactions they involve are replete
with culturally coded and performed nuances such as the
lingering eye contact of a successful first date. In other
words, there are two types of performances associated with
our interactions with others: cultural performances (such as
concerts) and performances of culture (such as dating). This
chapter looks at both types of performance, exploring the
different ways culture is performed and the effects of such
performances.

OVERVIEW
In anthropological terms, a performance can be many
things at once. It can be artful, reflexive, and consequential

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

while being both traditional and emergent.1 As a result, each performance is unique because of
the specific circumstances in which it occurs, including historical, social, economic, political, and
personal contexts. Performers’ physical and emotional states will influence their performances, as
will the conditions in which the performance takes place and the audience to whom the performance is delivered. At the same time, every performance is part of a larger tradition, and the creator,
performer(s), and audience are all interacting with a given piece of that larger body of tradition.
Performance is consequential because its effects last much longer than the period between the rising
and falling of a curtain. The reflexive properties of performance “enable participants to understand,
criticize, and even change the worlds in which they live.”2 In other words, performances are much
more than just self-referential; they are always informed by and about something.
Despite the importance of performance in our social worlds, it was only in the mid-twentieth
century that anthropologists embraced performance as a topic worthy of study. Visual arts received
serious attention from anthropologists much earlier, in large part because of Western cultural biases
toward the visual and because those tangible artifacts lent themselves to cultural categorization and
identification. In the 1950s, Milton Singer introduced the idea of cultural performance. Singer
noted that cultural consultants involved in his fieldwork on Hinduism often took him to see cultural
performances when they wanted to explain a particular aspect of that culture.3 Singer checked his
hypotheses about the culture against the formal presentations of it and determined that “these performances could be regarded as the most concrete observable units of Indian culture.”4 He concluded
that one could understand the cultural value system of Hinduism by abstracting from repeated observations of the performances. In other words, (1) cultural performances are an ideal unit of study
because they reference and encapsulate information about the culture that gave rise to them, and
(2) the cultural messages become more accessible with each “sample” of the performances since the
researcher can compare the specifics of repeated features of the same “performance.”
Singer’s observation that analyzing performance could be a useful method for understanding
broader cultural values was revolutionary at the time. Today, anthropologists are just as likely to
study performance itself—how performances become endowed with meaning and social significance,
how cultural knowledge is stored inside performers’ bodies.5 Anthropology’s increased openness to
treating performance as a worthy area of inquiry reflects a shift from focusing on social structures
of society that were presumed to be static to examining the ongoing processes within society that at
times maintain the status quo and at other times result in change.6

Cultural Performance vs. Performing Culture
When describing the anthropology of performance, two concepts are often confused: performing
culture and cultural performance. Though they sound similar, the difference is significant. Richard
Schechner, a performance studies scholar whose work frequently overlaps with anthropology, provides a useful distinction between these terms by distinguishing between analyzing something that
is a performance versus analyzing something as a performance.7 A cultural performance is a performance, such as a concert or play. Performing culture is an activity that people engage in through
their everyday words and actions, which reflect their enculturation and therefore can be studied as
performances regardless of whether the subjects are aware of their cultural significance.
Mexico’s famed ballet folklorico is one example of a cultural performance (see Figure 1). In essence,
it is an authoritative version of the culture that has been codified and is presented to audiences who
generally are expected to accept the interpretation. Cultural performances typically are readily recog-

Performance

3

nizable. Their importance is highlighted by the fact that they take place at specific times and places,
have a clear beginning and end, and involve performers who expect to demonstrate excellence.8
The umbrella of cultural performances includes many events
thought of as performances in
the West (e.g., concerts, plays,
dances) but also includes activities such as prayers and rituals
that westerners would classify
as religious practices. That some
cultures, particularly in the West,
make a distinction between a
performance and a religious
practice fits with a tendency to
see some practices as spurious
and others as genuine, one of
the reasons anthropologists have
only recently begun to study performing arts seriously. Singer found that each cultural performance
“had a definitely limited time span, or at least a beginning and an end, an organized program of activity, a set of performers, an audience, and a place and occasion of performance.”9 The same is true for
religious and secular events. Cultural performances are informed by the norms of one’s community
and signal one’s membership in that community.
Cultural performances contribute to preserving the heritage of a group, and in some cases, they
have the same effect as an anthropologist writing in the “ethnographic present” by providing an artificially frozen (in time) representation of culture. For example, among people living along the Costa
Chica of Mexico, artesa music and the accompanying dance performed atop an overturned trough
retains a strong association with the region’s African-descended population.10 The instruments and
rhythms used in this music reflect the African, indigenous, and European cultures that gave rise to
these blended communities and thus represent a rich, emergent tradition. In recent years, however,
the artesa mostly is no longer performed at weddings, as was traditional, and performers are now paid
to represent their culture in artificial settings such as documentaries and cultural fairs.
Performing culture refers to lived traditions that emerge with each new performance of cultural
norms—popular sayings, dances, music, everyday practices, and rituals—and it takes shape in the
space between tradition and individuality. Using our initial example, the concert Jayden and Dakota attended was a cultural performance while their dating behaviors were examples of performing
culture. Obviously, no two dates are identical, but within a given social group there are culturally
informed codes for appropriate behavior while on a date and for the many other interactions that
commonly occur between people.

EVERYDAY PERFORMANCE
There is a constant tension between hegemony and agency in our everyday activities. For example, while you choose how you want to dress on a given day, your choice of what to wear is shaped
by the social situation. You wear something different at home than you do when going to work, to
the beach, to a concert, or on a date. The range of what is considered acceptable attire in different

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
social settings is an example of hegemony—for
instance, a suit would be expected for a professional conference whereas a bathing suit would
be entirely inappropriate (compare, for instance,
Figures 2 and 3). An individual’s choice within the
culturally defined range of appropriate options is
an example of how agency—an individual’s ability to act according to his or her own will—is
constrained by hegemony. Getting dressed is an
example of an everyday performance of culture.
When Jayden and Dakota paid extra attention
to their appearance in anticipation of their date,
they demonstrated—performed—their interest
in pursuing a romantic relationship.
On the surface, our everyday performances
probably seem inconsequential. A single failed
performance may lead to an unfulfilling evening
but usually does not have long-lasting consequences. However, when we look at patterns of
everyday performances, we can learn much about
a culture and how members of groups are expected to behave and present themselves to others.
The subfield of visual anthropology is based on
the notion that “culture can be seen and enacted
through visible symbols embedded in behavior,
gestures, body movements, and space use.”11

Presentation of Self
Sociologist Erving Goffman coined the phrase presentation of self to refer to management of the
impressions others have of us.12 People adopt particular presentations of self for many reasons. A couple who aspires to be upwardly mobile, for example, may subsist on ramen noodles in the privacy of
their apartment while spending conspicuously large amounts of money on fine food and wine in the
company of people they want to impress. A political candidate from a very wealthy family might don
work clothes and affect a working class accent to appeal to voters from that demographic or make a
political appearance at a “working class” bar or pub rather than a country club. In many cases, people
are not being intentionally deceptive when they adopt such roles. It is normal to act differently at
home, at school, and at work; behavior is based on the social and cultural context of each situation.
Goffman thus notes that impression management is at times intentional and at other times is a subconscious response to our enculturation.
Goffman uses theatrical terms to discuss impression management when distinguishing front and
back spaces. Front spaces are arenas in which we carefully construct and control the audience’s perception of the actors while back spaces are private zones where actors can drop those pretenses (see
Figure 4). The front includes the setting—the physical makeup of the stage, including the furniture,
décor, and other props, that figuratively, if not literally, set the stage for a social interaction.13 For

Performance

5

example, a restaurant and a church are both designed to seat tens or
even hundreds of people and sometimes serve wine, but they are easily
identified by how the seating is arranged, the kind of music played, and
the artwork on the walls. Thus, presentations of the self also tend to be
defined in part by the physical environment. Waiters adopt their role
when they step into the restaurant and step out of those roles when
they leave at the end of their shifts.
Another important component of these performances is the personal front: aspects of one’s costume that are part of the actor’s body
or worn in close association with it.14 Clothing, physical characteristics,
comportment, and facial expressions all contribute to one’s
personal front. Some of these traits, such as height, are unlikely to change from one performance to the next. Others,
such as a priest’s collar, a doctor’s white lab coat, a ballroom
dancer’s dress, and a waiter’s convivial smile, can be changed
at will (see Figure 5). Changes in the personal front affect the
audience’s interpretation and understanding of the role
played by the individual and their beliefs about the “actor’s”
sincerity.
The match between the setting and one’s
personal front helps the audience quickly—
and often accurately—understand the roles
played by the actors in front of them. But
each actor’s performance still must live up
to the audience’s expectations, and a mismatch between expectation and execution
can result in the actor being viewed as a
failure. Take the example of the college professor. She could be a leading expert in her
field with encyclopedic knowledge of the
course topic, but if she stutters, speaks too
softly, or struggles to answer questions quickly, her students may underestimate her expertise because
her performance of an expert failed.
In some roles, the effort to manage an impression is largely invisible to the audience. Imagine, for
example, a security guard at a concert. If everything goes well, the security guard will not have to
break up any fights or physically remove anyone from the concert. If a fight does break out, a small

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

individual trained in martial arts might be best-suited to diffusing the situation, but security personnel are often large individuals who have an imposing presence, a personal front that matches the
public’s expectations. A security guard could easily keep an eye on things while sitting still but instead
usually stands with arms folded sternly across the chest or walks purposefully around the perimeter
to make her presence known. She may make a show of craning her neck for a better view of certain
areas even if they are not difficult to see. These overt performances of a security guard’s competence
are not necessary for the job, but their visibility discourages concert attendees from misbehaving.
Social actors differ in the degree to which they believe in both 1) the social role in question, and
2) their individual ability to performance that specific role. Those who Goffman called “sincere”
performers are both confident in their ability to play the role and believe in the role itself. A shaman,
for example, who believes wholeheartedly that she has been called to heal the members of her community is likely to both believe in the role of a shaman and in her particular ability to fulfill that role.
Some begin as sincere performers but later become cynical. Religious roles sometimes fall into this
category; the performer loses some degree of sincerity as the religious ceremonies are demystified.15
Others are cynical in the beginning but grow into their roles, eventually becoming sincere. This is
often the case with someone new to a profession. In the beginning, she may feel like a fraud due to
lack of experience and worry about being discovered. Over time, the individual’s confidence grows
until the role feels natural.
Case Study: VH1’s “The Pickup Artist”
The popularity of makeover television shows in recent years suggests that there is significant interest in learning to present an idealized version of oneself to others. In 2007, VH1
produced a reality show called “The Pickup Artist” that focused on men who experienced
difficulty talking to women or who repeatedly found themselves viewed by women as “just
friends” rather than as potential romantic partners. At the beginning of the season, the
men were dropped off at a new house in a bus that said “Destination: Manhood” on the
front, suggesting that their performance of masculinity was somehow lacking. The show’s
host was an author and self-proclaimed pickup artist named Mystery who had overcome
challenges connecting with women and was there to share his hard-earned knowledge
with others. In the initial episode, the men were filmed in a club as they approached women. Oblivious to the cues the women were sending them, all of the contestants blundered
through painfully awkward social interactions in which several of the women eventually just walked away. Behind the scenes, Mystery and fellow pickup artists observed and
commented on the contestants’ attire, their approaches, and their conversation strategies.
After diagnosing the contestants’ “problems” interacting with women, Mystery taught them
specific strategies for things like “opening a set” (initiating a conversation) and “the number
close” (securing a woman’s phone number). Though presented as a competitive reality
show with one contestant ultimately being named “Master Pickup Artist” and receiving
$50,000 to invest in his new identity, the show also revealed the level of performance expected within front-space areas such as nightclubs and how they differed from back-space
areas such as the communal house, where contestants were (presumably) able to relax
without having to micromanage their presentations of self.

Performance

7

Performance of Gender
As you may recall from the Gender and Sexuality chapter, gender is defined by culture rather than
by biology. Gender theorist Judith Butler’s term “gender performativity” references the idea that
gender as a social construct is created through individual performances of gender identity. Butler’s
key point, published originally in 1990 and expanded in 1993, is that an act is seen as gendered
through ongoing, stylized repetitions.16 In other words, while we all make specific choices—such as
how Jayden and Dakota chose to dress for their date—people doing things in patterned ways over
time results in certain versions being typified as “male” or “female.” Phrases such as “act like a man”
or “throw like a girl” are good examples. Socially, we define certain types of behavior as typical of men
and women and culturally code that behavior as a gendered representation. Thus, specific individuals
are seen as doing things in a particularly (or stereotypically) masculine or feminine way. How do you
know how “men” and “women” are supposed to behave? What makes one way of sitting, standing, or
talking a “feminine” one and another a “masculine” one? The answer is that definitions of masculine
and feminine vary with the socio-cultural milieus, but in every case, how people commonly do things
constitutes gender in everyday life.
In many ways, the notion that gender is created and replicated through patterned behavior is
an expansion of Marcel Mauss’ classic idea that the very movements of our bodies are culturally
learned and performed.17 Walking and swimming may seem to be natural body movements, but
those movements differ in individual cultures and one must learn to walk or swim according to the
norms of the culture. We also learn to perform gender. If you showed up to the first day of class and
all of the men in the class who had facial hair wore sundresses, you would notice and be surprised or
confused. Why? Because, as Butler pointed out, gender is constructed through patterns of activity,
and a bearded man in a sundress deviates from the expected pattern of male attire. While this is a
particularly obvious example, the mechanism is the same for much more subtle expectations regarding everything from how you walk and talk to your taste in clothing and your hobbies. In Western
contexts, for instance, athletic prowess is typically coded as masculine. But as Iris Marion Young
noted, it is impossible to throw like a girl without learning what that means.18 The phrase is not
meant to refer to the skills of pitcher Mo’ne Davis who, at thirteen years old, became the first female
Little League player to appear on the cover of Sports Illustrated in August 2014.19 Young’s point, by
extension, is twofold: 1) “girls” only throw differently from “boys” insofar as they are taught to throw
differently; and 2) what counts as throwing like a girl or a boy is a learned evaluation. Taking the
idea a step further, several scholars looked at performance of gender in a variety of sports, including
women’s bodybuilding, figure skating, and competitive ballroom dancing. In each case, some aspect
of femininity is over-performed through blatant makeup and costuming to compensate for the overt
physicality of the sport, which is at odds with stereotypical views of femininity.20
As anthropologist Margaret Mead first publicized more than 80 years ago, what counts as culturally appropriate conduct for men and women is quite different across cultural settings.21 More
broadly, Serena Nanda provided an updated survey of cross-cultural gender diversity.22 Two issues are
particularly important: 1) the Western concept of binary gender is far from universal (or accurate);
and 2) all behaviors are performed within—and hence contingent upon—specific contexts. For example, Nanda’s work in India documents the ability to perform a third gender.23 Similarly, Gilbert
Herdt’s work among the Sambia in Papua New Guinea counters the idea of sexual orientation as
fixed (e.g., heterosexual, bisexual, homosexual) and provides a counter-example in which personal
sexuality varies for boys and men by stage of life.24 Perhaps the most compelling case for performance

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

of gender is the Brazilian Travesti, transgendered male prostitutes who, despite having female names,
clothing, language, and even bodies achieved through silicone injections and female hormones, identify themselves as men.25 These cases demonstrate that sexuality is different from gender and that
gender, sexual orientation, and sexuality are performed in daily life and at moments of heightened
importance such as pride parades.
Case Study: Small Town Beauty Pageants
Oh to be the Milan Melon Queen, the Reynoldsburg Tomato Queen, or even the Circleville
Pumpkin Queen, these are the dreams that childhood are made of!
Beauty pageants provide communities with opportunities to articulate the norms of appropriate femininity for the contestants and spectators. Pageant contestants are judged on
their ability to perform specific markers of conventional femininity. In local pageants associated with community festivals (i.e., winners do not progress to larger regional and national competitions), contestants are expected to “perform . . . a local or small town version” of
this ideal according to performance-studies scholar Heather Williams.26 In these settings,
success is predicated on demonstrating one’s poise and confidence as a representative
of the community.27 Those competing in regional, state, and national competitions like
Miss America often spend years being groomed for competition and developing a stage
presence meant to transcend small town ideals of femininity. A striking difference between
the national pageants and many local ones is the swimsuit competition in the national pageants. Perhaps local organizers are reticent to objectify young women from their own communities or because of small town conservatism. Anthropologist Robert Lavenda points
out that a town may not be seeking to crown the most beautiful contestant and instead
seeks the one who will best represent the community and its values.28 Judges evaluate
contestants not on their physical attractiveness per se but on how well their “presentation
of self” aligns with the community’s views of who they are.
Lavenda identified several characteristics shared by contestants. Though the competitions are generally open to women age 17 to 21, the majority who competed had just finished high school, making them all part of the same cohort leaving childhood and entering
adulthood. All had been extremely active in extracurricular activities and were pursuing
post-secondary education. Furthermore, because they needed sponsors to compete, the
local business community had vetted all in some way. While contestants at the national level have private coaches and train independently for competitions, contestants in local pageants often work together for weeks or months before the festival, learning how to dress,
walk on stage, and do hair and makeup. The result is a homogenized presentation of self
that fits with the community’s expectations, and the ideal contestant represents “a golden
mean of accomplishment that appears accessible to all respectable girls of her class in
her town and other similar small towns.”29 If the winner chosen does not represent those
qualities or behaves counter to the prevailing values of the community, the audience often
becomes upset, sometimes alleging corruption in the judging.30 While the competition is
ostensibly about the contestants and their ability to perform a certain ideal of femininity, it
also demonstrates “the ability of small towns to produce young women who are bright, attractive, ambitious, and belong—or expect to belong—to a particular social category.”31 At
least during the competition, unsuccessful performances of the feminine ideal are pushed
out of sight and mind.32 This, the community tries to show, is what our women are like.

Performance

9

Social Drama as Performance
Goffman used a theatrical metaphor to analyze how individuals change their presentations of self
based on the scenic backdrop—front stage versus backstage. Anthropologist Victor Turner was more
interested in the cast of characters and how their actions, especially during times of conflict, mirrored
the rise and fall of action in a play.33 As already noted, everyday life is comprised of a series of performances, but some moments stand out as more dramatic or theatrical than others. When a social
interaction goes sufficiently awry, tensions arise, and the social actors involved may want to make sure
that others understand precisely how expected social roles were breached. Turner calls these situations
“metatheater,” and they are most clearly seen in and described as social dramas: “units of aharmonic
or disharmonic social process, arising in conflict situations.”34
A social drama consists of four phases: breach, crisis, redress or remedial procedures, and either
reintegration or recognition and legitimation of an irreparable schism.35 A breach occurs when an
individual or subgroup within a society breaks a norm or rule that is sufficiently important to maintenance of social relations. Following the breach, other members of the community may be drawn
into the conflict as people begin to take sides. This is the crisis phase of the social drama. Such crises
often reignite tensions that have been dormant within the society.
The redressive or remedial procedures used can take a number of forms. It is a reflexive period in
which community members take stock of who they are, their communal values, and how they arrived
at the conflict. The procedures used during this phase may be private, such as an elder offering sage
advice to the parties centrally involved in the conflict. Other procedures are public, such as protests
in the town square, formal speeches, and public trials. The Salem witch trials are an example of a
public means of redress. This phase can also include payment of reparations or some form of sacrifice.
The final phase takes one of two forms. If the redressive actions were successful, the community
will reintegrate and move beyond the schism (at least until another breach occurs). If the redressive
actions were not successful, the community will fracture along the lines identified during the crisis
phase. In smaller societies characterized by a high degree of mobility, individuals may physically
move away from one another. In other groups, the two camps may erect barriers to prevent interactions. Social dramas are important events in communities and can be source material for other kinds
of performances such as narrative retellings and commemorative songs and plays, all of which further
legitimize the outcome of the social drama.36
Case Study: Establishing a New Capoeira Group
Capoeira is an Afro-Brazilian martial art that combines music, dance, and acrobatics with
improvisational sparring. The traditional bearers of capoeira kept it alive despite persecution from the colonial Portuguese government and the Brazilian government until the
mid-1930s. Even after that date, it was mostly associated with marginalized segments of
the population. However, in the 1970s, several Brazilian capoeiristas began demonstrating
and teaching their art abroad. This sparked international interest in capoeira and demand
for teachers in nations such as the United States continues. In many cases, the teachers
are apprentices to more established mestres (masters) in Brazil and maintain ongoing
relationships with them.
While the teachers may continue to operate satellite groups under the primary mestre’s
direction for years, tensions can erupt between a mestre in Brazil and the teachers abroad.
This is precisely what happened with a group referred to here as Grupo Cultural Brasileiro

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
(GCP). The mestre of GCP authorized one of his top students to begin teaching capoeira
classes in a midwestern U.S. state. Eventually, demand for the classes grew, allowing the
teacher to operate classes in two towns in the state, and two of his students were given the
opportunity to start classes in new locations. All of the satellite groups were affiliated with
the GCP; individuals wore shirts with the GCP logo and the mestre periodically visited the
United States to give classes to the American students. Unbeknownst to most members
of the group, the teacher and mestre had a falling out after one of the visits. The mestre
had asked his teacher for a small sum of money (approximately $2,000) to pay for some
repairs on the primary training facility in Brazil. The teacher agreed that it was a worthwhile
expenditure but insisted that they had to discuss it with the U.S.-based board of directors
before he could send the funds. Feeling that his authority was being slighted, the mestre
demanded that certain individuals who he viewed as obstacles be removed from the board,
and when the teacher explained that this was not possible according to the group’s bylaws,
the mestre demanded that the group stop wearing the GCP logo. This disagreement constituted a breach under Turner’s model.
Several weeks later, an emergency board meeting was called to determine the proper
course of action. In response, the mestre called the teacher’s protégés who were already
teaching on their own and essentially asked them to take sides. The students were made
aware of this crisis when, at one of their weekly classes, they were told to turn their t-shirts
inside out so the logo would not show, and thereafter, they were not permitted to wear the
shirts.
To resolve the conflict, the board, teacher, and mestre considered mediation, and the
mestre and teacher spent considerable time talking about to various members of the community. These efforts at remediation failed, resulting in a schism. The students in the Midwest convened with the teacher, discussed the group’s values, and chose a new name and
symbol to represent the group in the capoeira community at large. Now, nearly ten years
later, the two groups continue to operate independently.

CONSTITUTING SOCIAL REALITY
In many cases, performances produce social realities. Imagine, for example, a political protest song
that moves people to action, resulting in overthrow of a government regime. Similarly, performance
can provide people with a template for action. For instance, people may model their relationships
after ones they observe on television, and famous quotations from films get absorbed into everyday
use and language. However, some performances stand out as more likely to shape social reality than
others.

Performativity
Many performances are accomplished without words—mime and dance are two obvious examples. Often, though, language is used instrumentally to accomplish a specific task. Many utterances
are simply descriptive (e.g., “that was a great concert!”) while others are actions that bring about an
outcome by virtue of being spoken. To distinguish between utterances that do something and those
that merely describe, linguist J. L. Austin coined the term performativity. For example, compare
these sentences:

Performance

11

We hereby bequeath our vast fortune to our darling daughter.
The girl inherited money from her parents when they died.
The first is performative because it causes something to happen; it transfers money between persons.
The second is merely descriptive; it shares information that may or may not be factual about an event
that occurred independently.
A person making a performative utterance must be genuine in the intent to carry it out and have
it ratified by interlocutors—co-participants in the speech event. For example, a mother might say
to her son, “I promise we will get ice cream after the dentist appointment.” Making such a promise
is a performative utterance because it creates a social contract, but her son may or may not believe
her based on his prior experience. Likewise, if one makes a bet, the other party must agree to the
terms. The bet is only on if the second party agrees.
Performative utterances commonly occur at wedding ceremonies.
Now that you have pledged your mutual vows, I, by virtue of the authority vested in me by the
state, declare you to be wed according to the ordinance of the law.
Although wedding ceremonies typically involve numerous performances, such as a procession, songs,
and lifting of the veil, the proclamation is the culminating moment in which the two individuals are
legally joined in matrimony. Without these words being spoken, the ceremony is incomplete.
In addition to the performative declaration, the proclamation includes another important element: the authority granted by the state to make the declaration. Without this authority, a legal marriage does not occur. So a group of children playing can stage a wedding and say the exact same words
and no one is married. In Austin’s terminology, the unofficial wedding proclamation is an “unhappy
utterance.”37 It is a failed performance because the parties involved did not have sufficient authority
to bring the action to reality. A parallel example is a lawyer declaring a defendant guilty, something
only a judge or jury (in the correct setting) can declare with authority. The ability of an utterance to
shape an individual or a society depends on the words said, the context in which they are said, and
the legitimacy and authority of the speaker. Performative utterances occur in many situations and are
particularly common in rituals.

Ritual as Performance
Consider a Cuban woman who is experiencing disharmony at home. Her husband is abusive, she
struggles to put food on the table, and one of her children left home and is living on the street. To
find a solution, she consults a priest of the syncretic religion Santería. In the consultation room is an
altar with candles, statues of gods and goddesses, and bowls filled with food offerings. The priest is
dressed in white, as is customary, and wears several beaded necklaces that correspond to the deities
with whom he is most closely associated. To use Goffman’s phrasing, the setting and his personal
front are congruent, assuring the woman that the consultation is genuine. To perform the divination, the priest tosses cowry shells on the table and asks the woman a series of questions based on
what the shells reveal. He listens to her answers, throws the shells again, and fine-tunes his questions
until he is able to focus on the crux of her distress. The flow of their dialog is similar to that seen in
Western-style psychological counseling, but the ritual specialist performs his expertise using religious
paraphernalia.

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

The Religion chapter introduced the concept of rituals and explained several of their functions,
including rites of passage and of intensification. In this section, we call attention to rituals as an area
of interest to cultural anthropologists who deal with performances and highlight how performance
can be a useful lens for viewing and understanding secular and religious rituals. Obvious examples
of rituals that inform anthropologists about a culture are concerts, plays, and religious events, which
often portray cultural values and expectations, but rituals are involved in many other kinds of situations, such as trying and sentencing someone accused of a crime in the redressive phase of a social
drama. The key here is that rituals are inherently performative. Merely talking about or watching
a video recording of one does not do anything whereas participating in a ritual makes and marks a
social change. Whether stoic or extravagant, a ritual is focused on efficacy rather than entertainment,
and its performance gives shape to the social surrounding.
Case Study: Performing Ethnography
Ethnographies are written to engage readers in the lived experience of a particular group,
but the reader cannot actually feel what it is like to live in a Ndembu village or smell herbs
being prepared for an Afro-Brazilian Candomblé ceremony. Consequently, Victor and
Edith Turner created a teaching method called “performing ethnography” to help students
gain a deeper, kinesthetic understanding of what it is like to participate in the ritual life of
another culture.38 Students prepare for the ritual by reading relevant ethnographies and
often meet with anthropologists who have done work with the people who performed it.
To prepare for the ritual, the students must seek additional information about the culture
so they can understand how to behave appropriately. The process also encourages them
to think critically about the presentation of information in ethnographies, especially if gaps
in the author’s descriptions become apparent. Modeling an experiment after the Turners’
example, Dr. Griffith had students perform a Christian American wedding ceremony. Obviously, no single ceremony can be representative of all weddings within that tradition,
but the students came away from the experience with a better sense of what it is like to
participate in that ritual and how the various roles move the couple from one social status
to another. As the Turners pointed out, a serious ritual can be conducted within what they
called a “play frame”39 that negates the action otherwise brought by the ritual. So even
though the woman who played the role of minister in the classroom “wedding” was in fact
ordained, her words did not marry the individuals. The Turners have also used this method
to allow students to better understand rituals such as coming of age ceremonies. Whether
one can truly understand what it is like to be an initiate in such an important ritual without
firsthand experience is doubtful, but the experience gives students an opportunity to reflect
on their feelings as they participate in the rituals, providing the Turners with new hypotheses to explain how and why the rituals bridge childhood and adulthood that can be tested
through further fieldwork.40

Political Performances
Performances have serious consequences for social reality and are often used to reinforce the status
quo. For example, children in the Hitler Youth organization during World War II were encouraged
to sing songs related to Germany’s supremacy and Hitler’s vision for an Aryan nation. Requiring
children to give voice to this ideology brought them in line with the goals of those in power. Indeed,

Performance

13

many civil rituals are part of such hegemonic discourses in which the basic parameters of social
thought and action are unquestioningly (and usually invisibly) dictated by those in authority. Singing
the national anthem before a sporting event is another example.
On the flipside, performances can be used to resist the status quo. These kinds of performances
can be as subtle as a rolling of eyes behind a professor’s back or as grand as an outright political uprising. Pete Seeger’s song “Bring Them Home,” which protested the United States’ involvement in the
Vietnam War, is a good example. Consider these lyrics: “Show those generals their fallacy . . . They
don’t have the right weaponry . . . For defense, you need common sense . . . They don’t have the right
armaments.” Those lines provide a clear indication of the singer’s political position, but repetition
of the chorus “bring them home, bring them home” invites the audience to sing along, echoing and
amplifying the singer’s message and thus increasing its political force.

BOUNDED PERFORMANCES
Although much of our interaction with others throughout the day involves performing various
roles, there are moments of heightened reflexivity that are particularly recognizable as being commonly understood as “performances,” such as plays and concerts, which are special because they are
marked off from everyday activities. In other words, they are bounded and analyzable. They are also
short-lived. Even when such performances are fixed on film or through movement notation (such as
Labanotation script, a system for recording dance movements), the interaction and feedback between
an audience and the performer(s) happens “in the moment” only once. Because they are known
and understood to be bounded, they often serve as moments of heightened consciousness. Jayden
and Dakota, introduced at the start of this chapter, paid close attention to their first date because
they knew that it was the only first date they could have together. Within such a state of heightened
awareness, performers essentially hold a mirror up to society and force audience members to come to
terms with themselves—as they are, as they once were, or as they could become.

Training/Rehearsal
Individuals such as shamans who are experts in performing rituals spend years mastering their
crafts. Unfortunately, performance scholars have largely focused on final performances and ignored performers’ preparations. Scholar Richard Schechner, a pioneer in the study of performance, has advocated for a more holistic study
of performance production that includes the
training, workshops, rehearsals, warm-ups, performance, cool-down, and aftermath.41 The steps
involved vary according to the culture in which
the performance occurs.42
Rehearsal and training instill an embodied
understanding of the art’s form and technique in
the performer, and adherence to the forms gives
performances their versatility and longevity.43
Techniques thus serve as a conservative force
within a performance genre as each generation

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

of performers learns to replicate the postures and movements of their predecessors.44 We do not suggest that performance traditions do not change. Indeed, as individuals master the form and become
legitimate bearers of tradition, they have more and more latitude to play with the form and introduce
innovations that may, in turn, be reproduced in the future by their protégés.
Some training requires a lifetime. For example, in the Japanese performance of Noh—a traditional
music and dance performance featuring masked actors (see Figure 6)—training typically begins when
an actor is around five years old.45 Because the actors have, in the process of their training, learned all
of the necessary roles, there is little need for a cast to rehearse a drama in its entirety prior to performing it. This kind of training is also seen in classical Indian dance and other forms in which adherence
to tradition is the norm. In other cases, audiences expect a continually changing repertoire of pieces
that require the cast to rehearse extensively prior to the performance. Ballet dancers, for example,
undergo extensive training for a relatively brief career, and the novelty of some performance pieces
requires intensive study of new choreography prior to opening night.
The pressure felt by performers during shows are not present during rehearsals, which typically
allow for an element of playfulness.46 Schechner thus likened rehearsals to rites of separation that
occur within rituals.47 In his view, rehearsals are removed in
space and time from the rest of society and allow performers
to acquire the skills and knowledge needed to create a transformative, liminal experience for themselves and the audience
when the performance is given. Thus, the spaces in which training and rehearsals take place are also important. Writing of the
ballet studio (see Figure 7), scholar Judith Hamera, who studies
performance, noted that “as surely as ballets are made in these
spaces, the spaces themselves are remade in the process, becoming, perhaps through the repetition of this epitome of classical
technique, a kind of Eden both inside and outside of everyday
space and time.”48 This “construction” can be both a concrete
process (the floors are scuffed by the dancers’ feet and the barres
bowed by the weight of novices learning to plié) and a metaphorical transformation. The sacrifices of time and energy by
the dancers sanctify the space. Even when the rehearsal space is
merely a parking lot, empty field, or someone’s living room, the
actions and intentions of those within the space give it meaning.

Framing Performance
Imagine sitting down with a group of young children. Their attention is focused on their teacher,
who sits at the front of the room. There are many clues that it is story time—the children have moved
from their desks to the floor and been told to sit quietly with their hands in their laps. But the unequivocal sign is the teacher saying “Once upon a time, in a land far, far away . . .” This is a familiar
formula for people who grew up in American culture. It tells the audience that a fairy tale is about
to begin and that the speaker is assuming responsibility for a suitable performance of the tale. With
such a simple phrase, the participants in this interaction are cast in specific roles with clearly defined
responsibilities. How will the story end? Most of us already know. The protagonist(s) will live “happily ever after.” This too is a formulaic phrase, one that signals conclusion of the performance. These

Performance

15

are what Richard Bauman calls framing devices: cues that “signify that the ensuing text is a bounded
unit which may be objectified.”49
Such frames are metacommunicative. They offer layered information about how to interpret the
ensuing message. Examples of framing devices include codes, figurative language, parallelisms, paralinguistic features, formulas, appeals to tradition, and even disclaimers of performance.50 Codes are
associated with particular types of performances. For example, a performance in which lines includes
the words thee and thou signal to listeners that the performance involves religious speech or other old
texts such as Shakespearian plays. Figurative language refers to illustrative words and phrases such as
similes and metaphors that convey meaning in just a few words. Calling someone “a wolf in sheep’s
clothing” alludes to a predator masked as prey, and no one familiar with the idiom would imagine this
as a reference to a four-legged predator wearing a wool costume. Parallelism is repetition of sounds,
words, or phrases used as a memory device or to build momentum. President Obama’s repetition of
“Yes we can” in his campaign speeches is a good example of this. Paralinguistic features describe how
words are delivered, such as an auctioneer’s signature speed of delivery. Formulas are stock phrases
that give the audience information, such as “once upon a time” indicating that a story is beginning.
Appeals to tradition, such as saying “this is how my dad always tells the story,” not only frame a performance but place the performance in an intertextual (a more detailed discussion of intertextuality
follows) relationship with past performances. Finally, disclaimer of performance is denying that one
is competent to perform and calls attention to the fact that a performance is about to occur or just
occurred. These devices, used alone or in combination, give the audience the authority to judge the
performer and distinguish the performance from the flow of events that preceding and following it.

Meaning Making
Typically, when constructing the meanings of bounded performance events, three primary interests are involved: the author(s), the artist(s), and the audience. In each case, the composition of those
groups differs and the meaning of a performance can be quite different. Polysemy (derived from the
Greek words for “many” and “sign”) is used in anthropology to describe settings, situations, and symbols that convey multiple meanings. This is certainly the case for performance events since a single
form can be used in a variety of ways depending on the creators’ and/or performers’ intentions and
the audiences’ framework for receiving and interpreting the piece.51 If artists intentionally subvert
the author’s intentions, the audience could interpret a performance as ironic rather than sincere.
Similarly, if an audience fails to understand the author’s intent, the message can fall flat or be received
quite differently than intended by either the author or the performers.
The author of a performance and the artists who transform the author’s vision into a reality often
have ambiguous positions in society. They may be admired for their skill and feared for their ability to transform social realities and disrupt the status quo.52 The author and artist can be the same
individual (e.g., an author performing a monologue she wrote) or a group of artists can collectively
author a work (e.g., the performance group Pilobolus).53 Most commonly, an author or authors creates the work and one or more artists perform it. In a ballet, for example, a dancer’s role is to carry
out faithfully the vision of the choreographer, which may or may not happen. At times, artists in
a performance have only a vague sense of who the author is, as when individuals recite folktales or
proverbs that have been handed down across generations.
The audience consists of one or more individuals who cooperate with the performer(s) by temporarily suspending the normal communication rule of turn-taking and who gather specifically to ob-

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

serve the performance.54 Individuals come to a situation with unique background and experiences so
the audience does not receive a performance uniformly. Similarly, as part of the context of a performance, the audience participates in constructing its meaning. Audience members evaluate the performance based on the formal features of the genre, holding performers responsible for demonstrating competence in the genre.55 For example, different criteria are used to evaluate acting in a drama
versus a comedy. In in-person settings, artists are often influenced by the audience. A politician, for
example, may phrase key points differently depending on the audience or choose particular jokes that
will resonate with the demographic at hand in an effort to be judged positively.56 Adjustments may
be made spontaneously in response to the audience’s reaction to earlier material.
Linked to the audience, then, is the setting. Experiencing a performance of Romeo and Juliet outdoors under a tent is very different from experiencing the same play in a historic theater like The
Globe in London (a reproduction of the Elizabethan-era theater where many of William Shakespeare’s plays were staged). The setting is important not only for context but for access. Performances
in public parks or downtown squares (e.g. Figure 8) are accessible to all while performances at theaters and opera halls (e.g. Figure 9) are limited to people who have time and money to spend on such
luxuries. Similarly, and as discussed previously, visual cues in a performance space are often important signals that a performance is occurring. If you see a couple in a park arguing loudly, wildly gesticulating, and drawing bystanders into their conflict, you may have stumbled onto an avant-garde
theater production, but the lack of framing (no stage, curtains, or formal audience seats) makes the
scene ambiguous. It may be only a couple arguing.

Clearly, then, there are many possible outcomes of a performance. Some are staged simply for
entertainment, which is an important component of human life. Often, though, there are additional
motivations behind the creation and performance. For example, a performance can be used to assert
the distinctiveness of a particular ethnic group or to argue for racial harmony in a nation-state. Carla
Guerron-Montero described such performances in Panama, which gained its independence from Colombia in 1903.57 The United States assisted the Panamanian separatist movement and participated
in building the Panama Canal shortly thereafter. To distinguish themselves from Colombians and
from U.S. citizens in Panama, middle-class intellectuals in Panama have consistently looked to Spain
as the legitimate source of their identity. In this romanticized view, the ideal Panamanian is a rural,
Hispanic (Spanish and indigenous) peasant, and peasant forms of dress (the pollera) and music (the
tipica) are used to symbolize a unified national identity of pride in being a racial democracy. Along

Performance

17

those lines and as performed in numerous everyday actions, Panamanian national discourse holds
that mestizo (mixed) identity is normative, and they contrast themselves with other Latin American
countries that have racial inequalities. Still, because lived life is always more complex than any single
narrative, Afro-Panamanians still contend with discrimination.58
Case Study: Theater and Public Health Education
An approach known as Theater of the Oppressed was chiefly promoted by Augusto Boal,
who was in turn influenced by Paulo Freire’s work on liberator education among oppressed
peasants in Brazil. Boal used the term to refer to performances that engaged the audience in a way that transformed its members and influenced them to abolish oppressive
conditions in their societies. Though originally conceived as a political action, Theater of
the Oppressed has been applied to public education. Performance-studies scholar Dwight
Conquergood, for example, spent time in Thailand at the Ban Vinai refugee camp developing a health education program.59 He started a performance company composed of
Hmong refugees that used traditional cultural performances such as proverbs, storytelling,
and folksong to produce skits about health problems in the camp. Conquergood wanted
to avoid merely coopting local performance traditions and using them to essentially force
Western ways of thinking on the refugees, which would establish a hierarchical model
of education based on the idea that knowledge can simply be transferred from one who
knows to one who does not.60 He wanted to engage the refugees in a dialog about how
they could collectively improve the health conditions of the camp. Early on, the village was
threatened by a potential outbreak of rabies, and when instructed to bring their dogs to
sites around the camp for vaccination, the refugees did not comply because they did not
understand the urgency of the situation or how the vaccines would help. Conquergood’s
group of actors created a parade in which they dressed up as animals that were important
in the Hmong belief system and played music to catch the villagers’ attention. When people
came to see the parade, the chicken, an animal known for its divinatory powers, shared
information about rabies and the importance of vaccinating dogs. The parade was successful in convincing residents to vaccinate their dogs and provided an opportunity for the
villagers to give the actors constructive criticism about their performance. Their critiques
increased the cultural relevance of future performances and made the villagers more invested in the activities of the theater troupe, further increasing their likelihood of success.

Recontextualized Performances
Established performances (such as a ritual or festival) occur in new and changing contexts. In line
with Clifford Geertz’s understanding of cultures as “texts,” the term intertextuality describes the network of connections between original versions of a performance and cases in which the performance
is extracted from its social context and inserted elsewhere. The conventional relationship between
text and performance is that “the text is the permanent artifact, hand-written or printed, while the
performance is the unique, never-to-be-repeated realization or concretization of the text.”61 In the
anthropology of performance, a “text” is a symbolic work (literature, speech, painting, music, films,
and other works) that is interpretable by a community. It is the source material, and the relationship
between the text and a performance is mediated by many contextual factors, including previous experiences with the text, learning of the lines, rehearsals, directorial license.

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Folklorist and anthropologist Richard Bauman asked what storytellers accomplish by “explicitly
linking” their tales to prior versions of the source material.62 In short, Bauman found that linking
situates each performance within the web of relationships among performances, which in turn adds
to the performer’s credibility by demonstrating that the performer is connected in some way to the
other performers or at least is knowledgeable of past performances. For example, a man singing a
lullaby to his child might preface the song by explaining that it is one his father sang to him and
that his father’s father sang before him. This places the father in a genealogical relationship with past
performers and places the audience, his child, into that genealogy as well.
Alternatively, one can explicitly link a current performance to a prior one to invert what the audience knows about the past performance, as in a parody.63 In that case, anthropologists refer to how
significantly one departs from faithful replication of the original source as the intertextual gap.64 A
direct quotation of another’s words, such as a town crier relaying a king’s decree, has a narrow intertextual gap while a parody that references an original source to mock it, such as the 2014 film A
Million Ways to Die in the West or the 1974 film Blazing Saddles that both poked fun at Westerns, has
a large intertextual gap. Source material taken from one genre and used in another, such as a popular
proverb turned into a song lyric, also has a large intertextual gap. Deliberate manipulation of these
gaps—the recontextualization of source material—changes their role, significance, and impact in a
performance.
Case Study: Intertextuality and the Coloquio
Richard Bauman and Pamela Ritch studied a coloquio (formal conversation) of a nativity
play that has been performed in Mexico as far back as the sixteenth century.65 Although the
play is often associated with the Christmas season, Bauman and Ritch reported witnessing
its performance at the culmination of important community events in other seasons as well.
The plays are long, often lasting twelve to fourteen hours, and involve a significant number
of community members who volunteer their time to act, direct, and produce the spectacle.
After parts are assigned, the actors must learn their lines. The words are already familiar
to them as they have attended such plays since childhood, and the actors often model their
deliveries on presentations they witnessed in the past. Six or seven rehearsals typically
precede the formal public performance, and each is a full run-through with no opportunity
to stop and rework a scene viewed as poorly done. However, a prompter reads from the
script to assist the actors with their lines if necessary, thereby assuring a narrow intertextual gap. When relying on the prompter’s cues, the actors echo back the words, reinforcing
the narrow gap. One character is an exception. In the written script, the hermit is a pious
character. In the performance, however, the hermit is a comic figure. He rarely knows his
lines and thus relies on the prompter’s cues, but instead of echoing them back faithfully, he
intentionally substitutes words for comic effect. He alone is allowed to significantly depart
from the script, creating a large intertextual gap that introduces humor into the performance that is absent from the script—and in a way that is impossible to sustain across
multiple performances of the play if it were ever “frozen” into the script. A joke, after all, is
funny only so many times before becoming boring from repetition.

Performance

19

Performance Communities
Cultural performances are informed by the norms of one’s community of practice and signal
one’s membership in the community.66 Thus, the study of performance is not limited to what happens on a stage or within the limits of Bauman’s frames. Rather, studies of performance allow us
to see the environment in which the performance occurs as a space in which identity is formed by
both accommodating and resisting social norms even as they are being rehearsed and learned.67 In
large, industrialized societies, people often elect to become part of smaller communities of practice
around which they build their identities. Each of those communities has its own “folk geography,” a
term used by performance scholar Judith Hamera to describe the shared knowledge of where to shop
for dance-related paraphernalia and which medical practitioners in town best understand dancers’
bodies.68 Folk geographies are all-encompassing. They are global geographies that include historical
markers redolent with meaning for the community, the locations of key teachers and everything else
a practitioner needs to know to navigate the community.
Sociologist Howard Becker’s exploration of “art worlds” highlights how the obvious activity—
painting or playing a musical instrument, for example—is contingent on and contextualized by a
larger community that provided the materials, training, venues, and audiences for all such art practices. Wulff has extended this concept to the ballet world and by Marion to the ballroom and salsa
world.69 More than simply suggesting that performances happen within communities, the point is
that communities emerge and grow around specific performance practices. Indeed, for something to
become a genre rather than simply an individual variation, other people must become involved. New
styles emerge only when variations find an appreciative audience and then are copied or modified
by others. Over time, however, as a style grows in popularity and is shared more widely, broader and
deeper cultural elaborations may develop. This has been the case with salsa dancing, which is now
both a worldwide phenomenon and a local practice.70

Performance in the Age of Globalization
In this age of globalization, communications and interactions among people in vastly different
geographical locations have sped up and grown dramatically thanks to ever-faster and more-ubiquitous communication and transportation technologies. Globalization is not a new phenomenon but
has greatly intensified in recent decades, creating links between producers and consumers, artists and
audiences, which were not possible in the past. And as emphasized in this chapter, performance is a
multifaceted phenomenon that touches all aspects of social life. It is particularly relevant to the global
media-scape articulated by anthropologist Arjun Appadurai in which many forms of media flow
across national borders.71 Examples of the global media-scape include American teenagers watching
Bollywood movies produced in India, a Brazilian telenovela (soap opera) shown in Mozambique, and
a Prague newspaper sent to family members living and working in Saudi Arabia. Globalization also
helps explain why some performance genres that once were highly localized traditions, such as tango
(originally from Argentina) and samba (originally from Brazil), are now internationally recognized,
practiced, and celebrated.
In our modern globalized society, many performance genres have come unmoored from their
cultural origins. It is one thing to consume such performances as spectators, but it is another to participate in these performance communities, leading to questions of authenticity and appropriation.
For example, is it acceptable for a middle-class white American woman to perform an art like capoeira

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

(see the preceding case study) that was traditionally associated with poor Afro-Brazilian men? Some
in Afro-Brazilian communities view it as acceptable and embrace those willing to dedicate themselves to the art. Others are reluctant to adopt an inclusive philosophy, arguing that Afro-Brazilians
endured years of suffering in service of preserving their art and therefore deserve to retain control of
its future. Similar debates surround other performance genres with strong connections to ethnicity,
such as jazz, blues, hip-hop, and rap.
International interest in local forms of performance also raises questions about intellectual property. For example, the Mbuti people of central Africa’s forests believe that song is the appropriate
medium for communicating with the forest and alerting it to their needs.72 Song is also pleasurable
for the Mbuti and associated with social harmony.73 Thus, song in general and the hindewhu, a hootlike sound made with an indigenous musical instrument, in particular play important roles in the
worldview of the Mbuti and related groups. Recently, their music has been transported out of the
forest and into the mainstream, and anthropologist and ethnomusicologist Steven Feld has traced use
of the hindewhu to songs by Madonna (Sanctuary) and Herbie Hancock (Watermelon Man).74 Hancock apparently developed his song after hearing the hindewhu on an ethnomusicology recording
released in 1966. When asked about the appropriateness of using this signature sound out of context
and without permission, Hancock said “this is a brothers kind of thing,” implying that their shared
African ancestry allowed him to coopt the Mbuti’s musical heritage.75 The central issue is not whether
Hancock’s claim to shared heritage justifies his use of the hindewhu but whether people like the
Mbuti have a right to control the use, reproduction, and alteration of their cultural performances. As
world beat music grows in popularity and many indigenous peoples become savvier about protecting
their cultural and intellectual rights, these questions will be more pressing.
Another effect of globalization is the rise to new types of performances. For example, many performances are specifically staged for media consumption and distribution, such as photo opportunities
arranged by politicians and celebrities. Similarly, some performances no longer exist outside of a
media-related state, such as online-only campaigns, protests, and movements. Focusing on the performances regardless of the cultural configuration in which they occur allows anthropologists to more
fully understand these emerging forms and practices. All of culture changes constantly, at different
rates and in various ways, and performance is no exception. Amid ongoing expansion of modern
technologies, the significance of performance in globalized contexts is central to anthropology’s ultimate commitment to holistic understanding. As a technology or format becomes commonplace, new
options arise as people construct profiles and albums, build social networks across online and mobile
applications, and make, post, and share videos. These sites of personal presentation and social action
are all sites of cultural performance and performances of culture.

CONCLUSION
The band takes a final bow and exits the stage. The lights come up and people begin streaming out
of the auditorium. One performance ends but a multitude of others continues. The security guard
continues to present a picture of authority, ensuring orderly behavior. A woman smiles as a man
makes a show of opening the car door for her. And Jayden promises to call Dakota sometime next
week.
This chapter has highlighted the many different kinds of performance that interest anthropologists. Under anthropology’s holistic approach, performance connects to topics from many earlier

Performance

21

chapters, including rituals (Religion chapter) and gender (Gender and Sexuality chapter). As we
have shown, explicit attention to various performance-based frameworks allows anthropologists to
identify the learned and shared patterns of ideas and behaviors that constitute human experience
and living. We started the chapter by noting that performance can be many things at once, making
it important to so much of human cultural experiences. Cultural performances are the events that
most readily fit the Western notion of a performance: clearly defined moments of heightened salience
of some feature of a culture’s values or social structure. These performances call attention to issues
that might otherwise go unnoticed by audience members and consequently can inspire or instigate
action. Such performances also can preserve aspects of a culture or facilitate cultural revitalization.
Performing culture, on the other hand, refers to the many diverse ways in which individuals both
reflect and create cultural norms through daily activities, interactions, and behaviors. Culture does
not, indeed cannot, exist simply as an abstract concept. Rather, it arises from the patterned flows of
people’s lives—their ongoing performances.
Anthropologists who study performance are interested in many of the same topics as other anthropologists, including: gender, religion, rituals, social norms, and conflict. Performance provides
an alternative perspective for exploring and understanding those issues. Rather than studying rituals
from a structural-functional perspective, for example, anthropologists can focus on performance and
thereby better identify and understand theatrical structure and how communities use performance to
accomplish the work of rituals. In short, performance anthropologists are interested not only in the
products of social life but in the processes underlying it.
(P.S. Good luck Jayden and Dakota!)

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What is the difference between studying something that is performance and studying something
as a performance? Why is this distinction important?
2. What is the role of performance in reflecting social order and values on the one hand and
challenging these and leading to social change on the other? Provide examples of each.
3. Explain the relationship between performance and cultural constructions of gender.
4. How are descriptive and performative utterances different from each other, and what role to
each play in verbal performance?
5. What roles do performances play in everyday life, especially as these relate to hegemonic
discourses?

GLOSSARY
Agency: An individual’s ability to make independent choices and act upon his/her will.
Community of practice: a group of people who engaged in a shared activity or vocation, such as
dance or medicine.
Cultural Performance: A performance such as a concert or a play.
Discourse: Widely circulated knowledge within a community.
Hegemonic discourses: Situations in which thoughts and actions are dictated by those in authority.
Hegemony: Power so pervasive that it is rarely acknowledged or even recognized, yet informs everyday actions.

22

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Performativity: Words or actions that cause something to happen.
Performing culture: Everyday words and actions that reflect cultural ideas and can be studied by
anthropologists as a means of understanding a culture.
Personal front: Aspects of one’s clothing, physical characteristics, comportment, and facial expressions that communicate an impression to others.
Polysemy: Settings, situations, and symbols that convey multiple meanings.
Presentation of self: The management of the impressions others have of us.
Reflexivity: Awareness of how one’s own position and perspective impact what is observed and how
it is evaluated.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Dr. Lauren Miller Griffith is an assistant professor of anthropology
at Texas Tech University. Her research agenda focuses on the intersections of performance, tourism, and education in Brazil, Belize, and the
USA. Specifically, she focuses on the Afro-Brazilian martial art capoeira and how non-Brazilian practitioners use travel to Brazil, the art’s
homeland, to increase their legitimacy within this genre. Dr. Griffith’s
current interests include the links between tourism, cultural heritage,
and sustainability in Belize. She is particularly interested in how indigenous communities decide whether or not to participate in the growing tourism industry and the long-term effects of these decisions.
Dr. Jonathan S. Marion is an associate professor in the Department of Anthropology and a member
of the Gender Studies Steering Committee at the University of Arkansas, and the author of Ballroom:
Culture and Costume in Competitive Dance (2008), Visual Research: A Concise Introduction to Thinking Visually (2013, with Jerome Crowder), and Ballroom Dance and Glamour (2014). Currently the President of the Society for Humanistic Anthropology,
and a Past-president of the Society of Visual Anthropology, Dr.
Marion’s ongoing research explores the interrelationships between performance, embodiment, gender, and identity, as well as
issues of visual research ethics, theory, and methodology.

NOTES
1. Richard Bauman and Pamela Ritch, “Informing Performance: Producing the Coloquio in Tierra Blanca,” Oral Tradition 9:2
(1994): 255.
2. David M. Guss, The Festive State: Race, Ethnicity, and Nationalism as Cultural Performance (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000), 9.
3. Milton Singer, “The Great Tradition in a Metropolitan Center: Madras,” Journal of American Folklore (1958): 347–388.
4. Singer, “The Great Tradition in a Metropolitan Center,” 351.
5. See Anya Peterson Royce, Anthropology of the Performing Arts: Artistry, Virtuosity, and Interpretation in Cross-Cultural Perspective (Walnut Creek, Altamira Press, 2004).
6. Victor Turner, The Anthropology of Performance (New York: Paj Publications, 1987).
7. Richard Schechner, Between Theater and Anthropology (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011).
8. Richard Bauman, Verbal Art as Performance (Long Grove: Waveland Press, 1984).

Performance

23

9. Turner, Anthropology of Performance, 23.
10. Laura A. Lewis, Chocolate and Corn Flour: History, Race, and Place in the Making of “Black” Mexico (Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 2012).
11. Jay Ruby, Picturing Culture: Explorations of Film and Anthropology (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2000): 240.
12. Erving Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (New York, Anchor Books, 1959).
13. Goffman, Presentation of Self.
14. Ibid,, 24.
15. Ibid.
16. Judith Butler, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (New York: Routledge, 1990); Judith Butler, Bodies
That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex” (New York: Routledge, 1993).
17. Marcel Mauss, “Techniques of the Body” Economy and Society 2:1 (1973): 70–89.
18. Iris Marion Young, “Throwing Like a Girl: A Phenomenology of Feminine Body Comportment Motility and Spatiality”
Human Studies 3:2 (1980): 137–156.
19. Sports Illustrated August 25 (2014), Cover.
20. Several authors have discussed the relationship between femininity and sport. On bodybuilding, see Anne Bolin, “Muscularity and Femininity: Women Bodybuilders and Women’s Bodies in Culturo-Historical Context,” in Fitness as Cultural
Phenomenon, ed. Karina A. E. Volkwein (New York: Waxmann Münster, 1998). On figure skating, see Abigail M. Feder-Kane,
“A Radiant Smile from the Lovely Lady,” in Reading Sport: Critical Essays on Power and Presentation, ed. Susan Birell and Mary
G. McDonald (Boston: Northeastern University Press, 2000). On ballroom, see Jonathan S. Marion, Ballroom: Culture and
Costume in Competitive Dance (Oxford: Berg, 2008) and Ballroom Dance and Glamour (London: Bloomsbury, 2014). See also
Lisa Disch and Mary Jo Kane, “When a Looker Is Really a Bitch: Lisa Olson, Sport, and the Heterosexual Matrix,” in Reading
Sport: Critical Essays on Power and Presentation, ed. Susan Birell and Mary G. McDonald (Boston: Northeastern University
Press, 2000).
21. Margaret Mead, Sex and Temperament: In Three Primitive Societies (New York: Perennial, 2001[1935]).
22. Serena Nanda, Gender Diversity: Crosscultural Variation (Long Grove: Waveland, 2014).
23. Serena Nanda, Neither Man nor Woman: The Hijras of India (New York: Cengage, 1998).
24. Gilbert Herdt, The Sambia: Ritual, Sexuality, and Change in Papua New Guinea (New York: Cengage, 2005).
25. Don Kulik, Travesti: Sex, Gender, and Culture among Brazilian Transgendered Prostitutes (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1998).
26. Heather A. Williams, “Miss Homegrown: The Performance of Food, Festival, and Femininity in Local Queen Pageants”
(Ph.D. dissertation, Bowling Green State University, 2009), 3.
27. Ibid.
28. Robert H. Lavenda, “Minnesota Queen Pageants: Play, Fun, and Dead Seriousness in a Festive Mode” Journal of American
Folklore (1988): 168–175.
29. Lavenda, “Queen Pageants,” 173.
30. Ibid.
31. Ibid., 171.
32. Ibid.
33. Turner, Anthropology of Performance.
34. Ibid., 74.
35. Ibid.
36. Ibid.
37. John Langshaw Austin, How to Do Things with Words (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1975).
38. Victor Turner and Edith Turner, “Performing Ethnography,” in The Anthropology of Performance, ed. Victor Turner (New
York: PAJ Publications, 1987): 139–155.
39. Turner and Turner, “Performing Ethnography,” 142.
40. Ibid.
41. Schechner, Between Theatre and Anthropology.
42. Bauman and Ritch, “Informing Performance.”
43. Royce, Performing Arts.
44. Royce, Performing Arts, 44.
45. Schechner, Between Theatre and Anthropology.
46. Bauman and Ritch, “Informing Performance.”
47. Schechner, Between Theatre and Anthropology.
48. Judith Hamera, “Performance, Performativity, and Cultural Poiesis in Practices of Everyday Life,” in The Sage Handbook
of Performance Studies, eds. D. Soyini Madison and Judith Hamera, (Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, Inc., 2006):50–51.
49. Bauman, Others’ Words, 4.
50. Bauman, Verbal Art.
51. See Guss, Festive State.

24

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

52. Bauman, Verbal Art.
53. Royce, Performing Arts. For more on Pilobolus, see their website, http://www.pilobolus.com.
54. Karin Barber, “Preliminary Notes on Audiences in Africa,” Africa 67:3 (1997): 347–362.
55. Bauman and Ritch, “Informing Performance;” Bauman, Others’ Words; Royce, Performing Arts.
56. Alessandro Duranti, “The Voice of the Audience in Contemporary American Political Discourse,” Georgetown University
Round Table on Languages and Linguistics (2003): 114–134.
57. Carla María Guerrón-Montero, “Can’t Beat Me Own Drum in Me Own Native Land: Calypso Music and Tourism in the
Panamanian Atlantic Coast,” Anthropological Quarterly 79:4 (2006): 633–663.
58. Guerrón-Montero, “Can’t Beat Me Own Drum.”
59. Dwight Conquergood, “Health Theatre in a Hmong Refugee Camp: Performance, Communication, and Culture,” TDR
32:3 (1988): 174–208.
60. Conquergood, “Health Theatre.”
61. Karin Barber, “Text and Performance in Africa,” Oral Tradition 20:2 (2005): 324.
62. Bauman, Others’ Words, 2.
63. Ibid.
64. Ibid., 7.
65. Bauman and Ritch, “Informing Performance.”
66. Bryant Keith Alexander, “Performing Culture and Cultural Performances in Japan: A Critical (Auto)Ethnographic Travelogue,” Theatre Annual 55 (2002): 3.
67. Judith Hamera, “Dancing Communities: Performance, Difference, and Connection in the Global City,” in Studies in
International Performance, ed. Janelle Reinelt and Brian Singleton (Houndmills, UK: Palgrave MacMillan, 2011).
68. Hamera, “Dancing Communities,” 12.
69. On the ballet world see Helena Wulff, Ballet Across Borders: Career and Culture in the World of Dancers (Oxford: Berg,
1998); on the ballroom world see Jonathan S. Marion, Ballroom: Culture and Costume in Competitive Dance (Oxford: Berg,
2008); on the salsa world see Jonathan S. Marion, “Contextualizing Content and Conduct in the LA and West Coast Salsa
Scenes,” in Salsa World: A Global Dance in Local Contexts, ed. Sydney Hutchinson. (Philadelphia: Temple University Press,
2013).
70. Sydney Hutchinson, ed., Salsa World: A Global Dance in Local Contexts (Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2013).
71. Arjun Appadurai, Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions of Globalization (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1996).
72. Steven Feld, “Pygmy Pop: A Genealogy of Schizophonic Mimesis” Yearbook for Traditional Music (1996): 1–35.
73. Ibid.
74. Ibid.
75. Hancock quoted in Feld, “Pygmy Pop,” 5.

Media Anthropology: Meaning,
Embodiment, Infrastructure,
and Activism
Bryce Peake, University of Maryland, Baltimore County
bpeake@umbc.edu
http://the-political-ear.com

LEARNING OBJECTIVES
• Describe the history of media
anthropology including initial resistance to
media as a topic of anthropological study.
• Identify the major categories of media that
are studied by anthropologists.
• Explain how anthropologists explore the
meaning of media and media experiences
including the ways meaning can be
shared or contested by individuals and
communities.
• Evaluate innovative approaches to media
anthropology including autoethnography,
photo voice, participatory photography,
and fabrication.
• Assess the importance of mechanical and
cultural infrastructure for the exchange
of ideas.

Media is a word that can be used to describe a set of technologies that connect multiple people at one time to shared
content. Media anthropologists study mass communication
(broadcast radio and television) and digital media (Internet,
streaming, and mobile telephony) with a particular interest
in the ways in which media are designed or adapted for use
by specific communities or cultural groups. Many research
projects focus on media practices, the habits or behaviors
of the people who produce media, the audiences who interact with media, and everyone in between.
Many classic anthropological concepts are incorporated
in studies of media. For example, in her ethnography of
Egyptian television soap operas, Dramas of Nationhood
(2004), Lila Abu-Lughod sought to understand how watching these programs contributed to a shared sense of Egyptian cultural identity. In her ethnography, Romance on the
Global Stage (2003), Nicole Constable examined how the
Internet was transforming ideas about marriage and love
by contributing to new kinds of “mail-order bride” economies in which men in the United States could communicate
with women thousands of miles away. Utilizing classic ideas
about ritual and community life pioneered by Margaret
Mead and Bronislaw Malinowski, Tom Boellstorff’s book
Coming of Age in Second Life (2015) explored the ways that
people were building realistic communities using virtual
reality software like Second Life. Anthropological concepts
of ritual, magic, taboo, and organic solidarity can be used
effectively to examine the role that media plays in the lives
of individuals and communities. Like other specializations
in anthropology, studies of media are also organized around
a commitment to long-term ethnographic fieldwork and
cultural relativism.
This chapter introduces some of the theories, insights,
and methodologies of media anthropology. At the heart of
media anthropology is the assertion that media practices

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

are not universal. Whether we are discussing how television is viewed, how public relations coordinators negotiate corporate hierarchies, how Facebook statuses are created and circulated, or how
cellular towers are built, the local cultural context plays an important role.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF MEDIA ANTHROPOLOGY
Media anthropology has a surprisingly long history. In 1950, Hortense Powdermaker completed
the first ethnographic and social scientific study of Hollywood studios. Her book, Hollywood: The
Dream Factory, preceded by approximately a decade the formation of the academic field of media
studies and the theories of mass culture that are popular today. Powdermaker, a student of Franz
Boas, was at the forefront of mass communication studies.
Powdermaker’s groundbreaking study of media was immediately disavowed by others in the social
sciences who believed that media was a topic unworthy of study. “Hollywood as ‘Dream Factory’ Just
Nightmare to Femme Anthropologist,” a book review in Variety read.1 A review of the book in the
American Sociological Review dismissively stated: “The notion, for some time suspect, that previous
investigation of a primitive tribe uniquely qualifies a person to study a sophisticated society… is now
revealed to be absurd. The anthropological method here [in sophisticated society] consists of little
more than a series of inane analogies.”2 And so, with the continuation of time, anthropology left the
study of mass media to scholars in sociology, political science, and psychology.
Mass media became a central part of life after
World War I and influenced even those cultures
that outsiders considered isolated or “primitive.”
Anthropologists of that era developed two different excuses for avoiding the study of media.
The first was the need to distinguish cultural
anthropology from journalism. As Elizabeth
Bird (2009) wrote, ethnographers were often
dismissed as overqualified journalists. Anthropologists who wanted to be seen as scientists
(as sociologists often were) wanted to distance
themselves as much as possible from mass media, a subject regarded as unserious. Cultural anthropologists also suspected that elitist book and
journal editors might dismiss poor ethnographic
work as “mere journalism” undeserving of “serious” scholarly consideration. Second, through
the 1980s, the discipline of cultural anthropology wanted to distinguish itself from the rising
fields of American and British cultural studies,
disciplines that had a central interest in interpreting media as “texts” that could reveal cultural values. The cultural studies approach was generally not based on holistic ethnography, which cultural
anthropologists continued to see as the defining feature of their profession.3
Today, media is a much more mainstream object of analysis in American cultural anthropology
and media research also offers a significant career path for many young anthropologists. The company ReD, for example, hires anthropologists as consultants to help telecommunication and media

Media Anthropology: Meaning, Embodiment, Infrastructure, and Activism

3

companies innovate new technologies. These anthropologists use social theory and ethnographic
methods to help create media technologies for the future. Similarly, major technology companies like
Intel and Microsoft employ a number of anthropologists in their artificial intelligence, social media,
networked systems, and “Internet of Things” labs. These anthropologists combine corporate work
with research, publishing some of the most cutting edge research in the fields of anthropology and
technology in disciplines like Human Centered Computing. These professionals draw on debates in
media anthropology to inform new developments in media technologies, communication and advertising strategies, and culturally-specific programming.

MEANINGFUL MEDIA
What do media anthropologists do to better understand media practices? Media anthropologists typically organize their studies
of media in two ways. First, they choose a
category or type of media: mobile telephones,
radio, television, Internet, or others. The
choice of media to be studied varies widely
between anthropologists. Some media anthropologists work on a topic that crosses
multiple technologies (such as radio, which is
both broadcast via airwaves and streamed via
the internet). Others concern themselves with
a particular technology like mobile phones
(which play music, allow for phone calls, and
support gaming communities) and explore
how that single technology contributes to different types of media practices. Some media
anthropologists even study the people who
study media (such as a study of people who
work as advertising researchers, or studies of
media scientists in different countries).
Second, media anthropologists locate
their ethnographic studies within a particular
community. The way media anthropologists
define “community” varies. Some may choose to study a “virtual” community like Tom Boellstorff
did in his study of the virtual reality platform Second Life. Others may choose to study how a geographical community, such as a town or a region, uses, adapts, or transforms under the influence of
a certain kind of media or technology. This is the approach taken by Lila Abu-Lughod and Nicole
Constable in the examples mentioned above. Media anthropologists may also study the ways that
mass communication and digital media connect diasporic communities, cultural communities dispersed from their original homelands.
Many media anthropology projects have focused on questions of meaning. Meaning refers to
the ideas or values that accompany the exchange of information. Historically, some media scientists
assumed that the meaning of information was unaffected by its transfer between communities or

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

by the medium of its transfer. In other words, they believed that information would be interpreted
the same way regardless of how it was communicated, or who was receiving it. Anthropologists have
demonstrated that the reality is much more complex. In her book Dramas of Nationhood, Lila AbuLughod asked questions about how nationally televised Egyptian soap operas were interpreted by
those who watched them. Her research revealed several important insights. First, what soap opera
directors and writers intended for a television show to mean was not necessarily what communities
of watchers interpreted the show to mean. Simply put, producers cannot wholly control meaning or
the value(s) that will be identified by a group of watchers. Second, different media give different messages or meanings. If the same message is broadcast on radio and television, the histories and cultural
associations of these two technologies affects the meaning of the message being conveyed. Televised
soap operas were interpreted quite differently, for instance, than the spoken poetry Abu-Lughod had
studied in her previous research in Egypt. Third, Abu-Lughod demonstrated that there is no universal way of consuming media; media consumption is bound to culture. How Egyptian women
participate in listening to or watching soap operas together, the practices of who sits where, of what
can or cannot be eaten during a show, or of when a show might be aired, is all bound to the norms
and values of the community. These three assertions about meaning are broadly applicable to all
cultures and have set the agenda for most academic and professional research in media anthropology.
Unlike other academic fields that study media and meaning, media anthropologists focus on
how producers and audiences share or contest different types of meaning. Ethnographies by
media anthropologists typically focus on the ways producers of media assume, or seek to stimulate,
a particular set of feelings in audiences, and how audiences can give feedback to media producers. In
his ethnography of advertising agencies in Sri Lanka, for example, Steven Kemper (2001) observed
that “when they are able, advertising agencies hire local staff” because they can “think like,” and thus
sell to, local audiences.4 In the process, local advertising staff become the audiences they imagine
others to be and their work helps to define a new class of consumers who purchase globalized media
products. Media production and consumption are interconnected, one creating the conditions for
the other.
Many media anthropology projects have focused on mass communication, the process of sending a message to many people in a way that allows the sender complete control over the content of
a message—although, as described above, not control over the meaning. This is the definition of
mass communication: one-to-many communication that privileges the sender and/or owner of the
technology that transmits the media. Such a description is not without its challenges. As Francisco
Osorio (2005) argues, talking drums like those used in New Guinea not only fit the definition of
mass communication—a message sent from one to many that privileges the sender—the talking
drums example also reveals the ways in which there is an implicit prioritization of electricity in
media anthropology, an assumption that mass communication involves electrical technology. This
is ethnocentric given the uneven distribution of electrical infrastructure. Dominic Boyer, an anthropologist who has written ethnographies about both energy infrastructures like electricity and German journalists writing international news, proposed that we move from media anthropology to an
“anthropology of mediation.”5 Rather than use a universal definition of what counts as media to the
anthropologist, Boyer’s term anthropology of mediation focuses on the way images, speech, people,
and things become socially significant or meaningful as they are communicated. The focus is shifted
away from the technology itself, a controversial approach that some have criticized for transforming
media anthropology into an “anthropology of everything.”

Media Anthropology: Meaning, Embodiment, Infrastructure, and Activism

5

As a result of this proposal for an anthropology of mediation, some anthropologists have started to
study the physical human senses that make meaningful interactions with media possible. As Charles
Hirschkind (2006) argues for example, the power of a cassette tape sermon in Egypt in “lies not
simply in its capacity to disseminate ideas or instill religious ideologies but in its effect on the human
sensorium… the soundscape produced through the circulation of this medium animates and sustains
a substrate of sensory knowledges and embodied aptitudes.”6 Hirschkind is suggesting that the feeling that Muslim listeners experience while listening to the sermons—rather than the precise meaning
or value of the information— is more significant for understanding the appeal of these tapes. This is
an example of research that focuses on mediation rather than simply assessing the meaning of the
information transferred.
Sensory approaches to mediation
present some methodological dilemmas. When media anthropologists
study meaning ethnographically they
can ask audiences what a particular example of media means or what
a person finds meaningful about it.
Anthropologists studying the sensory
dimensions of mediation do not have
direct access to how audiences feel media. We can ask how audiences feel, but
describing a feeling involves translating physical sensation into language,
a difficult process. To get around this
problem, ethnographers of mediation
have used innovative approaches to
participant-observation that include
techniques from psychoanalysis,7
depth interviews that closely analyze
how audiences create meaning rather
than what meaning is,8 and autoethnographic approaches in which the
anthropologist explores his or her own
personal experiences. These research
techniques are used to reduce the gap
between what people experience and what they can describe.9
Debates about the significance of media, mediation, meaning and the senses have occurred primarily in the context of studies of mass communication because mass communication technologies
like broadcast radio, television, and cinema are the most globally available. While people in Europe
and the United States might speak of the death of older “legacy” media like radio and VHS tapes,
these mediums play crucial roles in the lives of peoples in other places. Lynn Stephen (2012), for
example, describes how the takeover of a local radio station by a group of women protesters was crucial to their efforts to organize around human rights issues in Oaxaca, Mexico.10 Brian Larkin (2008)
has discussed the economic importance of pirated VHS tapes of recent films in Nigeria, a country in

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

which gross domestic product cannot be easily calculated due to the size of various shadow economies.
While mass communication is a form of one-to-many communication typically broadcast on
widely available channels, digital media is a much more personalized many-to-many communication
that involves the use of digital signals. In her ethnography of LGBT youth in rural America, Mary
Gray (2009) argued that the Internet’s more closely controlled access points allowed queer youth
to carve out online spaces for their emerging identities. The importance of these online spaces for
developing personal identity also meant that it was difficult to distinguish between “online” and
“offline” personas. Gray took a meaning-focused approach to understand the ways in which rural
LGBT youth create identities and feelings of belongingness in concealed online worlds. Jeffrey Juris
(2008) has argued that the Internet interactions allowed anti-corporate, anti-globalization activists in
Spain, Indonesia, and the United States to feel the threat represented by the Group of Eight summit
(a meeting of eight of the largest world economies). These feelings generated a sense of solidarity that
was not reducible to language. Both these projects demonstrate the relationship between meaning
and feeling that is a part of mass communication.
If digital media has opened up a space for us to think critically about the transformation of mass
media and people’s relationships with it, so too has digital media opened up new career paths for
anthropologists. Increasingly, media anthropologists are taking key positions in technology, advertising, public relations, and broadcasting industries. Dawn Nafus, an ethnographer who works and
conducts research in open-source software communities, has led multiple user experience research
projects at Intel Labs. Her time is divided between writing academic publications on the anthropology of emerging technologies and doing user testing for Intel’s latest innovations in computing and
wearable technology.11

WHAT MAKES MEDIA POSSIBLE?
Since the 1990s, anthropologists have successfully studied a range of mass communication
and digital media, but it is only recently that anthropologists have started studying the technologies that make these forms of connection possible. Broadly speaking, infrastructures are the
material technological networks that allow for
the exchange of goods, ideas, waste, people,
power and finance over space. When used to refer to media, infrastructure includes the pipes,
concrete, wires, people, values, electricity, software protocols and other technologies that allow
for the movement of information. Brian Larkin
(2008), a media anthropologist working in Nigeria, noted that the geographical location of
cinemas in the city of Kano was based on the
colonial requirement that there be a 440 yard buffer zone between white and black populations. This
requirement controlled the ways that electrical grids and transportation routes were developed. In
this way, various entangled infrastructures are implicated in the forms of taboo, desire, and fantasy

Media Anthropology: Meaning, Embodiment, Infrastructure, and Activism

7

shared by members of a society in locations like the movie theater. Similarly, in his ethnography of
Brazil’s first telecommunication engineers, Gerald Lombardi (1999) describes how engineers “spoke
in reverent tones about the selfless dedication of … fellow workers as they fought … to keep Brazil
at the forefront of telephonic progress.”12 “Telephonic progress” via infrastructure was an ideal of the
Brazilian state and its workers because it was considered “modern” and made Brazil competitive in
the eyes of global spectators. It was not phones that made Brazilian engineers feel or describe themselves as modern, but the capacity for making telephony possible.
There are two types of media infrastructure: mechanical infrastructure and cultural infrastructure. Mechanical Infrastructure includes the apparatuses that bring networks of technology into
existence. Cultural Infrastructure refers to the values and beliefs of communities, states, and/or
societies that make the imagining of a particular type of network possible. In the foreword to an ethnography on India and the rise of historical archives, Nicholas Dirks (2002) captures the sense of a
cultural infrastructure perfectly when he describes how archives function, that is how the archive does
ideological work, in producing and preserving ideas about Indian nationalism. It was the belief in
nationalism that made the colonial archive possible as a
container of various media—letters and notes, newspapers and telegraphs believed to define the Indian state.
Complicating the study of mechanical infrastructure is the fact that this infrastructure consists of the
same technology it uses to run. Information systems,
for instance are both made of and run by computers.
Typically, an infrastructure is different from a technology. A road is the infrastructure for a car; a pipe is the
infrastructure for oil. As Graham and Marvin (2001)
argue about the computer, computing is made possible
by the electricity that powers the computer, the system
of telematics that allow computers to transmit and receive information, and software protocols that delimit
a computer’s uses. The electricity, the telematics, and
the software protocols all rely on computing. What
may distinguish the twenty-first century is its reliance
on computing as the infrastructure of everything, from
oil production to data storage, electricity management
to the production of concrete.
For media anthropologists, the ways in which media
and communication infrastructure organize everyday
life are significant. Mechanical infrastructure affects
not only the engineers and bureaucrats who execute
and plan projects, but also the millions of people who
rely on information exchanged through the infrastructure, drive vehicles through the infrastructure, and
whose property rights are often usurped by the construction of infrastructure. At the same time, cultural
infrastructure is also important. As Christian Sandvig
(2012) describes in his ethnography of building indig-

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

enous Internet infrastructure on the Santa Ysabel Native American Reservation, anthropological
studies of media and communication infrastructure must weave together considerations of both
kinds of infrastructure in order to understand how these infrastructures are transformed by cultural
values, technological standards, legal regulations, and scientific and engineering techniques. Some
anthropologists work professionally designing media technologies or consulting with engineers, bureaucrats, and communities on the construction of media infrastructures. Cathy Baldwin, for example, is an anthropologist at the World Resources Institute Urban Development and Mobility Project.
She is known for her research on civil engineering and community participation. Working with
communities to maximize various forms of access, Baldwin’s career is based on the belief that physical
and natural environments should strengthen a community’s capacity to stay resilient when afflicted
by human-created and natural disasters—particularly climate change.
Practicing Anthropologist: Cathy Baldwin

Cathy Baldwin is an interdisciplinary anthropologist, writer, musician, and consultant who
has done anthropological research on city and urban infrastructure, environment, and
health.

How did you bring your anthropological training into consultancy work?
My objective was always to be an applied researcher working in policy or think tanks,
but I didn’t think about how until I graduated. During my doctoral fieldwork, I gave regular
feedback to a government minister (Member of Parliament in my fieldwork town) who was
working on a program to promote an inclusive British identity. After graduating I did some
applied research and a book chapter for a think tank at Oslo University on how non-governmental organizations (NGOs) used information and computing technologies (ICTs) to
empower poor communities in developing countries.

What types of collaborators does an anthropologist studying
infrastructure encounter?
When doing impact assessments in the infrastructure sector, you work with distressed
community members worried about uncertain change, so it’s crucial to have a sympathetic,
diplomatic manner in order to talk effectively with them. You also need to be able to find
ways of communicating social issues to engineers. This can be challenging as it is often
unfamiliar territory and beyond their concerns. The most effective solution is to be able to
present community concern as it might apply to them and their family members. For instance, “How would your mum feel if….” The policy world is full of people who like findings
summarized in short bullet points in non-anthropological language. By the time you are
ready with your material to do so, any theory used to underpin an argument that leads to a
practical, implementable recommendation has been amalgamated into a point expressed
in everyday language. It is still possible to use anthropological ideas at this stage, but they
have to be grounded in practical action.

If you could choose one substantial contribution anthropologists can
make to both the development and study of city infrastructure, what would
it be?
Social anthropologists are well equipped to foresee, understand, and analyze how dynamic social change processes springing from the physical, biophysical or industrial landscape affect communities, and to study how people engage with technologies. These are

Media Anthropology: Meaning, Embodiment, Infrastructure, and Activism

9

important skills that can guide the design of projects or structures, and inform strategies
adopted to manage the good and bad effects. While I see my colleagues mapping economic, environmental, or physical changes and processes, I can insert the social aspect.

What advice do you have for current anthropology students interested
in working on infrastructure, and perhaps media and communications
infrastructure, in the future?
Diversify your skill set as much as possible beyond just ethnographic methods as they
are just one small option outside academia. Intern at the World Bank in one of its urban
programs, or a large engineering consultancy, or an urban development think tank or policy
organization. Media and communications infrastructure is a totally separate topic, but there
are some urban firms that look at telecommunications infrastructure as well as standard
city systems.
ICT4D, or information and communications technologies for development, is an interesting branch of international development where there are studies and NGOs working on
practical projects with communities and anthropological input is valued. Also some of the
ICT or technology companies such as Microsoft and Intel employ anthropologists to do
consumer studies of how people use media and technologies. Genevieve Bell is the most
famous employee of Intel, as their in-house corporate anthropologist.
With all infrastructure topics, anthropologists inevitably analyze how people interact with
their structures, use infrastructure, what its social and cultural effects are, what values
and assumptions inform its design etc. You need to be good at thinking in practical terms
about the social and community consequences of hard structures. Understanding dynamic
social change processes is also an asset, and how much change is caused by structural
as opposed to subjective factors.
I would say that working as an anthropologist outside academia can be very lonely unless you are in a consulting firm that has a special focus on ethnographic methods. At both
the civil engineering firm and think tank, I was the only one with my skillset and missed
having others to learn directly from. That said, I have enjoyed becoming friendly with economists, civil and environmental engineers, environmental scientists, public health specialists and others. The field attracts nice people with the practical skills to implement things,
which I prefer to academic anthropology.
Interview by Bryce Peake

PARTICIPATORY MEDIA AND MEDIA ACTIVISM IN
ANTHROPOLOGY
The resurgence of media anthropology in the 1980s and 1990s was heralded by experiments, research, and debates in visual anthropology and ethnographic film surrounding indigenous media,
media produced by and for indigenous communities often outside of the mainstream commercial
market. Portable recording technologies, televisual production, and copy-making technologies made
it possible for local communities to use media for cultural expression. People like Eric Michaels
(1987), Faye Ginsburg (1991), and Terry Turner (Crocker 1991) used new technologies to help
indigenous communities produce media about their local cultures, and the various environmental,
legislative, social, and cultural threats they faced. In the Kayapo Video Project, anthropologist Terence Turner understood his role as empowering local Kayapo leaders, who then compiled a compre-

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

hensive video archive of Kayapo culture,
including ceremonies, oral history, ecological knowledge, and mythology, recounted
by older members of the community
whose knowledge would disappear with
their death. As Turner wrote, “in addition
to the uses of video self-documentation
for education and as a repository of cultural knowledge against losses from death
and acculturation, many Kayapo see video
as a means of reaching out to non-Kayapo,
presenting their culture and way of life in a
form that others can understand, respect,
and support. They see this as an essential
part of their struggle to sustain and defend
their society and environment.”13
For anthropologists, projects like the
Kayapo video sparked a debate: do Western inventions like the movie camera endanger or replace indigenous forms of storytelling, or do they empower new forms
of cultural creativity and experimentation?
How, anthropologists on one side of the debate argued, could technologies used to create the Disney
film Fantasia, the American television show Dallas, and other Western televisual and cinematic stories possibly create the complex narrative forms traditionally used for storytelling in other cultures?
On the other side of the debate, media anthropologists asked why one would assume that these
technologies could not be used in new ways?
Faye Ginsburg is more identified with this debate than any other media anthropologist. Ginsburg
described her position in the 1990s: “I
am concerned less with the usual focus on the formal qualities of film as
text and more with the cultural mediations that occur through film and
video works.”14 For Ginsburg, indigenous media constitutes a means for “reproducing and transforming cultural
identity among people who have experienced massive political, geographic,
and economic disruption,” and her
work among Australian aboriginal and
indigenous media-makers and documentary collaborators is focused on
exactly those goals.15 Ginsburg works
with her research subjects on media
projects, using media-making as a form

Media Anthropology: Meaning, Embodiment, Infrastructure, and Activism

11

of fieldwork. The result is an ethnography of the process of media creation and collaboration. Rather
than asking how indigenous peoples interpret representations, Ginsburg’s work examines how indigenous media producers create representations of their and other cultures. Her fieldwork addresses the
debate about the limits of Western media technologies, while also pushing video-based media in new
directions. Both Ginsburg and Turner’s work can be seen as an argument against anthropologists who
suggest that the use of new technologies to capture indigenous stories or concerns constitutes a form
of imperialism. These anthropologists, Turner suggested, hold an outdated and static perception of
indigenous groups. Rather than assuming that maintaining traditional modes of communication or
storytelling is the only way to safeguard cultural traditions, he suggested that new media technologies
can aid indigenous activists in transmitting cultural beliefs into the future.
In addition to documenting traditional cultural beliefs, media technologies can be absorbed into
communities in ways that strengthen them. Zeinabu Davis’ videowork on Yoruba trance rituals, for
example, demonstrates the way in which the meaning of media is not set by the technologies used
to create it. For the Yoruba ritual actors who were the subjects of the film, and who watched the
film following its production, portable video technologies increased the ache (Yoruba for “power
of realization”) of both trance states and Yoruba communities. According to Yoruba spiritual ideas,
images have a presence and can bringing things closer together. The actors believed the video would
help grow and sustain the Yoruba community by bringing viewers closer to the spiritual dimensions
of the ritual. Meaning, in other words, was not the only source of meaningfulness for Davis and her
Yoruba partners.
Practicing Anthropologist: Kyle Jones

Kyle Jones is an anthropologist who completed his fieldwork with hip-hop artists in Peru
and now works in human-centered design. Below, Kyle talks about applied anthropology
and experimental methods:

Your ethnographic fieldwork on hip hop in Peru was supported by the
Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropology, with some funds dedicated to
the applied dimensions of your project. What is applied anthropology, and
how did it figure into your project?
To me, applied anthropology is about taking the next step in the research process to
translate what you’ve learned into other domains of practice, often toward some kind of
solution to a problem someone faces. The Wenner-Gren Foundation’s Osmundsen Initiative urges anthropologists to think about the broader social concerns and contributions
of their research projects. For my project, I had learned that one of the most important
activities for the young people I was working with was putting on various kinds of events,
such as concerts or workshops. Despite their obvious passion for hip-hop and motivation
to produce events, a lack of funds (among other factors) nearly always proved a significant
barrier to their efforts. So what I did was try to support those efforts by facilitating the production of events among each of the three groups I was researching. Led by these different
groups in different cities, these events took many different forms, from a series of relatively
small concerts, workshops, and competitions spread out over two weeks to large all-day
festivals in city plazas. Methodologically, these events dovetailed with the other collaborative and participant-driven methods I was using, and also led to new opportunities for
exploring my research topics.

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
In your ethnographic work, you use some very different methods:
photovoice and participatory photography. What are these, and how do
you relate them to applied anthropology?
Photovoice is a method used across scholarly, policy, and many other types of research that puts cameras into people’s hands so they can make their own representations
of their lives and the activities related to your research questions. I similarly engaged in
collaborative media production, which included such things as helping to film video clips,
playing and recording music, taking promotional photos, promoting and producing events,
and designing and circulating imagery. In these things, I played a supporting role, using
what resources I had to facilitate the projects of the groups I was researching. These
methods are participatory in the sense that they encourage collaborators to get involved
in the research process and help bring questions about power in research interactions to
the fore. From an epistemological standpoint, these methods might be better termed participant-driven because of how they enable individuals to actively shape the direction of
the research through the conscious creation of media (i.e. the research data itself). These
methods were also particularly useful in doing research across locales because they can
be done remotely via the internet; I could keep up conversations and data creation-collection even when I wasn’t in the same city as my interlocutors, including when I was back
home in the U.S.
While I did not view them as applied at first because of how they developed in the context
of my graduate training, I now see them as a valuable part of my applied/practicing toolkit.
Using the media that my collaborators themselves created is a powerful way to tell a story
no matter the context of the work. They also entail that element of pushing your work into
new domains of practice and problem-solving, while also prompting you to think reflexively.
These kinds of methods help in recognizing the power and privileges that you bring as a
researcher, but then also entail thinking through how you can translate the resources those
things confer (expertise, time, technology, social connections, etc.) to support the efforts of
your interlocutors on their own terms.

Research on indigenous media has primarily focused on cultural information and entertainment,
but anthropologists have also explored the capacity of indigenous media to contribute to the production of localized science. The Nura Gili Indigenous Programs Unit at the University of New
South Wales, for example, has designed software that allows indigenous and Aboriginal communities
in Australia to share culture knowledge about astronomy.16 For many of these groups, astronomic
knowledge includes using the sun, moon, and stars for predictive purposes in navigation, time-keeping, seasonal calendars, and food practices. The stars in particular inform sacred law, customs and social structure, such as totem and kinship status and marriage. This knowledge was traditionally passed
down through artistic and poetic practices that have since disappeared from some communities.
The researchers in the Nura Gili Indigenous Programs Unit are harnessing the power of Microsoft’s
WorldWide telescope and Rich Interactive Narrative technology to help new generations “reclaim”
forms of indigenous knowledge production from archival records and contemporary astronomical
data in collaboration with community elders. For these scholars, the project is not simply one of
“giving back” to the community; rather, they recognize that indigenous astronomical traditions are
underpinned by a philosophy of knowledge that enables a different understanding of how humans
relate to the natural world. This knowledge can produce new forms of intercultural understandings
about climate and environmental change.

Media Anthropology: Meaning, Embodiment, Infrastructure, and Activism

13

For many of these participatory media projects, the stakes are highly politicized. For those anthropologists working in Australia, Africa, and South America, legacies of colonial violence are still omnipresent. How can anthropologists use their research to not only understand culture, but to also
mitigate some of the violent residue of inequality that came from colonialism? This is a key question
that undergirds much of this participatory media research. Along with research that addresses that
question comes a host of ethical considerations: how should media recordings be stored, who should
control the intellectual property developed through media technologies, and who defines the project
and how it will be developed. These may seem as though they are only practical questions, but for
many media anthropologists engaged in participatory methods they are also research questions. They
are also questions about power and fairness. By posing and answering these questions in their projects, media anthropologists doing participatory media methods have contributed to the development
of new approaches to ethnography.
Digital media poses several additional ethical issues particularly in terms of protecting the anonymity of research subjects. In her work on the hackers and trolls turned political collective Anonymous, Gabriella Coleman (2014) wrote about the fact that much of her research depended on
the anonymity of the hackers with whom she worked. How, she asked, should an anthropologist
balance the hacker collective’s need for anonymity while still confirming the validity or real identities of research subjects. In the process of researching groups like Anonymous, how should anthropologists try to balance the positive impact of the privacy activism this group engages in with the
misogynist, anti-political antics of some members of the group? In other words, what does it mean
for a researcher to “call out” Anonymous on its shortcomings while still protecting the true identities of its members?
Similarly, in her ethnography of online dating in Australia,
Susan Frohlick found herself needing to “dis-identify” daters
who had written particularly offensive or poorly constructed
dating profiles. So poorly built, or “uniquely horrible,” were
these profiles that to describe them as her interviewees did
would violate the authors’ right to anonymity.17 Frohlick argued that exploring themes of masculinity and dating were
more important to the research than personally identifying
individuals with bad dating profiles.
Ethnographers working with digital and social media in
particular, have devised multiple strategies for anonymizing
participatory media subjects. Annette Markham (2012), for
example, has developed the strategy of fabrication. Writing
ethnographic work about child sexuality and queer bloggers,
Markham urges ethnographers to take the essence of what is
being said by people, to combine or rearrange it, and fabricate an ethnographic account that demonstrates the points
most relevant for the research. Doing so, she argues, is not
new; it is common practice to use direct quotes from research
subjects in ethnography even though the quote may be off
by a few words because it was heard while spinning pots or
cooking or participating in some other activity. Such a practice poses many other ethical questions, and it is this ethical

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

conundrum that Markham says is most important for thinking through methodological and ethical
issues in media anthropology.18 While this fabrication approach is by no means perfect, and is open
to criticism, it demonstrates the necessity of ethical considerations when conducting methodological
experimentation in media anthropology.

CONCLUSION
Media anthropologists are concerned with many of the classic subjects of cultural anthropology:
kinship, religion, mythology, identity, and the transmission of cultural meaning. How, for instance,
does media allow people create and maintain kinship ties across large geographical distances? How
are religious beliefs transformed as they are communicated through platforms like television and
the Internet? How does media contribute to the development of a sense of self or group identities?
On the Mediterranean island of Gozo, for example, cellular phones have allowed distant relatives in
North America to remain part of the community by participating in the yearly celebrations of village
saints. Local Catholic priests in Greece have been forced to consider the spiritual force of religious
icons as they are transformed from a statue honored in-person during religious ceremonies into mediated images people see from afar.19 If the Virgin Mary appears to be weeping in a video, but the statue
shows no effect, does it count as a miracle? Rather than answer this question, media anthropologists
are interested in why people are concerned with it in the first place.
While class anthropological subjects remain important, media anthropologists are also engaging
with new problems and debates while interacting with other academic disciplines such as Media and
Communication Studies, Digital Sociology, and New Media Art. For instance, media anthropologists question the assumption that there is a universal media psychology that predicts the ways that
people will interpret media. They have pointed out that the impact social media has on individuals
is a function of culture, not just political economic conditions.20 Media anthropologists have even
engaged with questions about how basic human ideas about beauty or the passage of time translate
into mediums like film and radio.21
While grappling with a range of old and new themes, one thing continues to separate media anthropologists from other media scholars: a commitment to long-term, participant-observation based
fieldwork. Media anthropologists push the boundaries of what counts as ethnographic research and
academic writing, but they continue to rely on deep relationships with people and holistic consideration of the full range of media practices found around the world.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. What is the difference between interpreting and producing media? How have anthropologists
studied these processes differently?
2. How do anthropologists study media consumption, media production, and infrastructure?
What different types of approaches did the anthropologists in this chapter use? What sets
media anthropologists apart from other types of media scholars?
3. Where do media anthropologists work? What types of topics do they focus on?

Media Anthropology: Meaning, Embodiment, Infrastructure, and Activism

15

GLOSSARY
Cultural infrastructure: the values and beliefs of communities, states, and/or societies that make the
imagining of a particular type of network possible
Fabrication: a technique for reporting on research data that involves mixing information provided
by various people into a narrative account that demonstrates the point of focus for researchers.
Indigenous media: media produced by and for indigenous communities often outside of the commercial mainstream.
Mass communication: one-to-many communication that privileges the sender and/or owner of the
technology that transmits the media
Media: a word that used to describe a set of technologies that connect multiple people at one time
to shared content.
Media practices: the habits or behaviors of the people who produce media, the audiences who interact with media, and everyone in between.
Mechanical infrastructure is the apparatuses that bring networks of technology into existence.
Photovoice: a research method that puts cameras into people’s hands so they can make their own
representations of their lives and the activities.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Bryce Peake is an assistant professor of Media & Communication Studies and an affiliate faculty
member in Gender + Women’s Studies at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. His current
research focuses on masculinity, media, and science in the post-World War II British Mediterranean
spaces of Gibraltar and Gozo. He has also published multimodal projects on race in the United
States, and been recognized by the American Anthropological Association for his ethnographic photography. Bryce currently runs the Anthropology, Mediated workshop on the island of Gozo, a 15 day
ethnographic media fieldschool for undergraduates. Prior to arriving at UMBC, Bryce was a Julie
& Rocky Dixon Fellow in Graduate Innovation, and worked with anthropologists at Intel Labs to
develop a data-tracking application for users living with Tinnitus.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abu-Lughod, Lila. Dramas of Nationhood: The Politics of Television in Europe. (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2004).
Auslander, Mark. “Objects of Kinship.” Transition 122 (2017): 206–216.
Bird, Elizabeth, ed. The Anthropology of News and Journalism: Global Perspectives (Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 2009).
Boellstorff, Tom. Coming of Age in Second Life: An Anthropologist Explores the Virtually Human (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015).
Coleman, Gabriella. Hacker, Hoaxer, Whistleblower, Spy: The Many Faces of Anonymous. (New York: Verso,
2014).
Constable, Nicole. Romance on a Global Stage: Pen Pals, Virtual Ethnography, and “Mail Order” Marriages.
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003).
Crocker, William H. “Review of The Kayapo; The Kayapo: Out of the Forest.” American Anthropologist 93
no. 2 (1991): 514–516.

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Dirks, Nicholas. “Annals of the Archive: Ethnographic Notes on the Sources of History.” In From the
Margins: Historical Anthropology and Its Futures. Edited by Brian Keith Axel, 47–65. (Durham: Duke
University Press, 2002).
Frohlick, Susan. “Fluid Exchanges: The Negotiation of Intimacy between Tourist Women and Local Men in
a Transnational Town in Caribbean Costa Rica.” City & Society 19 no. 1(2007): 139–168.
———“I’m More Sexy Here: Erotic Subjectivities of Female Tourists in the Sexual Paradise of the Costa
Rican Caribbean.” In Gendered Mobilities. Edited by Tanu Priya Uteng and Tim Cresswell, 199–223.
(New York: Ashgate, 2008).
Gershon, Ilana. The Breakup 2.0: Disconnecting over New Media. (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2012).
Ginsburg, Faye. “Indigenous Media: Faustian Contract or Global Village?” Cultural Anthropology 6 no. 1
(1991): 92–112.
Graham, Steve, and Simon Marvin. Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities
and the Urban Condition. (New York: Routledge, 2001).
Gray, Mary L. Out in the Country: Youth, Media, and Queer Visibility in Rural America. (New York: New
York University Press, 2009).
Hirschkind, Charles. The Ethical Soundscape: Cassette Sermons and Islamic Counterpublics. (New York:
Columbia University Press, 2006).
Juris, Jeffrey S. “Performing Politics Image, Embodiment, and Affective Solidarity during Anti-Corporate
Globalization Protests.” Ethnography 9 no. 1(2008): 61–97.
Kemper, Steven. Buying and Believing: Sri Lankan Advertising and Consumers in a Transnational World.
(Chicago: University Of Chicago Press, 2001).
Larkin, Brian. Signal and Noise: Media, Infrastructure, and Urban Culture in Nigeria. Duke University Press
Books, 2008).
Lombardi, Gerald S. Computer Networks, Social Networks and the Future of Brazil. (New York University,
Graduate School of Arts and Science, 1999).
Markham, Annette. “Fabrication as Ethical Practice.” Information, Communication & Society 15 no. 3
(2012): 334–353.
Michaels, E. For a Cultural Future: Francis Jupurrurla Makes TV at Yuendumu. (Australia: Art and Culture
Monographs, 1987).
Osorio, Francisco. “Proposal for Anthropology of Mass Media.” In Media Anthropology. Edited by Eric
Rothenbuhler and Mihai Coman, 36–45. (Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 2005.
Peake, Bryce. “Gozo, Mediated.” Forthcoming in OmerTaa: A Journal of Applied Anthropology (2018):
670–675.
Pidduck, Julianne. “Queer Kinship and Ambivalence: Video Autoethnographies by Jean Carlomusto and
Richard Fung.” GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 15 no. 3 (2009): 441–468.
Powdermaker, Hortense. Hollywood: The Dream Factory. (London: Secker and Warburg, 1950).
Sandvig, Christian. “Connection at Ewiiaapaayp Mountain: Indigenous Internet Infrastructure.” In Race
after the Internet. Edited by Lisa Nakamura, 168–200. (New York: Routledge, 2012).
Stephen, Lynn. “Community and Indigenous Radio in Oaxaca: Testimony and Participatory Democracy.”
In Radio Fields: Anthropology and Wireless Sound in the 21st Century. Edited by Lucas Bessire (New York:
NYU Press, 2012).
Turner, Terence. The Kayapo Video Project: A Progress Report. Unpublished Manuscript, 1990.
Wyatt, Geoffrey. “Dreamtime Astronomy: Development of a New Indigenous Program at Sydney
Observatory.” Journal of Astronomical History and Heritage 17 no. 2 (2014): 195–204.

NOTES
1. The Variety headline is cited in Robert Bierstedt, “A Review of Hollywood-The Dream Factory: An Anthropologist Looks
at the Movie-Makers,” American Sociological Review 17 (1951): 124-125.
2. Ibid.
3. Jon Mitchell, Ambivalent Europeans: Ritual, Memory and the Public Sphere in Malta (New York: Routledge, 2001), 5.
4. Steven Kemper, Buying and Believing: Sri Lankan Advertising and Consumers in a Transnational World (Chicago: University
Of Chicago Press, 2001), 27.

Media Anthropology: Meaning, Embodiment, Infrastructure, and Activism

17

5. Dominic Boyer, “From Media Anthropology to the Anthropology of Mediation,” in the SAGE Handbook of Social Anthropology, ed. Jon Mitchell et al., 411–422 (London: Sage, 2012).
6. Charles Hirschkind, The Ethical Soundscape: Cassette Sermons and Islamic Counterpublics (New York: Columbia University
Press, 2009), 2.
7. Iain Edgar, A Guide to Imagework: Imagination-Based Research Methods (London: Routledge, 2004).
8. Charles Hirschkind, The Ethical Soundscape: Cassette Sermons and Islamic Counterpublics.
9. Julianne Pidduck, “Queer Kinship and Ambivalence: Video Autoethnographies by Jean Carlomusto and Richard Fung,”
GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 15 no. 3 (2009): 441–468.
10. Lynn Stephen, “Community and Indigenous Radio in Oaxaca: Testimony and Participatory Democracy,” in Radio Fields:
Anthropology and Wireless Sound in the Twenty-First Century, ed. Lucas Bessire (New York: New York University Press, 2012).
11. See Dawn Nafus, “Patches Don”t Have Gender:’ What Is Not Open in Open Source Software,” New Media & Society 14
no. 4 (2012): 669–683; and Dawn Nafus and Jamie Sherman, “Big Data, Big Questions| This One Does Not Go Up To 11:
The Quantified Self Movement as an Alternative Big Data Practice,” International Journal of Communication 8(2014): 11.
12. Gerald S. Lombardi, Computer Networks, Social Networks and the Future of Brazil. PhD dissertation, New York University,
1999), 21.
13. Terence Turner, The Kayapo Video Project: A Progress Report. Unpublished Manuscript (Turner 1990), 1.
14. Faye Ginsburg, “Indigenous Media: Faustian Contract or Global Village?” Cultural Anthropology 6(1): 94.
15. Ibid.
16. Geoffrey Wyatt, “Dreamtime Astronomy: Development of a New Indigenous Program at Sydney Observatory,” Journal
of Astronomical History and Heritage 17 no. 2 (2014): 195–204.
17. See Susan Frohlick, “Fluid Exchanges: The Negotiation of Intimacy between Tourist Women and Local Men in a Transnational Town in Caribbean Costa Rica.” City & Society 19 no. 1(2007): 139–168 and Susan Frohlick “I’m More Sexy Here:
Erotic Subjectivities of Female Toursits in the Sexual Paradise of the Costa Rican Caribbean,” in Gendered Mobilities, ed. Tanu
Priya Uteng and Tim Cresswell, 199–223 (New York: Ashgate, 2008).
18. Annette Markham, “Fabrication as Ethical Practice,” Information, Communication & Society 15 no. 3 (2012): 334–353.
19. See the forthcoming 2018 article by Bryce Peake, “Gozo, Mediated” Omertaa: A Journal of Applied Anthropology: 670–675.
20. Ilana Gershon, The Breakup 2.0: Disconnecting over New Media (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2012).
21. Mark Auslander, “Objects of Kinship,” Transition 122 (2017): 206–216.

Health and Medicine
Sashur Henninger-Rener, University of LaVerne and the Los Angeles Community College District
sashur.henninger@gmail.com

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Define the biocultural perspective and
provide examples of how interactions
between biology and culture have
affected human biology.
• Identify four ethno-etiologies
(personalistic, naturalistic,
emotionalistic, and biomedical)
and describe how each differs in
explaining the root cause of illness.
• Explain the significance of faith in
healing.
• Examine the relationship between
mental health and cultural factors,
including stigma, that affect the way
people with mental health conditions
are perceived.
• Discuss examples of culture-bound
syndromes.
• Evaluate the positive and negative
effects of biomedical technologies.

What does it mean to be “healthy”? It may seem odd to
ask the question, but health is not a universal concept and
each culture values different aspects of well-being. At the
most basic level, health may be perceived as surviving each
day with enough food and water, while other definitions of
health may be based on being free of diseases or emotional
troubles. Complicating things further is the fact that that
each culture has a different causal explanation for disease.
For instance, in ancient Greece health was considered to
be the product of unbalanced humors or bodily fluids. The
four humors included black bile, phlegm, yellow bile, and
blood. The ancient Greeks believed that interactions among
these humors explained differences not only in health, but
in age, gender, and general disposition. Various things could
influence the balance of the humors in a person’s body including substances believed to be present in the air, changes
in diet, or even temperature and weather. An imbalance in
the humors was believed to cause diseases, mood problems,
and mental illness.1
The World Health Organization (WHO) recognizes that
the health of individuals and communities is affected by
many factors: “where we live, the state of our environment,
genetics, our income and education level, and our relationships with friends and family.” 2 Research conducted by the
WHO suggests that these characteristics play a more significant role in affecting our health than any others, including
having access to health care. For this reason, anthropologists
who are interested in issues related to health and illness must
use a broad holistic perspective that considers the influence
of both biology and culture. Medical anthropology, a distinct sub-specialty within the discipline of anthropology, investigates human health and health care systems in comparative perspective, considering a wide range of bio-cultural
dynamics that affect the well-being of human populations.
Medical anthropologists study the perceived causes of illness as well as the techniques and treatments developed in a
society to address health concerns. Using cultural relativism
and a comparative approach, medical anthropologists seek
to understand how ideas about health, illness, and the body
are products of particular social and cultural contexts.

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

ANTHROPOLOGY AND THE BIOCULTURAL PERSPECTIVE
Evolutionary biology is a field of study that investigates the ways that natural processes have
shaped the development of life on Earth, producing measurable changes in populations over time.
Humans, Homo sapiens, are a special case in the discussion of evolution. We are a relatively young
species that has been on Earth for only about 195,000 years.3 Although this may sound like a long
time, compared with other animals, humans are newcomers and we have been subject to processes
of natural selection and adaptation for less time than many other living things. In that short time
period, human lifestyles have changed dramatically. The first humans evolved in Africa and had a
foraging lifestyle, living in small, kin-based groups. Today, millions of people live in crowded, fastpaced, and technologically advanced agricultural societies. In evolutionary terms, this change has
happened rapidly. The fact that these rapid changes were even possible reveals that human lifestyles
are biocultural, products of interactions between biology and culture. This has many implications
for understanding human health.
The theory of natural selection suggests that in any species there are certain physical or behavioral
traits that are adaptive and increase the capacity of individuals to survive and reproduce. These adaptive traits will be passed on through generations. Many human traits contributed to the survival of
early human communities. A capacity for efficient walking and running, for instance, was important
to human survival for thousands of years. However, as cultural change led to new lifestyles, some
human characteristics became maladaptive.
One example is the obesity epidemic that has emerged all over the world. According to the Center
for Disease Control and Prevention, more than one-third of the population of the United States is
obese.4 Obesity is considered to be a “disease of civilization,” meaning that it did not exist in early
human populations. Taking a biocultural evolutionary approach to human health, we can ask what
traits characteristic of early human foraging populations might have encouraged an accumulation of
fat in the human body. The answer comes from the evidence of food shortages among foraging populations. In fact, 47 percent of societies that forage experience food shortages at least once per year.
Another 24 percent experience a shortage at least every two years.5 When taking this into account,
the ability to retain body fat would have been advantageous for humans in the past. Women with
more body fat could give birth to healthy babies and breastfeed them, even in periods of food scarcity.
It is also possible that women and men would have viewed body fat as a sign of health and access to
resources, choosing sexual partners based on this characteristic. If so, powerful biological and cultural
forces would have contributed to genetic traits that led to efficient metabolism and higher body fat.
With the development of agriculture, calories became more easily available while many people
in the population became more sedentary. Traits that were once adaptive became maladaptive. The
development of cultural preferences for foods high in fat and sugar, such as the “standard American
diet” (SAD) is directly associated with obesity. These cultural changes have had a negative impact on
health in many places. In Polynesia, for instance, obesity rates were around 15 percent in traditional
farming communities, but climbed to over 35 percent as people moved to cities.6 This is an example
of the biocultural nature of many human health challenges.
Another example of this biocultural dynamic is sickle cell anemia, an inherited disease that can be
fatal. A person who inherits the sickle cell gene from both parents will have red blood cells with an
usual sickle (crescent) shape. These cells cannot carry oxygen as efficiently as normal red blood cells
and they are also more likely to form painful and dangerous blood clots. Ordinarily, genetic condi-

Health and Medicine

3

tions that make it more difficult for individuals to survive or have children, will become less common
in populations over time due to the effects of natural selection. From an evolutionary perspective, one
might ask why a deadly genetic condition has remained so common in human populations.
The cultural context is important for answering this question. The sickle cell gene is found most
often in human populations in Africa and Southeast Asia where malaria is widespread. Malaria is a
mosquito-borne illness that can be deadly to humans. People who have inherited one copy of the
sickle cell anemia trait (instead of the two copies that cause sickle cell disease) have resistance to
malaria. This is a significant adaptive trait in parts of the world where malaria is widespread. There is
some evidence that malaria became a significant threat to human health only after the invention of
agriculture. The deforested areas and collections of standing water that characterize agricultural communities also attract the mosquitos that carry disease. 7 In this case, we can see biocultural dynamics
in action. Because resistance to malaria is an adaptive trait, the sickle cell gene remained common in
populations where malaria is present. In parts of West and Central Africa, up to 25 percent of the
population has the sickle cell gene. While sickle cell anemia is still a deadly disease, those who inherit
a single copy of the gene have some protection from malaria, itself a deadly threat in many places.
This example illustrates the biocultural interaction between genes, pathogens, and culture.
Infectious diseases generally do not have an adaptive function for humans like the examples above,
but many infectious diseases are influenced by human cultural systems. Because early human communities consisted of small groups with a foraging lifestyle, viruses and bacteria transmitted from
person to person were unlikely to result in large-scale epidemics. Healthy individuals from neighboring groups could simply avoid coming into contact with anyone who was suffering from illness and
outbreaks would be naturally contained.8
The rapid increase in the size of human communities following the invention of agriculture
changed this pattern. Agriculture can support more people per unit of land and, at the same time,
agriculturalists need to live in permanent urban settlements in order to care for their crops. In a cyclical way, agriculture provides more food while also requiring that people have sizeable families to do
the necessary farm work. Over the course of several thousand years, agricultural communities became
increasingly densely populated. This had many implications for local ecology: problems disposing of
waste and difficulty accessing clean water. A prime example of the health effects of the transition to
urban settlements is cholera, a water-borne illness that spreads through water that has been polluted
with human feces. Cholera, which was first detected in urban populations in India, has killed tens
of thousands of people throughout history and continues to threaten populations today, particularly
in developing countries, where access to clean water is limited, and in places that have experienced
natural disasters.9
From an adaptive perspective, human beings die from infectious diseases because they do not have
immunity to them. Immunity can be built up over time for some diseases, but unfortunately only
after the illness or death of many members of a population.10 When a new infectious disease reaches
a population, it can wreak havoc on many people. Historically, several new infectious diseases are
known to have been introduced to human populations through contact with livestock. Tuberculosis
and smallpox were linked to cattle and influenza to chickens. When humans domesticated animal
species, and began to live in close proximity to them, new routes for the transmission of zoonotic
disease, illnesses that can be passed between humans and animals, were established.11 Living in cities
accelerates the spread of infectious diseases and the scale of outbreaks, but may also contribute to
the natural selection of genetic traits that confer resistance to disease. This biocultural evolutionary

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

process has been documented in urban populations where there are genes providing some resistance
to leprosy and tuberculosis.12

ETHNOMEDICINE
Ethnomedicine is the comparative study of cultural ideas about wellness, illness, and healing. For
the majority of our existence, human beings have depended on the resources of the natural environment and on health and healing techniques closely associated with spiritual beliefs. Many such practices, including some herbal remedies and techniques like acupuncture, have been studied scientifically and found to be effective.13 Others have not necessarily been proven medically effective by
external scientific evidence, but continue to be embraced by communities that perceive them to be
useful. When considering cultural ideas about health, an important place to start is with ethnoetiology: cultural explanations about the underlying causes of health problems.
In the United States the dominant approach to thinking about
health is biomedical. Illnesses are thought to be the result of specific, identifiable agents. This can include pathogens (viruses or
bacteria), malfunction of the body’s biochemical processes (conditions such as cancer), or physiological disorders (such as organ
failure). In biomedicine as it is practiced in the United States
(Western biomedicine), health is defined as the absence of disease or dysfunction, a perspective that notably excludes consideration of social or spiritual well-being. In non-Western contexts
biomedical explanations are often viewed as unsatisfactory. In
his analysis of ideas about health and illness in non-Western cultures, George Foster (1976) concluded that these ideas could be
categorized into two main types of ethno-etiology: personalistic
and naturalistic.14

Ethno-Etiologies: Personalistic and Naturalistic
Personalistic ethno-etiologies view disease as the result of the “active, purposeful intervention of
an agent, who may be human (a witch or sorcerer), nonhuman (a ghost, an ancestor, an evil spirit),
or supernatural (a deity or other very powerful being).”15 Illness in this kind of ethno-etiology is
viewed as the result of aggression or punishment directed purposefully toward an individual; there
is no accident or random chance involved. Practitioners who are consulted to provide treatment are
interested in discovering who is responsible for the illness—a ghost, an ancestor? No one is particularly interested in discovering how the medical condition arose in terms of the anatomy or biology
involved. This is because treating the illness will require neutralizing or satisfying a person, or a supernatural entity, and correctly identifying the being who is the root cause of the problem is essential
for achieving a cure.
The Heiban Nuba people of southern Sudan provide an interesting example of a personalistic etiology. As described by, S.F. Nadel in the 1940s, the members of this society had a strong belief that
illness and other misfortune was the result of witchcraft.

Health and Medicine

5

A certain magic, mysteriously appearing in individuals, causes the death or illness of anyone
who eats their grain or spills their beer. Even spectacular success, wealth too quickly won, is
suspect; for it is the work of a spirit-double, who steals grain or livestock for his human twin.
This universe full of malignant forces is reflected in a bewildering array of rituals, fixed and
occasional, which mark almost every activity of tribal life.16
Because sickness is thought to be caused by spiritual attacks from others in the community, people
who become sick seek supernatural solutions. The person consulted is often a shaman, a person who
specializes in contacting the world of the spirits.
In Heiban Nuba culture, as well as in other societies where shamans exist, the shaman is believed
to be capable of entering a trance-like state in order to cross between the ordinary and supernatural
realms. While in this state, the shaman can identify the individual responsible for causing the illness
and sometimes the spirits can be convinced to cure the disease itself. Shamans are common all around
the world and despite the proverbial saying that “prostitution is the oldest profession,” shamanism
probably is! Shamans are religious and medical practitioners who play important social roles in their
communities as healers with a transcendent ability to navigate the spirit world for answers. In addition, the often have a comprehensive knowledge of the local ecology and how to use plants medicinally. They can address illnesses using both natural and supernatural tools.
In naturalistic ethno-etiologies, diseases are thought to be the result of natural forces such as
“cold, heat, winds, dampness, and above all, by an upset in the balance of the basic body elements.”17
The ancient Greek idea that health results from a balance between the four humors is an example of
a naturalistic explanation. The concept of the yin and yang, which represent opposite but complementary energies, is a similar idea from traditional Chinese medicine. Achieving balance or harmony
between these two forces is viewed as essential to physical and emotional health. Unlike personalistic
explanations, practitioners who treat illness in societies with naturalistic ethno-etiologies are interested in understanding how the medical condition arose so that they can choose therapeutic remedies
viewed as most appropriate.
Emotional difficulties can be viewed as the cause of illness in a naturalistic ethno-etiology (an
emotionalistic explanation). One example of a medical problem associated with emotion is susto,
an illness recognized by the Mixe, an indigenous group who live in Oaxaca, Mexico, as well as others
throughout central America. The symptoms of susto include difficulty sleeping, lack of energy, loss
of appetite and sometimes nausea/vomiting and fever. The condition is believed to be a result of a
“fright” or shock and, in some cases at least, it is believed to begin with a shock so strong that it disengages the soul from the body.18 The condition is usually treated with herbal remedies and barrida
(sweeping) ceremonies designed to repair the harm caused by the shock itself.19 Although physicians
operating within a biomedical ethno-etiology have suggested that susto is a psychiatric illness that in
other cultural contexts could be labeled anxiety or depression, in fact susto is does not fit easily into
any one Western biomedical category. Those suffering from susto see their condition as a malady that
is emotional, spiritual, and physical.20
In practice, people assess medical problems using a variety of explanations and in any given society
personalistic, naturalistic, or even biomedical explanations may all apply in different situations. It is
also important to keep in mind that the line between a medical concern and other kinds of life challenges can be blurry. An illness may be viewed as just one more instance of general misfortune such
as crop failure or disappointment in love. Among the Azande in Central Africa, witchcraft is thought
to be responsible for almost all misfortune, including illness. E.E. Evans-Pritchard, an anthropologist

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

who studied the Azande of north-central Africa in the 1930s, famously described this logic by describing a situation in which a granary, a building used to store grain, collapsed.
In Zandeland sometimes an old granary collapses. There is nothing remarkable in this. Every
Zande knows that termites eat the supports in course of time and that even the hardest
woods decay after years of service. Now a granary is the summerhouse of a Zande homestead
and people sit beneath it in the heat of the day and chat or play the African hole-game or
work at some craft. Consequently it may happen that there are people sitting beneath the
granary when it collapses and they are injured…Now why should these particular people
have been sitting under this particular granary at the particular moment when it collapsed?
That it should collapse is easily intelligible, but why should it have collapsed at the particular
moment when these particular people were sitting beneath it…The Zande knows that the
supports were undermined by termites and that people were sitting beneath the granary in
order to escape the heat of the sun. But he knows besides why these two events occurred at
a precisely similar moment in time and space. It was due to the action of witchcraft. If there
had been no witchcraft people would have been sitting under the granary and it would not
have fallen on them, or it would have collapsed but the people would not have been sheltering
under it at the time. Witchcraft explains the coincidence of these two happenings.21
According to this logic, an illness of the body is ultimately caused by the same force as the collapse of
the granary: witchcraft. In this case, an appropriate treatment may not even be focused on the body
itself. Ideas about health are often inseparable from religious beliefs and general cultural assumptions
about misfortune.22

Is Western Biomedicine An Ethno-Etiology?
The biomedical approach to health strikes many people, particularly residents of the United States,
as the best or at least the most “fact-based” approach to medicine. This is largely because Western
biomedicine is based on the application of insights from science, particularly biology and chemistry,
to the diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions. The effectiveness of biomedical treatments is
assessed through rigorous testing using the scientific method and indeed Western biomedicine has
produced successful treatments for many dangerous and complex conditions: everything from antibiotics and cures for cancer to organ transplantation.
However, it is important to remember that the biomedical approach is itself embedded in a distinct cultural tradition, just like other ethno-etiologies. Biomedicine, and the scientific disciplines
on which it is based, are products of Western history. The earliest Greek physicians Hippocrates (c.
406–370 BC) and Galen (c. 129–c. 200 AD) shaped the development of the biomedical perspective
by providing early insights into anatomy, physiology, and the relationship between environment
and health. From its origins in ancient Greece and Rome, the knowledge base that matured into
contemporary Western biomedicine developed as part of the Scientific Revolution in Europe, slowly
maturing into the medical profession recognized today. While the scientific method used in Western
biomedicine represents a distinct and powerful “way of knowing” compared to other etiologies, the
methods, procedures, and forms of reasoning used in biomedicine are products of Western culture. 23
In matters of health, as in other aspects of life, ethnocentrism predisposes people to believe that
their own culture’s traditions are the most effective. People from non-Western cultures do not neces-

Health and Medicine

7

sarily agree that Western biomedicine is superior to their own ethno-etiologies. Western culture does
not even have a monopoly on the concept of “science.” Other cultures recognize their own forms of
science separate from the Western tradition and these sciences have histories dating back hundreds or
even thousands of years. One example is Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), a set of practices developed over more than 2,500 years to
address physical complaints holistically through
acupuncture, exercise, and herbal remedies. The
tenets of Traditional Chinese Medicine are not
based on science as it is defined in Western culture, but millions of people, including a growing
number of people in the United States and Europe, regard TCM as credible and effective.
Ultimately, all ethno-etiologies are rooted
in shared cultural perceptions about the way
the world works. Western biomedicine practitioners would correctly observe that the strength
of Western biomedicine is derived from use of
a scientific method that emphasizes objectively
observable facts. However, this this would not
be particularly persuasive to someone whose
culture uses a different ethno-etiology or whose
understanding of the world derives from a different tradition of “science.” From a comparative
perspective, Western biomedicine may be viewed
as one ethno-etiology in a world of many alternatives.

Techniques for Healing
Western biomedicine tends to conceive of the human body as a kind of biological machine. When
parts of the machine are damaged, defective, or out of balance, chemical or surgical interventions are
the preferred therapeutic responses. Biomedical practitioners, who can be identified by their white
coats and stethoscopes, are trained to detect observable or quantifiable symptoms of disease, often
through the use of advanced imaging technologies or tests of bodily fluids like blood and urine. Problems detected through these means will be addressed. Other factors known to contribute to wellness,
such as the patient’s social relationships or emotional state of mind, are considered less relevant for
both diagnosis and treatment. Other forms of healing, which derive from non-biomedical ethno-etiologies, reverse this formulation, giving priority to the social and spiritual.
In Traditional Chinese Medicine, the body is thought to be governed by the same forces that
animate the universe itself. One of these is chi (qi), a vital life force that flows through the body
and energizes the body and its organs. Disruptions in the flow or balance of chi can lead to a lack of
internal harmony and ultimately to health problems so TCM practitioners use treatments designed
to unblock or redirect chi, including acupuncture, dietary changes, and herbal remedies. This is an

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

example of humoral healing, an approach to healing that seeks to treat medical ailments by achieving a balance between the forces or elements of the body.
Communal healing, a second category of medical treatment, directs the combined efforts of the
community toward treating illness. In this approach, medical care is a collaboration between multiple
people. Among the !Kung (Ju/’hoansi) of the Kalahari Desert in southern Africa, energy known as
n/um can be channeled by members of the community during a healing ritual and directed toward
individuals suffering from illness. Richard Katz, Megan Bisele, and Verna St. Davis (1982) described
an example of this kind of ceremony:
The central event in this tradition is the all-night healing dance. Four times a month on the
average, night signals the start of a healing dance. The women sit around the fire, singing and
rhythmically clapping. The men, sometimes joined by the women, dance around the singers.
As the dance intensifies, n/um, or spiritual energy, is activated by the healers, both men and
women, but mostly among the dancing men. As n/um is activated in them, they begin to kia,
or experience an enhancement of their consciousness. While experiencing kia, they heal all
those at the dance.24
While communal healing techniques often involve harnessing supernatural forces such as the num, it
is also true that these rituals help strengthen social bonds between people. Having a strong social and
emotional support system is an important element of health in all human cultures.

Faith and the Placebo Effect
Humoral and communal approaches to healing, which from a scientific perspective would seem to
have little potential to address the root causes of an illness, present an important question for medical anthropologists. What role does faith play in healing? Sir William Osler, a Canadian physician
who was one of the founders of Johns Hopkins Hospital, believed that much of a physician’s healing
ability derived from his or her ability to inspire patients with a faith that they could be cured.25 Osler
wrote:
Faith in the Gods or in the Saints cures one, faith in little pills another, suggestion a third,
faith in a plain common doctor a fourth…If a poor lass, paralyzed apparently, helpless, bedridden for years, comes to me having worn out in mind, body, and estate a devoted family;
if she in a few weeks or less by faith in me, and faith alone, takes up her bed and walks, the
Saints of old could not have done more.26
In fact, there is a considerable amount of research suggesting that there is a placebo effect involved
in many different kinds of healing treatments. A placebo effect is a response to treatment that occurs
because the person receiving the treatment believes it will work, not because the treatment itself is
effective.
In Western biomedicine, the placebo effect has been observed in situations in which a patient
believes that he or she is receiving a certain drug treatment, but is actually receiving an inactive
substance such as water or sugar. 27 Research suggests that the body often responds physiologically to
placebos in the same way it would if the drug was real.28 The simple act of writing a prescription can
contribute to the successful recovery of individuals because patients trust that they are on a path that

Health and Medicine

9

will lead to wellness.29 If we consider the role of the placebo effect in the examples above, we should
consider the possibility that humoral and communal healing are perceived to “work” because the
people who receive these remedies have faith in them.
An interesting example of the complexity of the mind-body connection is found in studies of intercessory prayer: prayers made to request healing for another person. In one well-known study, researchers separated patients who had recently undergone heart surgery into two groups, one containing people who know they would be receiving prayers for their recovery and another group who
would receive prayers without being aware of it. Those patients who knew they were receiving prayers
actually had more complications and health problems in the month following surgery.30 This reflects
an interesting relationship between faith and healing. Why did the patients who knew that others
were praying for them experience more complications? Perhaps it was because the knowledge that
their doctors had asked others to pray for them made patients more stressed, perceiving that their
health was at greater risk.
However, it can also be a lack of faith that drives people to look for alternative treatments. In
the United States, alternative treatments, some of which are drawn from humoral or communal
healing traditions, have become more popular among patients who believe that Western
biomedicine is failing them. Cancer research
facilities have begun to suggest acupuncture as
a treatment for the intense nausea and fatigue
caused by chemotherapy and scientific studies suggest that acupuncture can be effective in
relieving these symptoms.31 Marijuana, a drug
that has a long recorded history of medical use
starting in ancient China, Egypt, and India, has
steadily gained acceptance in the United States
as a treatment for a variety of ailments ranging
from anxiety to Parkinson’s disease.32 As growing
numbers of people place their faith in these and
other remedies, it is important to recognize that
many alternative forms of healing or medicine lack scientific evidence for their efficacy. The results
derived from these practices may owe as much to faith as medicine.

MENTAL HEALTH
Unlike other kinds of illnesses, which present relatively consistent symptoms and clear biological
evidence, mental health disorders are experienced and treated differently cross-culturally. While the
discipline of psychiatry within Western biomedicine applies a disease-framework to explain mental
illness, there is a consensus in medical anthropology that mental health conditions are much more
complicated than the biological illness model suggests. These illnesses are not simply biological or
chemical disorders, but complex responses to the environment, including the web of social and cultural relationships to which individuals are connected.
Medical anthropologists do not believe there are universal categories of mental illness.33 Instead,
individuals may express psychological distress through a variety of physical and emotional symptoms.
Arthur Kleinman, a medical anthropologist, has argued that every culture frames mental health

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

concerns differently. The pattern of symptoms associated with mental health conditions vary greatly
between cultures. In China, Kleinman discovered that patients suffering from depression did not describe feelings of sadness, but instead complained of boredom, discomfort, feelings of inner pressure,
and symptoms of pain, dizziness, and fatigue.34
Mental health is closely connected with social and cultural expectations and mental illnesses can
arise as a result of pressures and challenges individuals face in particular settings. Rates of depression
are higher for refugees, immigrants, and others who have experienced dislocation and loss. A sense
of powerlessness also seems to play a role in triggering anxiety and depression, a phenomenon that
has been documented in groups ranging from stay-at-home mothers in England to Native Americans
affected by poverty and social marginalization.35
Schizophrenia, a condition with genetic as well as environmental components, provides another
interesting example of cross-cultural variation. Unlike anxiety or depression, there is some consistency in the symptom patterns associated with this condition cross culturally: hallucinations, delusions, and social withdrawal. What differs, however, is the way these symptoms are viewed by the
community. In his research in Indonesia, Robert Lemelson discovered that symptoms of schizophrenia are often viewed by Indonesian communities as examples of communication with the spirit
world, spirit possession, or the effects of traumatic memories.36 Documenting the lives of some of
these individuals in a film series, he noted that they remained integrated into their communities and
had significant responsibilities as members of their families and neighborhoods. People with schizophrenia were not, as often happens in the United States, confined to institutions and many were
living with their condition without any biomedical treatments.
In its multi-decade study of schizophrenia in 19 countries, the World Health Organization concluded that societies that were more culturally accepting of symptoms associated with schizophrenia integrated people suffering from the condition into community life more completely. In these
cultures, the illness was less severe and people with schizophrenia had a higher quality of life.37 This
finding has been controversial, but suggests that stigma and the resulting social isolation that characterize responses to mental illness in countries like the United States affect the subjective experience
of the illness as well as its outcomes.38

THE EXPERIENCE OF ILLNESS IN PLACE
Social Construction of Illness
As the above examples demonstrate, cultural attitudes affect how medical conditions will be perceived and how individuals with health problems will be regarded by the wider community. There
is a difference, for instance, between a disease, which is a medical condition that can be objectively
identified, and an illness, which is the subjective or personal experience of feeling unwell. Illnesses
may be caused by disease, but the experience of being sick encompasses more than just the symptoms
caused by the disease itself. Illnesses are, at least in part, social constructions: experiences that are
given meaning by the relationships between the person who is sick and others.
The course of an illness can worsen for instance, if the dominant society views the sickness as a
moral failing. Obesity is an excellent example of the social construction of illness. The condition
itself is a result of culturally induced habits and attitudes toward food, but despite this strong cultural component, many people regard obesity as a preventable circumstance, blaming individuals for
becoming overweight. This attitude has a long cultural history. Consider for instance the religious

Health and Medicine

11

connotations within Christianity of “gluttony” as a sin.39 Such socially constructed stigma influences
the subjective experience of the illness. Obese women have reported avoiding visits to physicians for
fear of judgment and as a result may not receive treatments necessary to help their condition.40 Peter
Attia, a surgeon and medical researcher who delivered a TED Talk on this subject, related the story
of an obese woman who had to have her foot amputated, a common result of complications from
obesity and diabetes. Even though he was a physician, he judged the woman to be lazy. “If you had
just tried even a little bit,” he had thought to himself before surgery.
Subsequently, new research revealed that insulin resistance, a precursor to diabetes, often develops
as a result of the excess sugars used in many kinds of processed foods consumed commonly in the
United States. As Attia observes, high rates of obesity in the United States are a reflection of the types
of foods Americans have learned to consume as part of their cultural environment.41 In addition, the
fact that foods that are high in sugars and fats are inexpensive and abundant, while healthier foods
are expensive and unavailable in some communities, highlights the economic and social inequalities
that contribute to the disease.
The HIV/AIDS virus provides another
example of the way that the subjective experience of an illness can be influenced by
social attitudes. Research in many countries
has shown that people, including healthcare
workers, make distinctions between patients
who are “innocent” victims of AIDS and
those who are viewed as “guilty.” People who
contracted HIV through sex or intravenous
drug use are seen as guilty. The same judgment applies to people who contracted HIV
through same-sex relationships in places
where societal disapproval of same-sex relationships exists. People who contracted HIV from blood
transfusions, or as babies, are viewed as innocent. The “guilty” HIV patients often find it more difficult to access medical care and are treated with disrespect or indifference in medical settings compared with superior treatment provided to those regarded as “innocent.” In the wider community,
“guilty” patients suffer from social marginalization and exclusion while “innocent” patients receive
greater social acceptance and practical assistance in responding to their needs for support and care.42
The stigma that applies to “guilty” patients also ignores the socioeconomic context in which HIV/
AIDS spreads. For instance, in Indonesia, poor women can make considerably more money as sex
workers than in many other jobs: $10 an hour as a sex worker compared to 20 cents an hour in a
factory.43 In a similar way, poverty and a lack of other choices contribute to a decision to engage in sex
work in other societies, including in sub-Saharan Africa where rates of HIV infection are among the
highest in the world. Poverty itself is one of the greatest “risk factors” for HIV infection.44 The clear
relationship between poverty, gender, and HIV infection has been the topic of a great deal of research
in medical anthropology. One example is Paul Farmer’s classic book, AIDS and Accusation: Haiti and
the Geography of Blame (1992), which was one of the earliest books to critically evaluate the connection between poverty, racism, stigma, and neglect that allowed HIV to infect and kill thousands of
Haitians. Projects like this are critical to developing holistic views of the entire cultural, economic,
and political context that affects the spread of the virus and attempts to treat the disease. Partners in
Health, the non-profit medical organization Paul Farmer helped to found, continues to pursue in-

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

novative strategies to prevent and treat diseases like AIDS, strategies that recognize that poverty and
social marginalization provide the environment in which the virus flourishes.

Culture-Bound Syndromes
A culture-bound syndrome is an illness recognized only within a specific culture. These conditions, which combine emotional or psychological with physical symptoms, are not the result of
a disease or any identifiable physiological dysfunction. Instead, culture-bound syndromes are somatic, meaning they are physical manifestations of emotional pain. The existence of these conditions
demonstrates the profound influence of culture and society on the experience of illness.
Anorexia
Anorexia is considered a culture bound syndrome because of its strong association with cultures
that place a high value on thinness as a measure of health and beauty. When we consider concepts of
beauty from cultures all over the world, a common view of beauty is one of someone with additional
fat. This may be because having additional fat in a place where food is expensive means that one is
likely of a higher status. In societies like the United States where food is abundant, it is much more
difficult to become thin than it is to become heavy. Although anorexia is a complex condition, medical anthropologists and physicians have observed that it is much more common in Western cultural
contexts among people with high socioeconomic status.45 Anorexia, as a form of self-deprivation,
has deep roots in Western culture and for centuries practices of self-denial have been associated with
Christian religious traditions. In a contemporary context, anorexia may address a similar, but secular
desire to assert self-control, particularly among teenagers.46
During her research in Fiji, Anne Becker (2004) noted that young women who were exposed to
advertisements and television programs from Western cultures (like the United States and Australia)
became self-conscious about their bodies and began to alter their eating habits to emulate the thin
ideal they saw on television. Anorexia, which had been unknown in Fiji, became an increasingly common problem.47 The same pattern has been observed in other societies undergoing “Westernization”
through exposure to foreign media and economic changes associated with globalization.48
Swallowing Frogs in Brazil
In Brazil, there are several examples of culture-bound syndromes that affect children as well as
adults. Women are particularly susceptible to these conditions, which are connected to emotional
distress. In parts of Brazil where poverty, unemployment, and poor physical health are common,
there are cultural norms that discourage the expression of strong emotions such as anger, grief, or
jealousy. Of course, people continue to experience these emotions, but cannot express them openly.
Men and women deal with this problem in different ways. Men may choose to drink alcohol heavily,
or even to express their anger physically by lashing out at others, including their wives. These are not
socially acceptable behaviors for women who instead remark that they must suppress their feelings,
an act they describe as having to “swallow frogs” (engolir sapos).49
Nervos (nerves) is a culture-bound syndrome characterized by symptoms such as headaches, trembling, dizziness, fatigue, stomach pain, tingling of the extremities and even partial paralysis. It is
viewed as a result of emotional overload: a state of constant vulnerability to shock. Unexplained

Health and Medicine

13

wounds on the body may be diagnosed as a different kind of illness known as “blood-boiling bruises.”
Since emotion is culturally defined as a kind of energy that flows throughout the body, many believe
that too much emotion can overwhelm the body, “boiling over” and producing symptoms. A person can become so angry, for instance, that his or her blood spills out from under the skin, creating
bruises, or so angry that the blood rises up to create severe headaches, nausea, and dizziness. A third
form of culture-bound illness, known as peito aberto (open chest) is believed to be occur when a person, most often a woman, is carrying too much emotional weight or suffering. In this situation, the
heart expands until the chest becomes spiritually “open.” A chest that is “open” is dangerous because
rage and anger from other people can enter and make a person sick.50
In stressful settings like the communities in impoverished areas of northeastern Brazil, it is common for people to be afflicted with culture-bound illnesses throughout their lives. Individuals can
suffer from one condition, or a combination of several. Sufferers may consult rezadeiras/rezadores,
Catholic faith healers who will treat the condition with prayer, herbal remedies, or healing rituals.
Because these practitioners do not distinguish between illnesses of the body and mind, they treat the
symptoms holistically as evidence of personal turmoil. This approach to addressing these illnesses is
consistent with cultural views that it is the suppression of emotion itself that has caused the physical
problems.

BIOMEDICAL TECHNOLOGIES
In the history of human health, technology is an essential topic. Medical technologies have transformed human life. They have increased life expectancy rates, lowered child mortality rates, and are
used to intervene in and often cure thousands of diseases. Of course, these accomplishments come
with many cultural consequences. Successful efforts to intervene in the body biologically also have
implications for cultural values and the social organization of communities, as demonstrated by the
examples below.

Antibiotics and Immunizations
Infectious diseases caused by viruses and bacteria have taken an enormous toll on human populations for thousands of years. During recurring epidemics, tens of thousands of people have died from
outbreaks of diseases like measles, the flu, or bubonic plague. The Black Death, a pandemic outbreak
of plague that spread across Europe and Eurasia from 1346–1353 AD, killed as many as 200 million
people, as much as a third of the European population. Penicillin, discovered in 1928 and mass produced for the first time in the early 1940s, was a turning point in the human fight against bacterial
infections. Called a “wonder drug” by Time magazine, Penicillin became available at a time when
bacterial infections were frequently fatal; the drug was glorified as a cure-all.51 An important factor to
consider about the introduction of antibiotics is the change to an understanding of illness that was
increasingly scientific and technical. Before science could provide cures, personalistic and naturalistic
ethno-etiologies identified various root causes for sickness, but the invention of antibiotics contributed to a strengthening of the Western biomedical paradigm as well as a new era of profitability for
the pharmaceutical industry.
The effects of antibiotics have not been completely positive in all parts of the world. Along with
other technological advances in areas such as sanitation and access to clean water, antibiotics contributed to an epidemiological transition characterized by a sharp drop in mortality rates, particularly

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

among children. In many countries, the immediate effect was an increase in the human population
as well as a shift in the kinds of diseases that were most prevalent. In wealthy countries, for instance,
chronic conditions like heart disease or cancer have replaced bacterial infections as leading causes of
death and the average lifespan has lengthened. In developing countries, the outcome has been mixed.
Millions of lives have been saved by the availability of antibiotics, but high poverty and lack of access
to regular medical care mean that many children who now survive the immediate dangers of infection during infancy succumb later in childhood to malnutrition, dehydration, or other ailments.52

Another difficulty is the fact that many kinds of infections have become untreatable as a result of
bacterial resistance. Medical anthropologists are concerned with the increase in rates of infectious
diseases like tuberculosis and malaria that cannot be treated with many existing antibiotics. According to the World Health Organization, there are nearly 500,000 cases of drug resistant tuberculosis
each year.53 New research is now focused on drug resistance, as well as the social and cultural components of this resistance such as the relationship between poverty and the spread of resistant strains
of bacteria.
Immunizations that can provide immunity against viral diseases have also transformed human
health. The eradication of the smallpox virus in 1977 following a concerted global effort to vaccinate
a large percentage of the world’s population is one example of the success of this biotechnology.
Before the development of the vaccine, the virus was killing 1–2 million people each year.54 Today,
vaccines exist for many of the world’s most dangerous viral diseases, but providing access to vaccines
remains a challenge. The polio virus has been eliminated from most of the world following several
decades of near universal vaccination, but the disease has made a comeback in a handful of countries,
including Afghanistan, Nigeria, and Pakistan, where weak governments, inadequate healthcare systems, or war have made vaccinating children impossible. This example highlights the global inequalities that still exist in access to basic medical care.

Health and Medicine

15

Because viruses have the ability to mutate and to jump between animals and people, human
populations around the world also face the constant threat of new viral diseases. Influenza has been
responsible for millions of deaths. In 1918, a pandemic of the H1N1 flu infected 500 million people,
killing nearly 5 percent of the human population.55 Not all influenza strains are that deadly, but it
remains a dangerous illness and one that vaccines can only partially address.56 Each year, the strains of
the influenza virus placed in the annual “flu shot” are based on predictions about the strains that will
be most common. Because the virus mutates frequently and is influenced by interactions between
human and animal populations, there is always uncertainty about future forms of the virus.57

Reproductive Technologies
Today, the idea of “contraception” is linked to the technology of hormone-based birth control.
“The pill” as we now know it, was not available in the United States until 1960, but attempts to both
prevent or bring about pregnancy through technology date back to the earliest human communities.
Techniques used to control the birthrate are an important subject for medical anthropologists because they have significant cultural implications.
Many cultures use natural forms of birth control practices to influence the spacing of births.
Among the !Kung, for instance, babies are breastfed for many months or even years, which hormonally suppress fertility and decrease the number of pregnancies a woman can have in her lifetime. In
Enga, New Guinea, men and women do not live with one another following a birth, another practice
that increases the time between pregnancies.58 In contrast, cultures where there are social or religious
reasons for avoiding birth control, including natural birth spacing methods, have higher birth rates.
In the United States, the Comstock Act passed in 1873 banned contraception and even the distribution of information about contraception.
Although the Comstock Act is a thing of the past, efforts in the United States to limit access to
birth control and related medical services like abortion are ongoing. Many medical anthropologists
study the ways in which access to reproductive technologies is affected by cultural values. Laury
Oaks (2003) has investigated the way in which activists on both sides of the abortion debate attempt
to culturally define the idea of “risk” as it relates to women’s health. She notes that in the 1990s
anti-abortion activists in the United States circulated misleading medical material suggesting that
abortion increases rates of breast cancer. Although this claim was medically false, it was persuasive
to many people and contributed to doubts about whether abortion posed a health risk to women, a
concern that strengthened efforts to limit access to the procedure.59
Other forms of reproductive technology have emerged from the desire to increase fertility. The
world of “assisted reproduction,” which includes technologies such as in vitro fertilization and surrogate pregnancy, has been the subject of many anthropological investigations. Marcia Inhorn, a medical anthropologist, has written several books about the growing popularity of in vitro fertilization in
the Middle East. Her book, The New Arab Man (2012), explores the way in which infertility disrupts
traditional notions of Arab masculinity that are based on fatherhood and she explores the ways that
couples navigate conflicting cultural messages about the importance of parenthood and religious
disapproval of assisted fertility.60

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

CONCLUSION
As the global population becomes larger, it is increasingly challenging to address the health needs
of the world’s population. Today, 1 in 8 people in the world do not have access to adequate nutrition, the most basic element of good health.61 More than half the human population lives in an
urban environment where infectious diseases can spread rapidly, sparking pandemics. Many of these
cities include dense concentrations of poverty and healthcare systems that are not adequate to meet
demand. 62 Globalization, a process that connects cultures through trade, tourism, and migration,
contributes to the spread of pathogens that negatively affect human health and exacerbates political
and economic inequalities that make the provision of healthcare more difficult.
Human health is complex and these are daunting challenges, but medical anthropologists have
a unique perspective to contribute to finding solutions. Medical anthropology offers a holistic perspective on human evolutionary and biocultural adaptations as well as insights into the relationship
between health and culture. As anthropologists study the ways people think about health and illness
and the socioeconomic and cultural dynamics that affect the provision of health services, there is a
potential to develop new methods for improving the health and quality of life for people all over the
world.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. This chapter describes several examples of diseases that result from interactions between biology
and culture such as obesity. Why is it important to consider cultural factors that contribute
to illness rather than placing blame on individuals? What are some other examples of illnesses
that have cultural as well as biological causes?
2. Many cultures have ethno-etiologies that provide explanations for illness that are not based
in science. From a biomedical perspective, the non-scientific medical treatments provided in
these cultures have a low likelihood of success. Despite this, people tend to believe that the
treatments are working. Why do you think people tend to be satisfied with the effectiveness of
the treatments they receive?
3. How does poverty influence the health of populations around the world? Do you see this
in your own community? Who should be responsible for addressing health care needs in
impoverished communities?

GLOSSARY
Adaptive: traits that increase the capacity of individuals to survive and reproduce.
Biocultural evolution: describes the interactions between biology and culture that have influenced
human evolution.
Biomedical: an approach to medicine that is based on the application of insights from science, particularly biology and chemistry.
Communal healing: an approach to healing that directs the combined efforts of the community
toward treating illness.
Culture-bound syndrome: an illness recognized only within a specific culture.

Health and Medicine

17

Emotionalistic explanation: suggests that illnesses are caused by strong emotions such as fright,
anger, or grief; this is an example of a naturalistic ethno-etiology.
Epidemiological transition: the sharp drop in mortality rates, particularly among children, that
occurs in a society as a result of improved sanitation and access to healthcare.
Ethno-etiology: cultural explanations about the underlying causes of health problems.
Ethnomedicine: the comparative study of cultural ideas about wellness, illness, and healing.
Humoral healing: an approach to healing that seeks to treat medical ailments by achieving a balance
between the forces, or elements, of the body
Maladaptive: traits that decrease the capacity of individuals to survive and reproduce.
Medical anthropology: a distinct sub-specialty within the discipline of anthropology that investigates human health and health care systems in comparative perspective.
Naturalistic ethno-etiology: views disease as the result of natural forces such as cold, heat, winds, or
an upset in the balance of the basic body elements.
Personalistic ethno-etiology: views disease as the result of the actions of human or supernatural
beings.
Placebo effect: a response to treatment that occurs because the person receiving the treatment believes it will work, not because the treatment itself is effective.
Shaman: a person who specializes in contacting the world of the spirits.
Somatic: symptoms that are physical manifestations of emotional pain.
Zoonotic: diseases that have origins in animals and are transmitted to humans.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Sashur Henninger-Rener is an anthropologist with research in the fields of comparative religion
and psychological anthropology. She received a Master of Arts from Columbia University in the
City of New York in Anthropology and has since been researching and teaching. Currently, Sashur
is teaching with The University of LaVerne and the Los Angeles Community College District in the
fields of Cultural and Biological Anthropology. In her free time, Sashur enjoys traveling the world,
visiting archaeological and cultural sites along the way. She and her husband are actively involved in
animal rescuing, hoping to eventually found their own animal rescue for animals that are waiting to
find homes.

NOTES
1. Jermone Gilbert, Humors, Hormones, and Neurosecretions (New York: State University of New York Press, 1962).
2. World Health Organization, “Health Impact Assessment,” http://www.who.int/hia/evidence/doh/en/.
3. Sally McBrearty and Allison Brooks, “The Revolution That Wasn’t: A New Interpretation of the Origin of Modern Humans,” Journal of Human Evolution 39 (1999), 453–563.
4. U.S. Center for Disease Control and Prevention, “Adult Obesity Facts,” http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.html.
5. Marjorie G. Whiting, A Cross Cultural Nutrition Survey (Cambridge, MA: Harvard School of Public Health, 1968).
6. Ian A.M. Prior, “The Price of Civilization,” Nutrition Today 6 no. 4 (1971): 2–11.
7. Steven Connor, “Deadly malaria may have risen with the spread of agriculture,” National Geographic, http://news.
nationalgeographic.com/news/2001/06/0625_wiresmalaria.html.
8. Jared Diamond, “The Arrow of Disease,” Discover Magazine, October 1992. http://discovermagazine.com/1992/oct/
thearrowofdiseas137.

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

9. World Health Organization, “Cholera,” http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs107/en/.
10. George J. Armelagos and John R. Dewey, “Evolutionary Response to Human Infectious Disease,” BioScience, 25(1970):
271–275.
11. William McNeill, Plagues and People (New York: Doubleday, 1976).
12. Ian Barnes, Anna Duda, Oliver Pybus, Mark G. Thomas. Ancient Urbanisation Predicts Genetic Resistance To Tuberculosis,” Evolution 65 no. 3 (2011): 842–848.
13. George T. Lewith, Acupuncture: Its Place in Western Medical Science (United Kingdom: Merlin Press, 1998).
14. George M. Foster, “Disease Etiologies in Non-Western Medical Systems,”
American Anthropologist 78 no 4 (1976): 773–782.
15. Ibid., 775
16. S.F. Nadel, The Nuba: An Anthropological Study of the Hill Tribes in Kordofan (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1947), 173.
17. Foster, “Disease Etiologies in Non-Western Medical Systems,” 775.
18. A.J. Rubel, “The Epidemiology of a Folk Illness: Susto in Hispanic America,” Ethnology
3 (1964): 268–283.
19. Robert T. Trotter II, “Susto: The Context of Community Morbidity Patterns,” Ethnology 21 no. 3 (1982): 215–226.
20. Frank J. Lipp, “The Study of Disease in Relation to Culture: The Susto Complexe Among the Mixe of Oaxaco,” Dialectical
Anthropology 12 no. 4 (1987): 435–442.
21. E.E. Evans-Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic Among the Azande (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1937), 70.
22. Leonard B. Glick, “Medicine as an Ethnographic Category: The Gimi of the New Guinea Highlands,” Ethnology 6 (1967):
31–56.
23. Elliott Mishler, “Viewpoint: Critical Perspectives on the Biomedical Model,” in
E. Mishler, L.A. Rhodes, S. Hauser, R. Liem, S. Osherson, and N. Waxler, eds.
Social Contexts of Health, Illness, and Patient Care (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press).
24. Richard Katz, Megan Biesele, and Verna St. Davis, Healing Makes Our Hearts Happy: Spirituality and Cultural Transformation among the Kalahari Ju/ ’hoansi (Rochester VS, Inner Traditions, 1982), 34.
25. Michael Bliss, William Osler: A Life in Medicine (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 276.
26. William Osler, “The Faith That Heals,” British Medical Journal 1 (1910): 1470–1472.
27. Cara Feinberg, “The Placebo Phenomenon,” Harvard Magazine http://harvardmagazine.com/2013/01/the-placebophenomenon.
28. Ted J. Kaptchuk, and Franklin G. Miller, “Placebo Effects in Medicine,” New England Journal of Medicine 373 (2015):8–9.
29. Robert Bud, “Antibiotics: From Germophobia to the Carefree Life and Back Again,” in Medicating Modern America:
Prescription Drugs in History, ed. Andrea Tone and Elizabeth Siegel Watkins (New York: New York University Press, 2007).
30. H. Benson, J.A. Dusek, J.B. Sherwood, P. Lam, C.F. Bethea, and W. Carpenter, “Study of the Therapeutic Effects of Intercessory Prayer (STEP) in Cardiac Bypass Patients: A Multicenter Randomized Trial of Uncertainty and Certainty of Receiving
Intercessory Prayer,” American Heart Journal 151 (2006):934–942.
31. National Cancer Institute, “Acupuncture,” http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/cam/acupuncture/healthprofessional/
page5.
32. Mira Taow, “The Religious and Medicinal Uses of Cannabis in China, India, and Tibet,” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs
13(1981): 23–24.
33. Marsella, A. and White, G., eds. Cultural Conceptions of Mental Health and Therapy (Dordrecht, Netherlands: D. Reidel,
1982).
34. Dominic T.S. Lee, Joan Kleinman, and Arthur Kleinman, “Rethinking Depression: An Ethnographic Study of the Experiences of Depression Among Chinese,” Harvard Review of Psychiatry 15 no 1 (2007):1–8.
35. Arthur Kleinman, Rethinking Psychiatry: From Cultural Category to Personal Experience (New York: The Free Press, 1988).
36. Robert Lemelson and L.K. Suryani, “Cultural Formulation of Psychiatric Diagnoses: The Spirits, Penyakit Ngeb and
the Social Suppression of Memory: A Complex Clinical Case from Bali,” Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry 30 no. 3 (2006):
389–413.
37. For more information about these studies, see J. Leff et al., “The International Pilot Study of Schizophrenia: Five-Year
Follow-Up Findings,” Psychological Medicine 22 (1992):131–45; A. Jablensky et al., “Schizophrenia: Manifestations, Incidence
and Course in Different Cultures: A World Health Organization Ten-Country Study,” Psychological Medicine Monograph
Supplement 20(1992); N. Sartorius et al., “Early Manifestations and First-Contact Incidence of Schizophrenia in Different
Cultures,” Psychological Medicine 16 (1986):909–28.
38. Bernice A. Pescosolido, Jack K. Martin, Sigrun Olafsdottir, J. Scott Long, Karen Kafadar, and Tait R. Medina, “The
Theory of Industrial Society and Cultural Schemata: Does the ‘Cultural Myth of Stigma’ Underlie the WHO Schizophrenia
Paradox?,” American Journal of Sociology 121 no. 3 (2015): 783–825.
39. Collean Barry, Victoria Bresscall, Kelly D. Brownell, and Mark Schlesinger, “Obesity Metaphors: How Beliefs about
Obesity Affect Support for Public Policy,” The Milbank Quarterly 87 (2009): 7–47.
40. Peter Conrad and Kristen K. Barker, “The Social Construction of Illness: Key Insights and Policy Implications,” Journal of
Health and Social Behavior, 51(2010): s57-s79.

Health and Medicine

19

41. Peter Attia, “Is the Obesity Crisis Hiding a Bigger Problem?,” TEDMED Talks April 2013 Retrieved from https://www.
ted.com/talks/peter_attia_what_if_we_re_wrong_about_diabetes.
42. Anish P. Mahajan, Jennifer N. Sayles, Vishal A. Patel, Robert H. Remien, Daniel Ortiz, Greg Szekeres, and Thomas J.
Coates, “Stigma in the HIV/AIDS Epidemic: A review of the Literature and Recommendations for the Way Forward,” AIDS
22 supp. 2 (2008): S67-S79.
43. Elizabeth Pisani, “Sex, Drugs, & HIV: Let’s Get Rational,” TED Talks February 2010. http://www.ted.com/talks/
elizabeth_pisani_sex_drugs_and_hiv_let_s_get_rational_1#t-1011824.
44. United Nations, “Poverty and AIDS: What’s Really Driving the Epidemic?” http://www.unfpa.org/conversations/facts.
html.
45. Maria Makino, Koji Tsuboi, and Lorraine Dennerstein, “Prevalence of Eating Disorders: A Comparison of Western and
Non-Western Countries,” Medscape General Medicine 6 no. 3 (2004):49.
46. Joan Jacobs Brumberg, Fasting girls: The Emergence of Anorexia Nervosa as a Modern Disease (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1988).
47. Anne E. Becker, “Television, Disordered Eating, and Young Women in Fiji: Negotiating Body Image and Identity during
Rapid Social Change” Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 28 no. 4 (2004):533–559.
48. Sing Lee, “Reconsidering the Status of Anorexia Nervosa as a Western Culture-Bound Syndrome,” Social Science & Medicine 42 no. 1 (1996): 21–34.
49. L.A. Rebhun, “Swallowing Frogs: Anger and Illness in Northeast Brazil,” Medical Anthropology Quarterly 8 no. 4
(1994):360–382.
50. Ibid., 369–371
51. Robert Bud, “Antibiotics: From Germophobia to the Carefree Life and Back Again.”
52. Nancy Scheper Hughes, Death Without Weeping: The Violence of Everyday Life in Brazil (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1989).
53. World Health Organization, “Antimicrobial Resistance,” http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs194/en/.
54. David Koplow, Smallpox: The Fight to Eradicate a Global Scourge (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003).
55. Jeffery K. Taubenberger, David Baltimore, Peter C. Doherty, Howard Markel, David M. Morens, Robert G. Webster,
and Ian A. Wilson, “Reconstruction of the 1918 Influenza Virus: Unexpected Rewards from the Past,” mBio 3 no. 5 (2012).
56. Jeffrey Taubenberger and David Morens, “1918 influenza: The Mother of All Pandemics,” Emerging Infectious Diseases,
12 (2006).
57. Suzanne Clancy, “Genetics of the Influenza Virus,” Nature Education, 1(2008): 83.
58. For more about these and other examples, see Carol P. MacCormack, Ethnography of Fertility and Birth (New York: Academic Press, 1982).
59. Laury Oaks, “The Social Politics of Health Risk Warning: Competing Claims about the Link between Abortion and Breast
Cancer,” in Risk, Culture, and Health Inequality: Shifting Perceptions of Danger and Blame, eds. Barbara Herr Harthorn and
Laury Oaks (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2003).
60. Marcia C. Inhorn, The New Arab Man: Emergent Masculinities, Technologies, and Islam in the Middle East (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2012).
61. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, “The Multiple Dimensions of Food Security,” http://www.fao.
org/docrep/018/i3458e/i3458e.pdf.
62. World Health Organization, “Urbanization and Health,” Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 88(2010): 241–320.

Seeing Like an Anthropologist:
Anthropology in Practice
Logan Cochrane, Vanier Scholar, University of British Columbia
logan.cochrane@gmail.com
http://www.logancochrane.com

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

• Identify ways in which “seeing like
an anthropologist” differs from the
approach to local cultures used by
international development agencies.
• Explain why “harmful traditional
practices” are prioritized for change
by development agencies and
describe how negative attitudes
toward these practices can be
examples of “bad for them, okay for
us.”
• Assess the reasons why
anthropological perspectives and
techniques tend to have a limited
impact on the design or goals of
international development projects.

What does it mean to see and hear what others do not
see and hear and how can that unique information be
practically applied? The lack of a simple answer is fitting
to anthropology because the work of anthropologists often demonstrates that simplistic explanations are, at best,
only part of the complex stories of human culture. In this
chapter, I provide examples of how the ability to see and
hear is applied in practice and how these skills add value
in a socio-cultural anthropology setting associated with
international development. In particular, I shed light on
the potential challenges of practicing anthropology within
non-governmental organizations. Given the ethic of confidentiality in anthropology, I omit details about the country,
organization, and ethnic groups as much as possible and
instead focus on the processes involved.
Although an education in anthropology stresses the importance of confidentiality and the potentially dire consequences of drawing attention to individuals and communities, it probably does not truly sink in until you conduct
your first fieldwork and “subjects” turn into human beings
with names, families, and feelings. One of the greatest ethical challenges anthropologists face in writing about individuals and communities is the additional attention drawn
to them when the intention of the anthropologist is to
highlight a concern that extends beyond specific individuals
and communities and can thus have negative consequences.
Take, for example, an assessment I conducted of a national
safety net program that took place in a limited number of
communities.1 If the individuals and communities participating had been explicitly identified or could be identified,
they may have experienced negative political consequences
such as a loss of government-provided social services or their
jobs. Instead, the anonymity of the individuals and communities was protected, and the concerns and challenges
were identified in a way that protected those who graciously
and generously contributed their time and ideas to the research process. Complete anonymity is not always desirable,
needed, or possible but is always an important consideration for anthropologists.

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
http://www.perspectivesanthro.org/

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Throughout the last ten years, I have worked for non-governmental organizations—about five
years in Eastern Africa and shorter periods in Asia and the Middle East—as a volunteer, employee,
and consultant with community-based groups and national and international organizations. In this
chapter, I explore one of those experiences to convey a sense of what “seeing like an anthropologist”
means by analyzing an effort to eliminate food taboos by a nongovernmental international development organization. This chapter was inspired by the work of political scientist and anthropologist
James C. Scott, particularly his Seeing Like a State (1998). I shift the focus inward onto anthropology
as a practice and a way of seeing.2

ANTHROPOLOGY AND DEVELOPMENT
Socio-cultural anthropology is best understood by its primary approach to data collection: participant observation. This key component of ethnographic research involves long-term engagement,
living with and learning from a cultural community different from one’s own. In listening, learning
about, and seeing the world from the perspectives of others, anthropologists draw on the idea of cultural relativism. This is in contrast to ethnocentrism, the belief that one’s own culture, cultural values,
and societal organization are true, right, and proper and that others’ are erroneous to some degree.
Cultural relativism posits that cultural practices and ideas must be understood within their contexts.
In the past, some anthropologists participated in the “development” activities of colonial governments, and individual anthropologists and the discipline as a whole were rightly criticized for
their roles in the injustices that resulted. While working in Afghanistan in 2013, I encountered
anthropologists who were engaged in activities in the name of “development” that could be defined
as neo-colonial in that they supported militaries by analyzing cultural communities with the goal of
finding ways to weaken them and foster unequal and unfair relationships (cultural imperialism).
Anthropological engagement is not always benevolent or neutral. As a result, anthropologists are encouraged to engage in self-reflection—to examine their roles, engagements, practices, and objectives
critically, known as reflexivity.
Varying degrees of criticism of the nature, objectives, and embedded assumptions of international
development continue. Some have called on international development practitioners to significantly
reform their activities to make them more effective, while others have expressed more radical criticisms, including the view that provision of aid causes greater impoverishment and should end.3 It is
essential when deconstructing development, as a concept and an activity, to ask why, when, how, and
for whom the development is intended and who it excludes. It also requires identifying the power
dynamics and motivations involved. Anthropological tools and ways of seeing are important means
by which to answer these questions.4

“HARMFUL TRADITIONAL PRACTICES”
My interaction with the project discussed in this chapter was limited in duration and I had specific
tasks related to program evaluation and impact assessment. I interacted with management staff based
in the international head office as well as the national head office, who provided me with background
information about the region and clarified expectations before visiting the project area. The project
itself was not primarily geared toward ending “harmful traditional practices,” but included a component related to addressing gender inequality and practices that negatively impact women. Reflecting

Seeing Like an Anthropologist: Anthropology in Practice

3

back on those discussions, it appears that staff and donors who were located furthest from the area
of the project had the greatest interest in these “harmful traditional practices.” Based on their emphasis, it is clear that foreign and exotic practices had an appeal that basic and shared needs did not.
For example, those who were more distanced from the people the project sought to support were
particularly interested in “female genital mutilation,” exchange marriages, and seemingly irrational
and bizarre food taboos.
On the other hand, within almost every community in the project area, both men and women
were primarily concerned about the lack of clean drinking water and healthcare options. Unfortunately, these concerns attracted little attention from outsiders.5 In fact, many governmental agencies
funding international development have explicitly restricted their funding such that water infrastructure is not an allowable project expense, including the governmental donor for the project in
which I was involved. The reason for this is rarely explicitly stated, however informal discussions with
development agency personnel cite high costs and sustainability as concerns. Abu-Lughod’s (2013)
research on western perceptions of Muslim women, and broadly on conceptualizing “others” and
their needs, provides insight into how prioritization of needs often takes place based upon assumptions, not reality.
“Harmful traditional practices” are an odd collection of practices that range from tattooing
and scarification to exchange marriages, forced marriages and marriages wherein a woman who is
widowed becomes the wife of her deceased husband’s brother. “Harmful traditional practices” also
include acts typically considered criminal activity throughout much of the world, such as abduction
and unlawful confinement. A national committee in Ethiopia, for example, listed 162 “harmful
traditional practices.”6 While many of these practices are illegal and generally agreed to be abuses
of human rights, some have parallel practices that are legal in the countries in which international
organizations are based, such as tattooing and scarification. Numerous examples of “bad for them,
okay for us” could be made. Each practice, its context, laws, and discourse requires contextualization
beyond the scope of this chapter. However, useful examples of deconstructions of one frequently
discussed practice, female genital mutilation, have been made by Russell-Robinson (1997), James
(1998), Obermeyer (1999), Ahmadu and Shweder (2009) and Londono (2009).
The project staff identified a number of “harmful traditional practices” they believed ought to be
stopped; however, I will only explore one of them: a collection of food taboos that were believed to
negatively affect the nutrition of women. In particular, there was a focus on one specific food taboo:
the restriction of women from eating eggs, which was the only food taboo mentioned in every report
provided by the organization.
I learned from the project proposal that there were “cultural taboos” forbidding women from
eating eggs and milk.7 To address this, the project would improve their access and provide training
on the nutritional value of these products. An initial assessment report stated that this taboo was
not only about prohibiting the consumption of eggs, but also poultry. However, it later became
clear that the restriction was only on eating eggs and meat from a specific breed of chicken that was
raised in a woman’s own home or in the home of her in-laws. The organization advocated that this
practice was negatively affecting women and infants because sources of already limited nutrition were
being restricted, particularly an important source of vitamin A, which is a common micronutrient
deficiency amongst the population. While eggs were a primary focus, other internal organizational
reports provided different information: women and children also did not eat goat meat, animals that
had been hunted, or any dairy products.

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

The consumption of these products was believed to cause illness and bring about the death of an
in-law, hence the prohibition. Several years into the project it was reported that a significant change
in child nutrition had occurred and the report suggested that training and education programs discouraging food taboos were the reason for this shift. A detailed gender report, conducted halfway
through the project, suggested that women and girls were still not generally allowed to eat chicken
meat and eggs, but provided some case studies of positive change. This particular report pointed to
the mother-in-law as the person who instituted the prohibition of chicken meat and eggs, while most
reports simply said the prohibition was “cultural” amongst this ethnic group or due to community
misconceptions. After five years of work, the project continued to actively engage in activities aiming
at addressing the “misconceptions” and “traditional practices” of not eating eggs or drinking milk.
One report, finalized a few years into the project, mentioned significant resistance to project activities encouraging the consumption of eggs and chicken meat. The “harmful traditional practice” was
described as a “serious taboo,” and a “deeply rooted belief.” This report referenced another organization that was working to “prove the taboo is wrong” and had fostered remarkable change. Meeting
with management staff in the national head office, I heard the same general story: there are cultural
taboos forbidding women and girls from eating some foods, and specifically eggs. Staff permanently
based in the project area repeated this information.
However, throughout the years of the project very little was understood about this particular practice. The food taboo was identified and a few potential, sometimes conflicting, reasons were given.
No one appeared to have taken the time to understand why these food taboos existed. When I later
explored this question, a staff member who had lived and worked within the region for almost two
decades remarked, “I have not had a chance to know about this.” This is one of the challenges anthropologists face in working within non-governmental organizations: often the difficulties communities
face are assumed to be a result of ignorance and the “solution” is presented as a straightforward,
often technical, activity such as education. I believe the lack of understanding of these practices was
not due to insurmountable barriers, but a lack of inquiry into the “why,” “how,” “when,” and other
questions that make cultural practices understandable. The ability to ask these kinds of questions,
I argue, is a skill built into the anthropological way of seeing. For those familiar with “schemes to
improve the human condition,” as Scott put it, the lack of interest in asking questions would not be
surprising. Organizations tend to identify a problem, propose a solution, and plan evidence-based
activities to achieve an objective. For many in the international development sector, finding out why
these taboos exist is not particularly important. Rather they believe it is most important to stop those
practices deemed (by them) to be harmful.

WE NEVER ASKED ABOUT IT BEFORE
The historian Eugen Weber wrote that “when one looks for different things, one sees different
things.”8 He was referring to seeing within a text; I believe the same applies to other kinds of observation. Anthropologists fundamentally view the world through a unique lens, and their ability to see
what others do not is fostered through anthropological methodologies, approaches, and ideas. The
physical reality is the same; the lens is different. Likewise, professionals in non-governmental organizations—management staff, economists, medical professionals, and development experts—bring
their particular training, their lenses, to the problems, often focusing on different kinds of information they respectively view as important. In other words, our individual perspectives alter what we
see.

Seeing Like an Anthropologist: Anthropology in Practice

5

The ethical challenge for anthropologists working in international development is that often the
donors, organizations and projects operate without detailed sociocultural information. As a result,
many anthropologists end up advocating for significant shifts in how the sector operates. For example, in designing a project, the proposed activities are often outlined before the baseline assessments
of community needs are conducted. When the project is approved, and budget is set, it is difficult
to completely adjust the focus and plan based on new knowledge of community needs. Anthropologists working on these projects often find themselves in the challenging space of advocating for new
approaches, such as funding structures based on needs, rather than donor priorities, and flexibility in
programming as opposed to carrying out the set activities that are outlined in program plans.
In the case of the food taboos identified within this development project, diverse ways of seeing
were evident in the reports, in which medical perspectives focused on the impacts of the nutritional
content of the foods, gender specialists were most concerned with the abuse of women’s rights,
planners identified how behavior changes could occur and be integrated into the project using evidence-based measures, and economists paid attention to the potential income women could generate
by producing poultry and selling eggs. Despite the passing of years and even the identification of
some strong resistance by people in the communities, the food taboos were consistently presented as
cultural issues or misconceptions that best practices and evidence-based behavior-change approaches
could eliminate. The plan was to “raise awareness,” hold “community-based dialogues,” “facilitate
exchange visits” with communities in which such taboos were not practiced, and provide nutritional
education. On paper, the plan sounded good. The diverse activities would reinforce the message of
behavior change with each offering unique insight and thus having a compounding effect in achieving the desired objective. The activities had previously been shown to be successful in a range of
settings. For the project staff, all required information appeared to have been gathered.
My work began with spending time with the people in their communities and asking them about
the food taboos—what they actually were and why they existed—and the community members
provided detailed and insightful information. When I talked to the field staff about it, they reported
that they had never asked the people in the communities those questions. That might sound like a
case of neglect, but I view it is the logical outcome of one way of seeing. When a problematic practice has been identified and the organization has experience with activities that have changed such
behavior, why do the details matter? From that perspective, the tedious task of collecting such data
would waste valuable resources, time, and effort. It is important, at this juncture, to shed some light
on the systemic nature of seeing from technical perspectives of this sort, which are common in the
organizational cultures of international development programs and their staff members. It is not limited to international development workers—national and local organizations often present the same
narratives about “bad” cultural taboos that can be eliminated by providing education about nutrition
and empowering women.

SEEING LIKE AN ANTHROPOLOGIST
When I started my work in the program, I had no previous experience with the ethnic group that
practiced the food taboos and had never been in the region. I was sent to visit a number of communities as part of an assessment unrelated to food taboos and to conduct gender-separated focus
group discussions and individual interviews. In the first community I visited, the adult men made no
mention of food taboos but the women did, and what they said was at odds with the project reports.
They said that the restrictions applied only to adult married women and were, as one of the official

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

reports had noted, limited to a specific local breed of chicken raised in specific households. I made
note of the comments and went on with my tasks. In the second community, I interviewed religious
leaders from two Christian sects who also mentioned the food taboos, describing them as examples
of common practices of witchcraft. In the third and fourth communities, I had lengthy discussions
exploring the context that no one had asked about until then: What in fact were the food taboos?
Why did the taboos exist? What reinforced them as an ongoing practice? How did people view the
practices and what were the consequences of not following them? The staff members who had been
working with the communities were amazed at the valuable information gathered by simply asking
the questions.
Community members made a number of important clarifications, some of which aligned with
what was presented in reports and some did not. The details of these taboos were not uniform in all
communities, however they shared some trends. For example, once a woman married a number of
restrictions began, which included the prohibition of eating eggs and chicken meat, although only
those that were produced from local breeds of chicken and only those raised within her household or
the household of her in-laws. The restrictions did not apply to children or unmarried girls, nor did
they apply to other breeds of chickens. Additionally, women could eat eggs and chicken meat as long
as it was from a different source, such as eggs from a neighbor’s chicken. In some communities, this
also applied to the meat of hunted animals and milk. Women who did consume the prohibited products were believed to suffer from illnesses, such as swelling and itching, or even to cause the death of
one of their in-laws. One project activity instructed women to bring the eggs they were forbidden to
eat to the project staff, who then cooked the eggs and told the women to eat. The response of some
women was outright refusal, some ate and then induced vomiting, while others followed the instructions and ate without strong objection. Reactions such as these suggested that there was more to the
prohibition than a simple misconception.

I WILL NOT EAT IT UNTIL I DIE
Elders in the communities explained that food taboos were one of a series of interconnected restrictions on behaviors, some identified by the project as harmful but not connected to the food taboos. In addition to food taboos, the restrictions included limitations on what women can touch and
places they could enter while menstruating, a prohibition against a wife eating from the first harvest
of the season until after her husband does, and rules preventing a wife from drinking from a newly
prepared batch of alcoholic drink until after her husband does. Project workers had identified many
of these practices, but understood them to be isolated from each other as separate traditions. The
elders’ view of the practices as linked suggested that they needed to be understood as manifestations
of something larger.
I found that the communities’ narratives differed but the information and specific rules were consistent. The food taboos were, in fact, a small part of a detailed belief system that influenced many
components of everyday life. There had been, perhaps two generations ago, a respected leader from
their ethnic group who had supernatural traits. His name was Gumzanjela, and he guided the community and held a role akin to religious leadership. Although Gumzanjela had passed on, he continued to be present in the community. His presence, described as his spirit, influenced what happened,
could bring about illness, and could be called on when seeking cures. Some believed that Gumzanjela
was a person; others believed that he had always been a supernatural being. Regardless, belief in
Gumzanjela was a serious matter; people believed in him, believed his regulations were true, and

Seeing Like an Anthropologist: Anthropology in Practice

7

had witnessed repercussions of failing to follow them. Gumzanjela had established the food taboos
and restrictions for women. One of the many stories told about him was that his first child was born
holding a leaf of a specific plant that was thereafter used as a cure for spiritual illnesses. Treatment of
illness was a common theme in recollections of Gumzanjela and was a primary reason people continued to seek his help. Disobeying Gumzanjela was said to result in curses, sometimes on the one who
violated a rule and other times on a relative such as the in-laws cited in the food taboos. The curses
ranged from relatively minor ailments such as severe itching or swelling to the death of an in-law.
In addition to prohibiting a number of behaviors for women, Gumzanjela had imparted specific
directions for people to follow, often built on his teachings, that were delivered via spiritual mediums
in the community who communicated with Gumzanjela. For example, Gumzanjela had prescribed
a cure that involved cutting off the claw of a chicken and placing it in the belly button of the person
needing treatment. The claw was left there for one week, and the person could not bathe during that
time. At the end of the week, the claw was removed and the person bathed. Only the person being
treated could eat the chicken from which the cutting was taken.
In each community, there were well-known practitioner spirit-mediums, both male and female,
to whom people go to connect with Gumzanjela. They sought various forms of support or requested
that curses be placed on someone. The seeker could be given specific instructions to do certain
things or to refrain from doing certain things. Payments and sacrifices were sometimes required,
and occasionally Gumzanjela called for lengthy spiritual events during the night in which rites were
performed and/or sacrifices were made.
One of the project reports had referred to the food taboos as being deeply rooted and, in context,
it is easy to understand why that was the case. The specific food taboos were components of a much
larger belief system; they were integral activities required by the communities’ religious traditions
and thus taken very seriously. They were, as one member of the community noted, part of the “law
of Gumzanjela.”
A brief analogy demonstrates the gravity of this point. Imagine that the people in the project
communities were followers of Judaism or Islam, religions that prohibit consumption of a number
of foods, including pork.9 An international development organization and its external staff members
might identify a protein deficiency that could be resolved by people consuming pork and view the
taboo against it as a harmful traditional practice that should be eliminated through education about
its nutritional value. Additionally, disadvantaged members of society could be encouraged to raise
and sell pigs to generate income. Because Islam and Judaism are major recognized religions with
millions of followers, it might seem absurd to try to convince them to eat pork based on nutritional
and economic grounds. But the law of Gumzanjela is also a belief system and is as important to the
communities in the project as Islam and Judaism are to their followers. The project had failed to
recognize that the food taboos were part of a comprehensive belief system and that the organization
had made demands that directly confronted culturally important beliefs and values. As a result, the
project activities were viewed as an affront to their religious traditions and to the righteous, respected
man from whom the laws had come and his living spirit.
I asked a group of men if a person could continue to believe in Gumzanjela and not practice the
food taboo regarding chicken and eggs. No, they said, it was not possible. They added forcefully,
“I believe in Gumzanjela. I have seen the effects; no cure works except from Gumzanjela.” They
explained that there “is no cure from the medical professionals; only Gumzanjela can cure these
illnesses.” Women thoroughly embraced these beliefs as well. Several years into the project, for example, a woman stated that she would “not eat it [the eggs] until I die.” Her response reflected the

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

strength of her personal beliefs despite the project’s efforts. The majority of the community members
interviewed agreed that belief in Gumzanjela was correct and that they must follow the system set
out. Gumzanjela was present in their lives and in their homes and affected their lives daily. They
experienced it and knew it to be true.
Some members of the community had “left Gumzanjela” and practiced a different faith, either
Christianity or Islam. A primary reason for their leaving Gumzanjela and abandoning the food taboos, they explained, was the theology of their new faith. The women ate eggs, disregarded the
menstruation rules, and sought medical help from local clinics rather than cures from spiritual practitioners. Abandoning the taboos required abandoning the greater belief system, a religious conversion either to a new theology or to a rejection of faith (at least theoretically; I did not encounter any
community members who rejected faith altogether).

AN ISOLATED CASE?
Is this particular project unique or is the narrow vision of practitioners common in international
development? Another project in which I was involved was run by an agricultural organization that
was promoting changes in planting methodologies aimed at increasing yields. The farmers recognized
that the new planting method increased yields but did not adopt it. A primary reason for that failure
was a different way of thinking about what is important in an agricultural livelihood—the organization was promoting short-term gains and the farmers were prioritizing long-term sustainability of
the soil. Another international organization and its donors were confident that child malnutrition in
a region was the product of lack of knowledge about the nutritional value of consuming a diversity
of foods to reduce micronutrient deficiencies, and they developed a series of educational projects to
address the problem. But after spending time with members of the community, they realized that a
lack of diversity in their diets was due largely to having few options, primarily because of poverty, and
that the malnutrition was associated with seasonal food shortages and could not be alleviated through
education. The activities of these projects appeared beneficial, but did not address the actual problems; instead, they were designed based on assumptions about both the problems and the solutions
and failed to value contextualized, ethnographic information.
Technical approaches too often exclude the socio-political context in which they are applied and,
consequently, entirely miss the politicized nature of the project and its activities. A vocational training effort I worked with in the Middle East, for example, failed, not because the need for education
was misunderstood, but because the socio-political context in which it took place was neglected;
the poor quality of existing educational systems was not addressed because improving the quality
of the education provided was not an objective. Similarly, in the evaluation of the social safety net
mentioned at the outset, the political nature of the implementation of the project was not adequately
recognized by the international funding agencies.10 Thus, the experience explored in this chapter is
not uncommon, and it is clear that the anthropological way of seeing allows broader issues to come
into view—cultural, social, and political—which can then be incorporated into the project goals and
activities. These are areas that relatively technical approaches and evaluations tend to miss.

REFLECTIONS
What, then, do socio-cultural anthropologists do? There is no single answer to this question.
There are, however, skills that anthropologists acquire that unveil unique ways of seeing and listening

Seeing Like an Anthropologist: Anthropology in Practice

9

that can be applied to many different settings. Some anthropologists use these skills to facilitate the
creation of policies that are more inclusive and multicultural, some engage with poorly understood
subcultures, and others enhance the effectiveness of marketing of consumer goods. This chapter illustrates how I used the anthropological way of seeing to contextualize development actions, actors, and
the people for whom the “development” was being done and explores the ethical challenges faced by
anthropologists when working in the international development sector and within non-governmental organizations.
In general, I have found that many people working in international development organizations
have not yet recognized the value of asking people why they do what they do. From the anthropologist’s point of view, understanding why a practice occurs is not merely an act of inquiry; it is also
a means of demonstrating respect for people and their knowledge and taking time to listen, learn,
and see. The typical approach of development practitioners implicitly and explicitly conveys a lack of
respect for the culture, values, and ideas of the people the projects seek to support.
The respect inherent to the anthropologist’s view is based on cultural relativity, which guides the
inquiry process. Judgment is withheld to understand the relative context of the practices in question.
Far too frequently staff of development organizations judge based on their assumptions and do not
see value in investigating further. That limited vision is a barrier to their success. It is essential, in
seeing like an anthropologist, to be willing to understand other people’s perspectives and respect their
ideas. As an anthropologist, I am not required to believe in Gumzanjela. However, my training and
education prepare me to understand and to begin to see the world from a perspective founded in
that belief. My ability and willingness to see reality from perspectives other than my own are essential
skills—the ability to see what some people do not see and hear what some people do not hear. Anthropology can connect the activities of international development efforts to cultural values so they
work together instead of against each other. The identification of the comprehensive belief system in
which the food taboos were embedded, for example, opened up new avenues for practical, culturally
respectful solutions to the problem of poor nutrition for women and children.
The story of the development organization’s efforts is purposely left unfinished. Did the community resist? Did the organization change its activities? Was a different learning and inquiry-based
culture supported within the organization? Did belief in Gumzanjela continue? Did the organization
succeed in changing specific behaviors? How did the community navigate the external pressure? Did
individuals mostly succumb to the project’s advocacy or did they find ways to deflect, redirect, and
mislead the external advocates? As I hope this chapter has conveyed, people’s responses to efforts to
change them are complex. Anthropologists play an important role by extending an organization’s
vision so that its programs and activities can better align with the realities of the people for whom
they are designed and implemented.

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS
1. The international development professionals described in this chapter were determined to
eliminate the food taboos associated with the “law of Gumzanjela,” but Cochrane points out
that these rules were part of a larger belief system. Are there situations in which it is acceptable
to try to alter a group’s cultural values in order to promote changes in health, nutrition, or
women’s rights? Or, do you think it is inappropriate for outsiders to demand change? Do you
think it is possible to achieve goals, such as improved nutrition, without pressuring groups to
change their values and beliefs?

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

2. Cochrane provides several examples of situations in which anthropological perspectives
and methods led to the discovery of important information about local communities that
development professionals did not have. However, the lack of knowledge about local cultures
that characterizes many development projects is not caused simply by a lack of anthropological
expertise. What other factors mentioned in this chapter contribute to a mismatch between the
needs of local people and the goals of international development projects?

GLOSSARY
Cultural imperialism: attempts to impose unequal and unfair relationships between members of
different societies.
Food taboos: cultural rules against the preparation and/or consumption of certain foods.
Harmful traditional practices: behaviors that are viewed as ordinary and acceptable by members of
a local community, but appear to be destructive or even criminal to outsiders.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Logan Cochrane is a Vanier Scholar at the University of British Columbia (Okanagan). For the last twelve years he has worked overseas,
including in Afghanistan, Benin, Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
Congo, Ethiopia, Tanzania and Uganda. Logan has worked as a consultant with clients that have included Management Sciences for Health,
Save the Children, The Liaison Office, UNICEF and UNAIDS.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abu-Lughod, Lila. Do Muslim Women Need Saving? Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2013.
Ahmadu, Fuambai. S. and Shweder, Richard. A. “Disputing the Myth of the Sexual Dysfunction of
Circumcised Women.” Anthropology Today 25 no. 6 (2009):14-17.
Robert Chambers. Provocations for Development. Warwickshire, UK: Practical Action Publishing, 2012.
Cochrane, L. and Tamiru, Y. “Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Program: Power, Politics and Practice.”
Journal of International Development. 28 no. 5 (2016):649-665.
Escobar, Arturo. Encountering Development: The Making and Unmaking of the Third World. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1994.
Farmer, Paul. Infections and Inequalities. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001.
Green, Duncan. From Poverty to Power. Oxford, UK: Oxfam, 2012.
Illich, Ivan. “Development as Planned Poverty.” In The Post-Development Reader, edited by M. Rahnama
and V. Bawtree, 94-102. London: Zed Books, 1997.
James, Stanlie. M. “Shades of Othering: Reflections on Female Circumcision/Genital Mutilation.” Signs. 23
no. 4 (1998):1031-1048.
Lock, Margaret. “Afterward: Seeing Like an Anthropologist.” In Troubling Natural Categories, edited by N.
Adelson, L. Butt and K. Kielmann, 209-222. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2013.
McGovern, Mike. “Popular Development Economics—An Anthropologist Among the Mandarins.”
Perspective on Politics 9 no. 2 (2011):345-355.
Moyo, Dambisa. Dead Aid. Why Aid is Not Working and How There is Another Way for Africa. New York:
Farrar, Strauss & Giroux, 2009.

Seeing Like an Anthropologist: Anthropology in Practice

11

NCTPE [National Committee on Traditional Practices of Ethiopia]. Old Beyond Imaging Ethiopia –
Harmful Traditional Practices. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: National Committee on Traditional Practices of
Ethiopia, 2003.
Obermeyer, Carla. M. “Female Genital Surgeries: The Known, the Unknown, and the Unknowable.”
Medical Anthropology Quarterly 13 (1999):79-106.
Russell-Robinson, Joyce. “African Female Circumcision and the Missionary Mentality.” A Journal of
Opinion 25 (1997):54-57.
Scott, James. C. Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998.
Sulkin, Carlos. D. Londono. “Anthropology, Liberalism and Female Genital Cutting.” Anthropology Today
25 no. 6 (2009):17-19.
Weber, Eugen. Peasants into Frenchman: The Modernization of Rural France, 1870-1914. Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1976.

NOTES
1. See Logan Cochrane and Y. Tamiru, “Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Program: Power, Politics and Practice,” Journal of
International Development 28 no. 5 (2016):649-665.
2. I cannot claim to be the first to write about “seeing like an anthropologist;” others have done so, including Lock (2013),
though with slightly different objectives.
3. Those who have called on international development practitioners to reform their activities include Robert Chambers
(2012), Paul Farmer (2001), and Duncan Green (2012). A more radical critique suggesting that the provision of aid causes
greater impoverishment can be found in Arturo Escobar (1994) and Ivan Illich (1997). Dambisa Moyo (2009) has called for
an end to international development projects.
4. Those interested in an anthropological perspective of the views of other development actors can read McGovern’s (2011)
article on the works of Collier.
5. I use the term outsiders to refer to those external to the communities, either as non-members or as those not living within
or near that particular location, and am not referring only to international staff.
6. NCTPE, National Committee on Traditional Practices of Ethiopia, 2003
7. The project proposal and reports mentioned in this chapter are internal organizational reports not available to the public.
The purpose of the reports is to inform programming, which differs from academic research articles that are made available to
the public (although not always open access). While these practices appear quite different, there are some similarities: organizations publish publicly available reports on their work based on the totality of the data collected, but these reports do not
include all of the information that they have. Similarly, not all data collected by academic researchers is made available to the
public nor is it all published, rather a selection of that data is published in academic article and books.
8. Eugen Weber, 1976, Peasants into Frenchman: The Modernization of Rural France, 1870-1914. Stanford University Press:
Stanford University Press, x.
9. Leviticus 11:7–8: “And the pig, because it parts the hoof and is cloven-footed but does not chew the cud, is unclean for you.
You shall not eat any of their flesh and you shall not touch their carcasses; they are unclean for you.” Quran 2:173: “He [God]
has only forbidden to you dead animals, blood, the flesh of swine and that which has been dedicated to other than God.”
10. Cochrane and Tamiru, “Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Program.”

PUBLIC ANTHROPOLOGY
Robert Borofsky, Hawaii Pacific University, Center for a Public Anthropology
borofsky@hpu.edu
http://www.publicanthropology.org/

LEARNING OBJECTIVES

As an example of public anthropology (following the model
of the Kahn Academy), Dr. Borofsky has created short
10–15 minute videos on key topics in anthropology for introductory students. All 28 videos are available from the
Perspectives: An Open Introduction to Cultural Anthropology
website.

• Identify examples of anthropological
research that has contributed to the
public good.

INTRODUCTION

• Explain how the structure of academic
careers, topical specialization, and
writing styles contribute to difficulty
with communicating findings from
academic anthropology to a wider
public.

• Define public anthropology and
distinguish it from academic
anthropology and applied
anthropology.
• Assess the factors that contribute
to a desire for public engagement in
anthropology as well as the obstacles
to this engagement.
• Evaluate the ways in which
accountability, transparency,
collaboration, and the goal of
benefitting others could contribute to
reframing anthropology.
• Discuss actions that can be taken
by anthropologists to facilitate social
change.

Was Julie Andrews right when (in the Sound of Music)
she sang, “Let’s start at the very beginning, a very good place
to start?” Should authors follow her advice in writing textbook chapters by, at the beginning, explaining the organization of the chapter so readers will know what to expect and
be able to follow the chapter’s themes clearly? I cannot sing
Do Re Me half as well as Julie Andrews. But I will try to
follow her suggestion.
This chapter begins with an outline of its organization—which topics follow others plus a little “secret.”
After this introduction, the chapter turns to (a) two puzzles
stemming from anthropology’s interactions with the broader
public. It next (b) discusses how we might best define public anthropology given that different people interpret it in
different ways, especially in respect to the field’s ambiguous
overlapping with applied anthropology. Building on these
points, the chapter then turns to (c) public anthropology’s
four main strategies for enhancing the discipline’s credibility with the broader public. The chapter concludes with (d)
a section on facilitating change—guides for those who want
to help transform people’s lives for the better. Even without
Julie Andrews singing, I trust this sounds interesting. The
chapter asks important questions and offers thoughtful
answers that, I hope, will draw you into reflecting on the
challenges public anthropology faces as well as how it
seeks to encourage anthropology to better serve the common good.
Before beginning, however, I should share a secret.
You will see throughout this chapter—as in most anthropological articles and books—a host of references in numbered
footnotes. You might ask why anthropologists are intent on

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
http://www.perspectivesanthro.org/

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

citing colleagues extensively, especially when it is off-putting to students and the broader public.
Seeing all the references with only a limited sense of who is being referred to and what they mean
can be intimidating. Anthropologists use these references to show colleagues that they “know what
they are talking about.” It demonstrates that they are familiar with key literature relating to a topic.
The citations also serve another purpose. They reinforce the discipline. The more anthropologists cite
each other, the more they convey that anthropology is an important discipline with important things
to say—just look at all the people and articles being cited. But intriguingly, many anthropologists
only discuss the references in passing—usually for a sentence or two—just enough to show they are
familiar with them.
As a result, these citations should be taken with a grain of salt. They involve anthropologists
conveying, to each other, their intellectual mettle, their academic competence. Skip over them if they
do not seem interesting. Do not let them intimidate you. Why do I use them? Simply stated, I am
writing not only for you—a student reading this text—but also for colleagues who may review this
chapter as well. They may be interested in exploring further some of the provocative things I say so I
need to let them see my sources.
Why do I bold certain passages? I do this for three reasons.
1. It highlights key points in each section so the chapter is easier for you to read.
Either before or after a bolded passage, there is additional material that amplifies the
bolded text. This allows you to separate the key points from additional material that
discusses and/or explains the central points being made.
2. If you are in a rush, you can skim the chapter’s main themes by focusing on the
bolded passages. You will get the main ideas but not the details and explanations that
clarify the bolded points.
3. You can use the bolded passages to review the chapter once you have read it. Go
back through the bolded points and see if you remember the chapter’s key themes. If
you come across a point about which you are unclear, simply read the neighboring
text to clarify what the bolded passage is about.

TWO PUZZLES
Turning to the chapter’s key themes, let’s start by exploring two puzzles. The first puzzle:
By the time you reach this chapter, I hope you see how exciting anthropology can be. It deals with
all sorts of intriguing questions about the human condition—how humans and their societies have
evolved through time, what life is like in unfamiliar places, what human differences suggest about
our commonalities, and how understanding them may facilitate better human relations. And yet,
most of the widely read, popular books that deal with anthropological issues—books that win
prominent prizes and are bestsellers—tend to be written by non-anthropologists. Why is that?
The second puzzle: Anthropologists have done much good in the world—not only helping to enrich human understanding of our past and present but also facilitating concrete changes that improve
people’s lives. Yet anthropology’s positive efforts have not often been highlighted in the world’s
newspapers or other media outlets. Again, why?
Starting with the first puzzle, why non-anthropologists tend to write the bestselling anthropologically oriented books, let me offer three examples. Reading this textbook, you can see that

Public Anthropology

3

books on the evolution of human societies, including how the West (meaning Western Europe, Canada, and the United States) became more developed than the “Rest” (i.e., non-Western societies), are
standard anthropological fare. Many anthropologists have written about these topics. But only one
book has become wildly popular: Jared Diamond’s Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human
Societies (1997). The book won the 1998 Pulitzer Prize for General Non-Fiction, was the subject of
a well-received PBS National Geographic special, and remained on the New York Times bestseller list
for almost four years. Diamond studied anthropology as an undergraduate but obtained a doctoral
degree in physiology. Starting out as a professor of physiology at University of California, Los Angeles, he is now a professor of geography.
Katherine Boo’s Behind the Beautiful Forevers: Life, Death, and Hope in a Mumbai Undercity (2012) is an insightful ethnography of life in an Indian slum. It provides a vivid sense of how
people, despite overwhelming difficulties, not only are able to survive but at times are filled with hope
for a better life. In the tradition of the best ethnographies, the book allows readers to understand
and appreciate how the main characters navigate their lives through conditions that might surprise,
and perhaps shock, some. Behind the Beautiful Forevers won the 2012 National Book Award for nonfiction and the Los Angeles Times Book Award and has been a New York Times bestseller. While Boo
spent a number of years studying the people of Annawadi (a Mumbai slum near the airport), she is
not an anthropologist. She is an investigative journalist, formerly of the Washington Post and now a
writer for the New Yorker.
Anne Fadiman’s The Spirit Catches You and You Fall Down (1997) is a detailed, extended case
study in medical anthropology that documents the miscommunications that developed between a
Laotian refugee Hmong family and the medical staff of a Merced, California, hospital treating the
family’s epileptic daughter, Lia. It offers a nuanced, sensitive ethnographic account of the problems
well-intentioned people face when they talk past one another. As the New Yorker observed, “Fadiman
describes with extraordinary skill the colliding worlds of Western medicine and Hmong culture.”1
The book has received numerous honors, including the National Book Critics Circle Award for General Nonfiction and the Los Angeles Times Book Prize for Current Interest, and almost one million
copies have been sold. (Sales of most anthropology books are around 2,000 copies). Fadiman refers
to anthropologists but is not one herself. When she wrote the book, she was a journalist and editor.
She is now a writer in residence at Yale University.
There is no doubt that anthropologists would like to be read and recognized by audiences beyond
the discipline. Such an accomplishment means more than just selling lots of books; it means having
a public impact that stretches beyond the university.
Some anthropologists have been popular authors, most prominently, perhaps, Margaret Mead.
Her 1928 book, Coming of Age in Samoa, which compared sexual experiences of Samoan girls with
those of American girls, sold hundreds of thousands of copies. But such anthropologists are relatively
rare today. Clifford Geertz won the National Book Critics Circle Award for Criticism in 1988 and
Robert Levy was a finalist for the National Book Award in 1974, but neither book sold particularly
well beyond academia. Recently, another anthropologist, David Kertzer, won the Pulitzer Prize. But
his book, The Pope and Mussolini: The Secret History of Pius XI and the Rise of Fascism in Europe, is,
as its subtitle suggests, focused on details of European history, a topic outside the anthropological
mainstream.
My point is this: Few anthropologists writing on anthropological themes today are widely read
beyond the discipline. The anthropology-oriented books that are best sellers and win promi-

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

nent awards tend to be written by non-anthropologists, and when an anthropologist writes an
award-winning book, it tends to be on a less-anthropological subject.
What gives? Clearly, anthropologists have the skill and interest to write for the broader public. I
suggest, in part, that it is a matter of priorities. Many anthropologists would enjoy a large, public
audience (A survey in the Chronicle Review in 2016 indicated that 83 percent of the Chronicle subscribers sampled believed that academics should do more to shape public debate.)2 For most junior
professors, however, an even higher priority is promotion and tenure. To achieve these, they must
demonstrate to their faculty review committee that they can produce serious, professional work. A
key marker, if not the key marker, of significant professional work is the degree to which academic
colleagues cite one’s publications in their publications. It is often referred to as an author’s intellectual
impact.
While there are other standards for assessing promotion and tenure, committees tend to fall
back on cited publications in assessing a faculty member’s achievements because clear metrics
exist for the degree to which colleagues cite one’s work. All committee members have to do is log
on to Google Scholar, for example, and type the individual’s name in quotes. (It also helps to include
the author’s discipline since Google Scholar does not differentiate between two scholars with the
same name.) Until recently, there were no metrics for assessing an author’s citations in the public
press. Almost by default, then, anthropologists seeking promotion needed to demonstrate their competence through academic citation-oriented metrics.
There is also the matter of maintaining appearances. Promotion committees often encourage
anthropologists to conform to certain professional standards. Mary Douglas, a famous British anthropologist, in a book entitled Purity and Danger (1966) emphasized social structures (including
anthropology departments) “are armed with articulate, conscious powers to protect the system; the
inarticulate, unstructured areas . . . provoke others to demand that ambiguity be reduced.”3 For some,
seeking to speak to nonacademic audiences challenges academic practice. It creates ambiguity regarding who anthropologists should be writing for and to what end. Anthropologists usually need to be of
high status to challenge academic practice in this manner safely. (Note that Margaret Mead, who was
world famous, never held a senior academic position at a prominent university though, intriguingly,
many universities asked her to speak at them.)
Moreover, anthropologists tend to focus on fairly specialized topics. In 1980, Eric Wolf wrote
a famous editorial in the New York Times, stating “they divide and subdivide, and call it anthropology.”4 He was objecting to anthropology’s tendency to turn from broad, holistic analyses to more
limited, specialized ones. As part of their academic training, anthropologists usually learn to focus on
narrow, specialized subjects. It enhances their status because, with a narrow niched subject, faculty
members can be familiar with most of the associated professional literature. That is more difficult
with a broad topic. While the books by Diamond, Boo, and Fadiman all deal with specialized topics,
their authors are masters at showing how their topics fit into broader concerns that interest a range of
readers. Many anthropologists, unfortunately, are not experienced in writing in this manner.
I face this issue as editor of the California Series in Public Anthropology. The series encourages
scholars in a number of disciplines to write about major social concerns in ways that help the broader
public understand and address them. Two presidents (Mikhail Gorbachev and Bill Clinton) and
three Nobel laureates (Amartya Sen, Jody Williams, and Mikhail Gorbachev) have contributed to
the series as authors of books or forwards. Given its prestige, many anthropologists are eager to write
for the series, but it is often a struggle for them to write for broad audiences in exciting ways. Given
their desire for promotion and tenure, it is often a bridge too far.

Public Anthropology

5

There is another often-unstated reason that I describe later in this chapter but want to briefly
touch on here. It relates to cultural hegemony, a term associated with the Italian Antonio Gramsci. We might define cultural hegemony as the means by which a dominant group or perspective
orders various beliefs, explanations, values, and worldviews so that they seem to be not only the
norm—the expected way to behave—but also justify the status quo as natural and
beneficial, thereby leaving the dominant group in control. Essentially, it is a means of
dominating without having to apply overt power or violence.
An example of such cultural hegemony is the New York Times’ review of Robert and Sarah
LeVine’s Do Parents Matter? The book’s theme—that American parents should be less tense in
raising their children—should attract a relatively broad range of readers, which presumably is why
it was reviewed in the New York Times Book Review (2016).5 The problem is that the LeVines
were not able to step outside of an academic writing style to show the relevance of their ideas to
a broad audience. Let me quote from part of the review:
Firm takeaways . . . are rare, though, peppered inside a dizzying survey of firsthand experiences
and other studies: on toilet training, eating patterns, tantrums . . . It’s not that any one culture
has it figured out, but that practices “vary much too widely across cultures for us to accept
uncritically the supposition that the mental health of American children is being put at risk
by ‘insensitive’ infant care.”
. . . The LeVines have deep understandings of cultural contexts, allowing them to offer howto-style pieces of advice: Co-sleeping makes life easier for parents and does not inhibit child
development; a “skin-to-skin style of infant care” can foster more compliant children. But
a combination of endlessly complicated cultural contexts and the limits of in-field research
make these conclusions less than useful for Western readers. Toilet training is easier when
conducted outdoors or on dirt floors. Compliance is more achievable when the child is put
to work at age 6.
Most frustrating of all: “We don’t have all the evidence needed to settle the question of
whether the parental practices described in this book inflict harm on adult mental health.”
Someone should do that research and write a book about it. I would read it.
The LeVines are senior anthropologists who need not worry about tenure/promotion review committees. Their book addresses a significant topic. Wh ile attempting to write for a wi der au dience.
They were not able to move outside the academic styles of presentation with which they were familiar
and comfortable. Instead, they remained within the cultural hegemonic framings of anthropology
and the academy.
The same pattern can be seen in the rise of internet sites associated with anthropology. I n
principle, the changing media landscape should widen readers’ interests, presenting them with a rich
wealth of information. But more frequently than not, readers focus on websites that fit their existing
interests and often remain within their own intellectual “bubbles.” One sees this with
anthropological efforts to reach a broader public with websites such as Sapiens and
Anthrodendum, which seek to make anthropological insights available to a wide audience. But the
way they frame the issues, choose topics to cover, and present the information limit their readership.

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

In brief, despite a desire to reach wider audiences, we see the difficulty even senior anthropologists
have in escaping the hegemonic frameworks of their discipline and academia. They are uneasy operating too far outside their comfort zones, too far outside the frameworks they have grown accustomed
to as scholars.
Let’s turn to the second puzzle—why anthropologists tend not to be more recognized for
helping others and nourishing the common good. Again, we will consider three examples. The
first concerns individuals faced with arbitrary bureaucratic demands. In 1978, six elderly
Native American women from the Bannock and Shoshoni tribes in Idaho were accused by a local
social services agency of fraud and required to pay $2,000 each in restitution. The fraud
accusation was based on the belief that these women had misled the U.S. government about
their incomes and, hence, their eligibility for Supplementary Security Income support.
Anthropologist Barbara Joans acted as an expert witness for the women in court. She emphasized
that the women had an imperfect grasp of English and, as a result, a limited understanding of
government regulations. Joans “concluded that the social services personnel and the Indian women
were operating at different levels of English and cultural understanding . . . [consequently] the
women would not have been able to comprehend what was expected of them.”6 The judge agreed
with Joans’ conclusion and decided that, henceforth, “social services personnel would have to
use an interpreter when they went to the reservation to explain programs and their
requirements.”7 The women did not lose their government benefits.
The second example involves a study of a government program—the Experimental
Technology Incentive Program (ETIP) set up by the U.S. Department of Commerce8 that
sought to stimulate innovation among American companies. Gerald Britain, an anthropologist,
spent more than two years observing the program and provided an in-depth evaluation of its
effectiveness. Britain suggested that, despite its good intentions, the program was caught in a
structural bind. Companies had little incentive to follow through on the program’s suggestions
and had their own priorities. Moreover, the program had a high rate of staff turnover, which
meant that its projects were often erratically supervised. What ultimately proved the program’s
undoing was its inability to spend all of the funds allocated to it. Its surplus of roughly $2 million
brought the program to the notice of prominent administrators, and, after a brief investigation,
the Commerce Department terminated the program. Through his fieldwork, Britain was able to
explain why a government program might fail despite its value and good intentions.
The third example concerns the Vicos Project, which is often praised within the discipline
as an important effort by anthropologists to assist with third world development. In 1952,
guided by Alan Holmberg, Cornell University leased “Vicos,” a Peruvian highland hacienda
(farm) with roughly 1,800 Quechua-speaking residents, to conduct agricultural experiments.
“Between 1952 and 1957 Holmberg, with colleagues and students, initiated a set of social,
economic, and agrarian changes . . . By the end of a second lease in 1962, sufficient political
pressure had been brought to bear . . . to force the sale of Vicos to its people.”9 Despite this
positive result, some have challenged the project’s overall success. According to Paul Doughty, who
participated in the project and revisited Vicos years later, “In the decades since the end of the
project [officially in 1966], the community experienced numerous successes as well as failures as
an independent community. Its attempts to diversify the economic base were often thwarted [by
others] and the farming enterprise was affected by plant diseases [and] bad market prices . . .
For several years from 1974–80, self-serving government manipulations left the people in the
community confused, corrupted their leadership, and eroded their confidence.”10 Still, Doughty
concluded that the Vicosinos had “altered their society from one of denigrated serfdom

Public Anthropology

7

and subordination to become an autonomous community of Quechua highlanders fending for
themselves on a par with others in Peru’s complex and uncertain milieu.”11
Many other examples like these demonstrate anthropology’s ability to empower people and
facilitate good, but they often go unnoticed by the broader public. Why? Let me suggest four
reasons. You are welcome to add others.
First is the complexity of change. Consider the U.S. Civil Rights Movement. It led to two
major laws that have helped transform American society: the Civil Rights Acts of 1964 and the
Voting Rights Act of 1965. They were a long time coming—a century, in fact, after passage of the
Thirteenth Amendment in 1865 (formally ending slavery). It is difficult to pinpoint one event that
led to their passage. Part of the impetus for the Voting Rights Act stemmed from the violence
faced by black marchers, including Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., in Selma. Without the organizing
of Dr. King and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), the actions of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) and the Student
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC), the rise of television that allowed millions to
witness the violence of Selma, the political skills of President Lyndon Johnson, and a coalition of
liberal Democratic and Republican legislators, the bills would never have passed. With so many
involved, it is hard to specify one event or person that was the tipping point that led to their
passage.
Anthropologists played a role in the Civil Rights Movement. Before World War II, Franz Boas
and Margaret Mead emphasized that changing social environments could lead to significant
behavioral changes. In 1939, Hortense Powdermaker wrote an insightful ethnography of black
life in Mississippi that dealt with economic and political barriers that limited black success. Even
though Boas, Mead, and Powdermaker helped develop the intellectual framework for the
1964 and 1965 laws, they are rarely mentioned in relation to the Civil Rights Movement
because they were not directly involved in the events that led to the bills’ passage.
A second factor was noted by Shirley Fiske, who described anthropologists as frequently
working from the bottom up. Anthropologists are not highlighted as key change agents because
they do their work away from the political spotlight, slowly chipping away at the problem.
Regarding anthropological work on climate change, Fiske writes:
Anthropologists have been involved at every step, from the formation of interagency committees
in the 1990s, to membership on the National Academy of Sciences studies, to contemporary
efforts to insert the social and power dimensions into concepts like “vulnerability assessment”
that are building blocks of the National Climate Assessments required by statute. It is not just
one person, but the continuing insertion of the “bottom up” approach.12
Anthropologists often provide important data regarding what happens “on the ground,” but
those who actually make changes usually get the credit. In terms of the 1964 and 1965 laws, the
spotlight was focused on the major political figures involved—Martin Luther King and
President Lyndon Johnson.
A third factor relates to anthropologists working in “third world” settings studying the less
powerful on the margins of Western society. President Obama’s mother, Ann Dunham, was an
anthropologist who conducted valuable fieldwork in Indonesia, but to the broader public, the
main value of her work was that she took her son along with her, broadening his international
perspective. Helping six elderly Bannock and Shoshoni women is valuable. The Vicosinos who
gained control over their land appreciated Cornell’s efforts. But such efforts usually do not draw

8

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

much attention outside of anthropology.
Fourth, given the everyday onrush of information, references to anthropologists in the news
media rapidly fade from the spotlight. Ann Kingsolver, an anthropologist at University of
Kentucky, was cited in an Economist article on Appalachia in 2015, but the Economist provided its
readers with many other articles on the United States as well. With a host of new articles the following
week, she became just one voice among many for the month.13
For this situation to change, anthropologists need to demonstrate the good they do on an
ongoing basis. Presently, the benefits they bring appear to be episodic—a bit here, a bit there. For
the public to take greater notice, the discipline as a whole rather than a few individuals must
consistently demonstrate how anthropology nourishes the common good. Sadly, it does not do
that yet.
I hope that the preceding discussion has helped to unravel the two noted puzzles—why the most
popular anthropological works today tend to be written by non-anthropologists and why anthropological efforts to do good are often less recognized by the broader public than they might be. Many
anthropologists wish to be publicly recognized outside the discipline, but both overt and
covert frameworks reinforce the status quo. Facilitating change will involve refocusing the
discipline away from the specialized interests and academic priorities that dominate it now and
toward work that directly benefits society more broadly, that serves the common good.
I make this point about structural constraints and hegemonic frameworks before defining
public anthropology for an important reason. While anthropologists are often eager to push
their ideas and deeds out to the broader public, they tend to pass over the need to address the
subtle but significant covert obstacles they face.
In the next section, you will see how different anthropologists perceive public anthropology
and how concern for public engagement has varied over time. I leave the tricky part—how
anthropologists might overcome the structural constraints limiting public engagement—until later.

DEFINING PUBLIC ANTHROPOLOGY
Let me offer a brief definition of public anthropology: Public anthropology focuses on the
interface between anthropology as an academic discipline and the broader public that supports and,
ideally, finds much value in it. This works as a definition you can recite to others. It emphasizes
the role the public plays in supporting anthropology as well as that anthropology is not an academic
island unto itself. Still, it does not address certain subtleties.
Public anthropology has gone from a term I created in the 1990s as a name for the
California Series I edit to a term that now has more than 100,000 links in Google Search. I
coined the term because it represented a goal of the series: addressing public problems in public ways.
Public, in this sense, contrasted with academic styles of presentation. As phrased in the front matter of
early books in the series, “the California Series in Public Anthropology emphasizes the anthropologist’s
role as an engaged intellectual. It continues anthropology’s commitment to being an ethnographic
witness, to describing in human terms how life is lived beyond the borders of many readers’
experiences. But it also adds a commitment through ethnography to reframing the terms of public
debate—transforming received, accepted understandings of social issues with new insights, new
framings.”14
Public anthropology has taken on added significance since the series began. It has become an
institutionalized part of the discipline. There is an Institute of Public Anthropology at California
State University Fresno, a public anthropology lecture series at University of Waterloo, a public

Public Anthropology

9

anthropology post-doctoral fellowship at the Field Museum, a master’s program in public anthropology at American University, a faculty focus in public anthropology at Tufts University, a public
anthropology review section and a public anthropology editor at American Anthropologist, a
master’s degree in public issue anthropology at University of Guelph, a doctoral program in
antropología de orientación publica at Universidad Autonoma de Madrid in Spain, and a public
anthropology category for posts at Savage Minds. Courses dealing with public anthropology are
taught at a number of North American schools.
Different groups use the term in somewhat different ways. In the master’s program in public
anthropology at American University, for example, students “explore the workings of culture,
power, and history in everyday life and acquire skills in critical inquiry, problem solving, and public
communication.” A Tufts University web page states that “Public anthropology includes both civic
engagement and public scholarship . . . in which we address audiences beyond academia. It is a
publicly engaged anthropology at the intersection of theory and practice, of intellectual and ethical
concerns, of the global and the local.” The Public Issue Anthropology program at University of Guelph
explores “the interface between anthropological knowledge and issues crucial to governance, public
discourse, livelihoods, [and] civil society.” The American Anthropologist’s review section highlights
“anthropology of general interest to a wide audience” (an earlier version of the section’s purpose
suggested its articles were aimed at nonacademic audiences).
In recent decades, other terms have arisen that cover some of the same intellectual territory. Let
me offer a sampling. Thomas Hylland Erikson stated that “Engaging Anthropology takes an
unflinching look at why the discipline has not gained the popularity and respect it deserves.”15 Kay
Warren wrote, in an article entitled “Perils and Promises of Engaged Anthropology,” that engagement
involves “investigations that consider such issues as social justice . . . [and] globalization’s impacts.”16
Practicing anthropology works “to understand and help people around the world.” It adds, “we also
turn up in places you might not expect to find us, including the fields of agriculture, computer
science, law enforcement forensics, and more.”17Activist anthropology, according to the University of
Texas Anthropology Department, is “predicated on the idea that we need not choose between first rate
scholarship on the one hand and carefully considered political engagement on the other.” Charles
Hale stated that there need not be a “contradiction between active political commitment to resolving
a problem and rigorous scholarly research on that problem.”18
Despite the florescence of terms, public anthropology remains the preferred one. If we use a Google
search as a rough standard, public anthropology (as previously noted) generates more than 100,000
links. There are roughly 38,000 for practicing anthropology, 10,000 for engaging anthropology, and
4,000 for activist anthropology. Why have these other terms not replaced public anthropology? I am
not sure. But I suspect it derives from the fact that the other terms are not as institutionalized, not
as embedded in the discipline’s social structures as public anthropology. They are not associated with
programs, lecture series, and book series as public anthropology is.

PUTTING PRESENT CONCERNS IN PERSPECTIVE
It is important to place public anthropology’s current popularity in historical perspective. Readers
should note that anthropology has not always been as isolated from the general public as it seems
today. James Frazer’s The Golden Bough, Margaret Mead’s Coming of Age in Samoa, and Ruth Benedict’s
Patterns of Culture engaged a wide range of readers outside the academy in stimulating and important
ways during the first half of the twentieth century. In the 1930s, 1940s, and early 1950s,

10

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

anthropologists often played prominent roles in public arenas. In May 1936, for example, Franz
Boas appeared on the cover of Time Magazine, which referred to Boas’ The Mind of Primitive Man
as the “Magna Carta of self-respect” for non-Western peoples. Margaret Mead was a cultural icon.
During the 1950s, she was the most widely known and respected anthropologist in the world. Upon
her death in 1978, tributes came not only from the president of the United States but from the
secretary-general of the United Nations. In 1979, she was posthumously awarded the United States’
highest civilian honor, the Presidential Medal of Freedom.
Why did anthropology become less publicly engaged? Basically, an academic trend that had
been building since the early 1900s came to dominate the discipline. By the late 1960s,
anthropology had very much embraced the academy (or university), and the academy had very
much embraced anthropology. The founders of anthropology in the mid to late 1800s resided
outside universities, either as private scholars (e.g., Henry Lewis Morgan) or as government
employees (e.g., James Mooney and John Wesley Powell). But with the rise of universities as
centers of learning in the late 1800s—for anthropology, it started with Franz Boas becoming a
professor of anthropology in 1899 at Columbia University—more and more anthropologists
became associated with academic settings.
What is striking about anthropology’s early years is how few anthropologists there were.
The American Anthropological Association had 306 members in 1910 and 666 in 1930. “Some
elders of our tribe,” George Stocking noted, “can recall an age when most anthropologists knew
each other personally, and [conferences] could be held . . . in one meeting hall of modest size.”19
This means that anthropologists who wrote books had to write for wider audiences if they wanted
anyone to publish them. The anthropology market was too small to attract major publishers. Here's
how Raymond Firth phrased it regarding his ethnography of Tikopia, a Polynesian island in the
South Pacific:
In writing We, The Tikopia...I had to cater for a nonspecialist readership... in the mid-thirties
[1930s], the name Tikopia would be completely meaningless to the outside world . . . I
believe then as now that . . . anthropology by its very nature ought to have a wider appeal
than its tiny specialist market indicated. I had been supported in this view by the enthusiastic
response to my public lectures and broadcasting talks to schools. So I tried to broaden the
interest of the material—opening of the book “reads like a novel” as a friend remarked—
without sacrificing the scientific rigor of its exposition.”20
A key turning point in this process was the expansion of student enrollments at American
universities in the 1960s associated with the post-World-War-II baby boom. This led to
expansion in the number of anthropology departments and, consequently, in student
anthropology majors. This meant teachers no longer had to write primarily for public audiences if
they wanted to be published. They could write their books solely for students taking anthropology
courses. This trend continues today with further expansion of the discipline. The American
Anthropological Association now has more than 10,000 members, and academically oriented
publishers find it profitable to focus solely on classroom sales for anthropology books.
Especially striking, relative to Firth’s work in the 1930s, is how anthropologists frame their
work today. Current works often have a “turned inward” quality. Seeking a broader public is less of
a priority. As Andrew Abbott noted, “Since professionals draw their self-esteem more from their own
world than from the public’s [today] . . . The front-line service [i.e., engagement with the public]
that is both their fundamental task and their basis for legitimacy becomes the province of low-status
colleagues and para-professionals.”21 One sees this in the tendency for large introductory classes to be

Public Anthropology

11

taught by lower-status adjuncts, for example. High-status full professors tend to teach small advanced
courses in their specialties.
Drawing on Mary Douglas once more, we might frame the effort to keep the broader public at
bay—while accepting its funding—in terms of purity and pollution. Moving beyond the academic
pale makes faculty impure—it “pollutes” them (Margaret Mead’s failure to gain a prominent university position is a prime example). The pure remain comfortably ensconced within anthropology
departments producing work that few read outside the discipline.

PUBLIC ANTHROPOLOGY’S RELATION TO APPLIED ANTHROPOLOGY
A question commonly raised about public anthropology is how it differs from applied anthropology. In answering, let me start with a personal anecdote. After I coined the term public anthropology, I
was under pressure to demarcate how it differed from applied anthropology, which surprised me. I
wondered why various academics felt a need to make a clear delineation between ambiguously
defined fields as if they could differentiate between them as one does with cars (e.g., Fords versus
Hondas) or baseball teams (e.g. the Boston Red Sox versus the New York Yankees). I understand the
desire for clarity but personally feel uneasy making precise delineations between the fields. What
follows is a suggestive sense of how they differ—no more.
Perhaps the best way to differentiate public and applied anthropology is by
understanding the different contexts in which they developed. Applied anthropology has its
roots in late nineteenth century American and British colonialism. The focus was on
understanding how various indigenous groups lived in order to govern them more effectively. E.E.
Evans-Pritchard’s famous studies of the Nuer, for example, were financed by the British government
of Anglo-Egyptian Sudan to understand why the Nuer were opposing colonial rule. The American
Bureau of Ethnology had a similar aim. It sponsored precedent-setting studies by Cushing, Dorsey,
Stevenson, and Mooney to understand the dynamics of certain North American Indian tribes and
how they were changing under American domination.
In 1941, a group of anthropologists formally established the Society for Applied Anthropology
“to promote the investigation of the principles of human behavior and the application of these principles to contemporary issues and problems.” The society’s opening statement in its journal noted
that “Applied Anthropology is designed not only for scientists, but even more for those concerned
with putting plans into operation, administrators, psychiatrists, social workers, and all those who as
part of their responsibility have to take action on problems of human relations.” Today, the society’s
website repeats the first sentence (“to promote the investigation of ”) and then continues: “The society
is unique among professional associations in membership and purpose, representing the interests of
professionals in a wide range of settings—academia, business, law, health and medicine, government,
etc. The unifying factor is a commitment to making an impact on the quality of life in the world.” In
a recent review of the field, Trotter, Schensul, and Kostick wrote that applied anthropology tended to
have a pragmatic, practical orientation motivated by two concerns: “One is to produce research that
has straightforward findings that can be used for direct interventions or implications that can lead
to recommendations for policy change . . . The other is to test and improve anthropological theory
through devising experiments in sociocultural interventions or policy changes.”22
Public anthropology grew out of a different context. I coined the term to give an upbeat, positive
name to the California book series I was developing in the late 1990s. Why did I not employ applied

12

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

anthropology in the series title? Partly because it was already widely used. I wanted something new,
something different, that could catch people’s attention. Another reason was that applied anthropology no longer had the same innovative “buzz” that it had in the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s. It had
become part of the established order.
The tension between applied and public anthropology became clear when, soon after publishing
an article on public anthropology in Anthropology News, an applied anthropologist, Merrill Singer,
wrote an article entitled “Why I Am Not a Public Anthropologist” (2000). He offered a two-fold
critique of public anthropology: (1) it ignored work applied anthropologists had done to date in this
field and (2) it could lead to a two-tier system in which public anthropologists became the high-status theoreticians while applied anthropologists became lower-status grunts in charge of addressing
concrete, practical problems.23 If the author had read what I had written prior to publishing his
piece, he would have seen that I did not mean to disparage applied anthropology. Why, I
wondered, was there not room for both of us—whatever we called ourselves? Certainly there
were many people and many problems needing urgent attention. It puzzled me that some
academics wanted to argue over definitions and status given all the problems of the world.

THE UPS AND DOWNS OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT
Rather than being drawn into what Sigmund Freud called “the narcissism of small differences”
(related groups arguing over small differences to differentiate their identities), I prefer to step back
and look at a bigger picture. Since at least the founding of the Bureau of Ethnology in 1879 under
John Wesley Powell, American anthropologists have sought to address the problems of various
groups of people. Prominent in those early years was the work of James Mooney, who described the
ghost dance, a religion sweeping Indian tribes of the American West in 1889 and 1890 in response
to American domination. He also provided vivid details about a cavalry massacre of more than 200
Sioux at Wounded Knee on December 29, 1890. The commitment to social engagement continued into the twentieth century even as anthropology became institutionalized as an academic
field within universities. Franz Boas was very much an activist. He opposed racist theories popular
in the United States and Europe during the 1930s. Anthropologists, moreover, were actively involved
in the Allied war effort during World War II. The well regarded anthropologist Cora DuBois served
with the Office of Strategic Services, for example. She was awarded the Army’s Exceptional Civilian
Award as well as the Order of the Crown by Thailand.
Margaret Mead noted that anthropologists coming out of the war years realized “their skills could
be applied fruitfully to problems affecting modern societies and the deliberations of national governments and nation states.”24 One of the highlights of this post-World-War-II period was the Coordinated Investigation of Micronesian Anthropology (CIMA), which represented “the largest research
effort in the history of American anthropology” and involved roughly 10 percent of the American
anthropological profession conducting fieldwork for the U.S. Navy in Micronesia (which the Navy
had a mandate to administer).25 In the 1960s, anthropologists such as Marvin Harris and Marshall
Sahlins played prominent roles in establishing the first “teach-ins”—activist public discussions held
at universities—opposing the Vietnam War. They wrote prominent pieces in widely read publications such as The Nation and Dissent.
In the late 1980s, public engagement was once again popular in the discipline. In 1972, 88 percent of new PhDs were employed in academic settings and just 12 percent were employed in nonaca-

Public Anthropology

13

demic settings. But in 1988, 54 percent were employed in nonacademic settings.26 This change in the
job market both symbolized and encouraged increased engagement with those outside the discipline.
And yet, each time these efforts languished. Th e eff orts of Boa s, Har ris, and Sah lins are still
remembered, but their efforts are not that frequently emulated today. Th e CIMA Na vy project is
a distant memory, known mostly through a book that documented it. In 1997, 71 percent of new
Ph.D.s were hired for academically related positions and 29 percent for nonacademic positions.27

TAKING STOCK OF WHERE WE ARE AND WHERE WE ARE HEADING
Let me highlight three summarizing points relating to the preceding sections. First, despite the
institutionalized structures and hegemonic frameworks limiting public outreach (noted in the
opening section), public engagement seems to repeatedly return to excite the discipline. Why?
Victor Turner’s concept of anti-structure suggests an answer. Turner highlights “two alternative
‘models’ for human relations. One involves society as a structured, differentiated, and often
hierarchical system of politico-legal-economic positions.”28 The other, termed anti-structure,
opposes society’s formal structures, emphasizing instead alternative, less conforming orientations.
He writes that “there would seem to be—if one can use such a controversial term—a human
‘need’ to participate in both modalities.”29 Public engagement is not precisely the same as Turner’s
anti-structure. Still, it emphasizes a different form of accountability from standard academic
practice. It reaches out to others beyond the discipline. It supports a different style of prose. It
focuses on actively addressing the world’s problems.
Since they are ensconced in departmental structures, one might suggest many
anthropologists periodically long for greater social engagement and public recognition. They
tire of the narrow, inward-looking academic structures that pervade the discipline. They reach
out, seeking to engage the public on its own terms, not theirs. But their efforts usually do not last
—they lack structural support that would allow them to be more than momentary bursts of
enthusiasm. In this context, anthropologists’ attempts are temporary transformations,
momentary defiances, of the established order. With time, anthropologists mostly return to the
professional grind centered on academic standards of accountability and pursuing their separate
interests in their separate ways.
Second, applied anthropology has an ambiguous relationship with mainstream academic
anthropology. On the one hand, applied anthropologists might feel proud that they have resisted
the academic structures of the discipline—perhaps better than any other group in the discipline’s
history. They now have their own formal society (Society for Applied Anthropology), annual
meetings, and their own journal (Human Organization), and applied anthropology is seen as a
major disciplinary subfield (along with cultural anthropology, archaeology, biological anthropology,
and linguistics).
On the other hand, applied anthropology has succeeded by adopting certain academic
structures. Despite determined effort to engage outside the academy, a sizable number of
applied anthropologists hold university positions. There are at least two reasons for this. First, to
become a certified applied anthropologist, one needs a graduate degree. The field can only
intellectually reproduce if a sizable number of applied anthropologists remain at universities to
train new generations of applied anthropologists. Second, given that applied anthropology is now
very much a part of the discipline, anthropology departments are a prime source of paid positions
so many of the applied anthropologists who attend the society’s annual meeting and publish in its
journal are academics. They give the meeting and journal an academic feel while, at the same
time, espousing to be different from mainstream anthropology.

14

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Third, if public anthropology is not to befall the fate of such trends, it must reflect on how
it can reframe certain academic structures. Might I suggest this brings us back to Julie Andrews?
If we want public anthropology to make a difference in people’s lives, we need to start at the
beginning—with the underlying structures of the discipline that repeatedly limit public
engagement. To effectively address public problems, we need to address them on the public’s
terms, not our own. That means not simply listing a set of academic studies that others
should attend to and follow—as one might offer to academics. It means rethinking what
anthropology does and how it does it. It is within this context that readers can perceive
public anthropology’s revolutionary intent. Public anthropology seeks to revise key
academic structures. It seeks to transform the structures that prevent anthropology from
becoming more interdisciplinary, more publicly engaged, more focused on helping others.
Cultural hegemony, you will recall, is a term associated with Antonio Gramsci, a prominent
Italian communist. (He spent more than ten years in prison because of his opposition to Mussolini
and fascism.) In relation to anthropology, cultural hegemony refers to the themes previously
discussed—the focus on publishing academically oriented books that enhance one’s
professional career and the reward system that makes deviance from academic standards
dangerous for those who wish to be promoted. The term refers not only to helping
maintain the status quo but to making it seem as if the status quo is a reasonable,
appropriate way to behave. My point is this: If we want to change the discipline and the
broader academic structures that support it, we must perceive the hegemonic constraints that
limit social engagement in the discipline.
The next question is how to facilitate such change. The following section offers
suggestive strategies. With the first two strategies, the hope is that anthropology can become
a more credible discipline in the public’s eyes by improving its accountability standards
and providing greater transparency regarding how certain results are achieved.
The third strategy is based on the idea that anthropology works best when it involves
collaboration with others. Anthropologists need to work with other groups, other
organizations, to facilitate significant change. Anthropologists need the power and resources
those organizations provide. Addressing the larger society’s concerns regarding accountability
and transparency offers a means by which to reach out to others—since many beyond
academia are interested in facilitating precisely those changes within the academy.
The fourth strategy suggests anthropology can further its credibility by focusing on helping
others instead of mainly striving not to harm them—the discipline’s current ethic.
Anthropologists’ efforts to help others have, as previously noted, been well-intended but episodic.
They have occurred irregularly rather than representing a broad disciplinary effort.
Anthropologists should strive, as best they can, to help the people who help them in their research.
Let me share another secret with you. These strategies may be a bit too bold for some
anthropologists who, ensconced in traditional academic ways, have grown comfortable with the
status quo. They might long for greater public recognition but are not necessarily be eager to
change. If you are interested in exploring anthropology beyond the introductory level, these
strategies offer a way for you to participate in changing the discipline for the better and,
through that change, the broader world as well.

A FRAMEWORK FOR RESHAPING THE DISCIPLINE
This section sets out in detail the four strategies for reframing the discipline. A later section invites
you to grapple with ways to facilitate social change.

Public Anthropology

15

(1) Accountability—Moving beyond judging faculty members by the number of academic
papers they publish to judging them by whether what they have written helps others rather
than just their careers. Anthropologists tend to assess the intellectual quality of their colleagues
by the published works they produce. According to Deborah Rhode’s In Pursuit of Knowledge:
Scholars, Status, and Academic Culture, “Because academic reputation and rewards are increasingly
dependent on publication, faculty have incentives to churn out tomes that will advance their
careers regardless of whether they will also advance knowledge.”30 She notes a report by the Carnegie
Foundation that more than a third of faculty members surveyed believed that their published works
were mostly assessed in terms of quantity rather than quality (at schools with doctoral programs,
more than 50 percent of the faculty members held that view).31
Instead of focusing on quantitative calculations of accountability, such as publishing a
certain number of articles per year (or books every few years), I suggest that accountability
would be better assessed in more pragmatic terms: How socially significant is the problem
being addressed? To what degree does the author successfully address it? What impact does the
author’s published work about this problem have outside the academy?
The vast majority of funding for anthropological research comes from nonacademic agencies and
foundations. A key criterion for funding is that the research must be valuable for a relatively broad
public rather than only a few individuals. The National Science Foundation (NSF), for example,
requires that all proposals and final reports specify the “broader impacts” of the research, which
NSF defines as encompassing “the potential to benefit society and contribute to the achievement
of specific, desired, societal outcomes” and written “insofar as possible, [to] be understandable to a
scientifically . . . literate lay reader.”32 The National Institutes of Health (NIH) Office of Behavioral
and Social Sciences Research affirms that “realizing the full potential of our Nation’s investment in
health research requires that science inform both practice and policy . . . we can stimulate relevant
and usable research that is informed by the needs of end users whether they are healthy individuals, patients, practitioners, community leaders, or policymakers.”33 Paralleling these perspectives,
the United Kingdom’s Research Councils UK (RCUK) stresses a commitment to “supporting and
rewarding researchers to engage with the public.”34
Despite affirmation of these standards by funders, many anthropologists still opt for academic
standards that focus on the number of academic colleagues who cite their work. They also focus on
who obtains research funding. British anthropologist Adam Kuper has suggested that “The [grant]
review process rewards people who can write good proposals even if they failed to deliver on earlier
grants. Few foundations evaluate the research they fund . . . The best credential for a fellowship is a
previous fellowship. And landing a grant usually wins you more kudos than getting out the results
of your research.”35 In other words, the path to success often lies in claiming to advance knowledge
rather than in demonstrating that you have.
The primary value of focusing on outcomes is that outcomes can be assessed fairly directly.
Do the results effectively address the problem? Do they contribute to building coherent, cumulative knowledge that can be used beyond the discipline to address real problems? Do they
improve other people’s lives?
Take Abhijit Banerjee and Esther Duflo’s Poor Economics as an example. The authors systematically identified approaches that work best for particular problems. For example, they compared
programs for preventing malaria and asked which program had a better chance of being used in a
group of villages—malaria nets given away free to villagers or malaria nets that villagers had to partly
pay for and hence had an incentive to use properly? Rather than assuming the answer, they compared

16

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

randomized groups in several locales using various levels of financial support provided for acquiring
the nets. Based on that information, they were able to draw conclusions regarding the best way to distribute the nets in a range of locales to fight malaria effectively. They found that (a) all of the villagers
accepted free nets but, as the price went up, fewer did, and (b) there was no difference in use of the
nets based on whether the villagers paid for them.36 Apparently, people valued the nets regardless of
how they got them—because they helped fight malaria.
The Nobel-winning author Robert Solow described Poor Economics as follows: “Abhijit Banerjee
and Esther Duflo are allergic to grand generalizations about the secret of economic development.
Instead they appeal to many local observations and experiments to explore how poor people in poor
countries actually cope with their poverty.”37 This represents anthropology at its best. By comparing
the effectiveness of different approaches, anthropologists can develop a comprehensive understanding of how to address a problem in a particular context.
When advocating for this sense of accountability, it is important not to get caught up in academic rhetoric concerning objectivity. As the social sciences moved into universities in the late
1800s, objectivity in the social sciences took on a different meaning. It came to refer to avoiding
politically charged topics that might upset the political and financial elites who often helped fund
and direct universities. Mary Furner, in Advocacy and Objectivity: A Crisis in the Professionalization
of American Social Science, 1865–1905, described how professionalization changed what it meant to
study a social issue.
The professionalization process altered the mission of social science [within universities].
Only rarely [as the twentieth century proceeded] did professional social scientists do what
no one else was better qualified to do [and what they had done decades earlier]: bring expert
skill and knowledge to bear on cosmic questions pertaining to the society as a whole. Instead,
studies and findings tended to be internal, recommendations hedged with qualifiers, analyses
couched in jargon that was unintelligible to the average citizen. . . . The academic professionals,
having retreated to the security of technical expertise, left to journalists and politicians the
original mission—the comprehensive assessment of industrial society—that had fostered the
professionalization of social sciences.38
Objectivity does not lie in avoiding certain politically charged topics. The issue is not whether
an individual has an “agenda”—one could suggest that everyone has biases of one sort or another.
Being a “disinterested professional” does not mean being uninterested in the world outside one’s
laboratory. It means putting the larger society’s interests ahead of one’s own personal interests
or the interests of those for whom one works. Objectivity derives from open, public analyses of
divergent accounts. We know an account is more objective—more credible, more scientific—after various individuals, whatever their personal biases, independently confirm the claims made.
The opposition is not between objectivity and advocacy; it is between claiming objectivity and
substantiating it. Anthropologists who claim to act in a disinterested manner with no hint of social
advocacy are not necessarily being objective. Objectivity comes from others confirming one’s data.
If the data cannot be confirmed, it is critical to understand how and why this limits the claims one
can make.
(2) Transparency—Moving beyond highlighting conclusions that attract attention to
allowing others to understand how these conclusions were reached.
Lancet, one of the world’s leading medical journals, reported in 2014 that perhaps
$200,000,000,000 (that is, 200 billion dollars), which constitutes about 85 percent of all global

Public Anthropology

17

research spending, is likely wasted on poorly designed and poorly reported research studies. Since
this is a rather shocking figure, let me offer the actual words from The Lancet. Macleod et al.
report:
Global biomedical and public health research involves billions of dollars and millions of
people . . . Although this vast enterprise has led to substantial health improvements, many
more gains are possible if the waste and inefficiency in the ways that biomedical research is
chosen, designed, done, analysed, regulated, managed, disseminated, and reported can be
addressed. In 2009, Chalmers and Glasziou . . . estimated that the cumulative effect was
that about 85 percent of research investment—equating to $200 billion of the investment in
2010—is wasted.39
In a related article, Glasziou stated that “research publication can both communicate and miscommunicate. Unless research is adequately reported, the time and resources invested in the conduct
of research is[sic] wasted . . . Adequate reports of research should clearly describe which questions
were addressed and why, what was done, what was shown, and what the findings mean. However,
substantial failures occur in each of these elements.” 40 Related to this point, the Economist reported
that “half of clinical trials do not have their results published . . . Proportionally, the worst culprits
are government and academia.”41
In an article entitled “Many Psychology Findings Not as Strong as Claimed,” in the New York
Times, Benedict Carey reported:
The past several years have been bruising ones for the credibility of the social sciences. A star
social psychologist was caught fabricating data, leading to more than 50 retracted papers.
A top journal published a study supporting the existence of ESP that was widely criticized.
The journal Science [one of the world’s leading journals] pulled a political science paper on
the effect of gay canvassers on voters’ behavior because of concerns about faked data. Now, a
painstaking years long effort to reproduce 100 studies published in three leading psychology
journals has found that more than half of the findings did not hold up when retested.42
These studies make clear there is a real need for transparency in research so others can properly
review, assess, and, if possible, confirm important studies. Two hundred billion dollars is a lot of
money to spend on questionable research.
Let me offer two examples of the importance of increased transparency in anthropology.
First, there is heated debate over whether the Yanomami (living in the Amazon region between
Brazil and Venezuela) were once particularly violent and, in frequent wars, killed numerous
opponents. Because some have viewed the Yanomami as exemplifying tendencies of “early man,” an
incorrect assumption in my view, the issue has drawn worldwide attention regarding just how
violent “early man” was. The issue also carried serious political implications for the Yanomami. If
they were indeed as violent as some had portrayed them, the Brazilian government felt they should
be broken up into several small reserves rather than be permitted a large single reserve that would
help prevent gold miners from entering the Yanomami’s territory. (After considerable debate, a
large single reserve was established in 1992.)
Though much has been written on the topic, reliable data are needed to assess the Yanomami’s
level of violence accurately. All we have are ambiguous anecdotal assessments and suggestive statis-

18

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

tics that might or might not be valid. The a rgument r evolves a round d ata r eported b y C hagnon i n
a famous article in Science (1988).43 But these data have not been made public making it impossible
to confirm them. Chagnon indicates he has “never published data that would enable someone to
determine who specifically was a ‘killer,’ his name, his village, his age, how many wives he had, and
how many offspring. In short, the data needed to make the criticism that Fry makes [questioning
the validity of Chagnon’s statistics] cannot be gleaned from my published data.”44 If Chagnon will
not release his data so others can confirm them, readers might wonder if new research might be conducted. The problem is that the Yanomami have since been pacified. Readers might think, therefore,
that anthropologists would just drop the debate, admitting it is unresolvable until Chagnon makes
his data public. But that has not happened. Anthropologists continue to get into heated arguments
over the topic. Just ask one of your teachers who specializes in lowland South America about this and
see how she or he responds.
The second example is Herrnstein and Murray’s widely discussed book, The Bell Curve (1994),
which suggested that differences in intelligence among “races” (as they defined them)
performed differently on certain IQ tests. From this debatable proposition, the authors implied
that whites appeared to be more successful economically than blacks because whites were more
intelligent.
Needless to say, the book caused a stir in the press. Early reviews, drawing on the statistical analyses
the authors provided, were generally positive. Nicholas Lemann noted a key reason for the positive
reviews: “ Th e ordinary routine of neutral reviewers having a month or two to go over the book with
care did not occur . . . The [initial] debate . . . was conducted in the mass media by people with no
independent ability to assess the book.” Early reviewers had to base their reviews on the statistics
provided by Herrnstein and Murray, “It was not until late 1995 that the most damaging criticism of
The Bell Curve began to appear, . . . The Bell Curve, it turns out, is full of mistakes ranging from
sloppy reasoning to mis-citations of sources to outright mathematical errors.” 45
In other words, without the ability to carefully analyze the data supporting an author’s conclusions, allowing others to confirm the author’s assertions, the social and medical sciences cannot produce credible results on which the public may rely. Without transparency, it is mostly people offering
suggestive but unproven uncertain possibilities.
Are you puzzled by why the Center for a Public Anthropology is not the Center for Public Anthropology? Do you know what the phrase “a public” refers to? It emphasizes making anthropology’s
dynamics more public, embedding the focus on transparency in the name of the center.
(3) Collaborating with others—Moving beyond working alone to working with others to
facilitate significant change. Working on their own, anthropologists rarely have the power to bring
significant social change. To be effective, they usually need the energy, resources, and momentum
generated by larger organizations that have the ability to mobilize people and persist in a project
through time. Stated succinctly: Public anthropology works best when it collaborates with others.
Before providing examples of anthropological collaboration, let me discuss three points to place
both the strategy and the examples in context. First, the key to getting readers to take note of what
one writes often lies less in what is disclosed than in to whom the information is disclosed. Anthropologists should target their information to those most interested in it while being sure to present it
in a form that these interested parties can readily use. The value of targeted transparency—
providing institutions with truthful public information they need to discredit the claims of
competitors—is that there is a ready group of individuals committed to publicizing it. When
reporting on where foreign aid does (and does not) work, for example, anthropologists could
focus on reporting the information to organizations that compete financially with ones that
wastefully spend aid grants.

Public Anthropology

19

Second, targeted transparency makes clear why anthropologists need to reach beyond
policymakers to other constituencies in presenting their information. Providing information
solely to policymakers (who then use it at their discretion) can be a dangerous tango. To have
credibility—to really speak truth to power—cultural anthropologists cannot be pawns of the
powerful. With their academic appointments and tenured positions, anthropologists can be
respected, independent critics. Yes, anthropologists should collaborate—both formally and
informally—with a range of social and political institutions. But anthropologists need to retain a
certain independence so their information and insights are not buried by those seeking to
maintain the status quo. Simply reporting information back to those who fund one’s research or
pay one’s salary means important information is unlikely to ever become public. Anthropologists
need to reach out to others who will use their information and build on it to facilitate change.
Third, if you accept my point regarding cultural hegemony—the structural and cultural
constraints that limit the discipline’s public engagement— then collaborating with those
outside the discipline offers a way to overcome such constraints. Since many outside the
academy are concerned about higher education’s limited accountability and transparency,
collaborating with outside groups offers a means by which to address these problems.
My first example of anthropological collaboration is Partners in Health (PIH), a nonprofit
organization that builds medical support programs on communities’ existing structures
and uses community personnel as staff. Two of the medical doctors who founded the
organization, Paul Farmer and Jim Yong Kim, both have PhDs in anthropology. According to its
website, PIH’s mission is to “provide a preferential option for the poor in health care. By
establishing long-term relationships with sister organizations based in settings of poverty, Partners
In Health strives to achieve two overarching goals: to bring the benefits of modern medical science
to those most in need of them and to serve as an antidote to despair.”
Collaboration is central to PIH’s organization, as the Catalogue of Philanthropy notes:
Health programs should involve community members at all levels of assessment, design,
implementation, and evaluation. Community health workers may be family members,
friends, or even patients who provide health education, refer people who are ill to a clinic, or
deliver medicines and social support to patients in their homes. Community health workers
do not supplant the work of doctors or nurses; rather, they are a vital interface between the
clinic and the community . . . PIH doesn’t tell the communities we serve what they need—
they tell us.46
PIH perceives community health workers as critical partners in a patient’s care:
For nearly three decades, PIH has hired and trained community health workers to help
patients faced with . . . challenges receive care. Our 12,000 community health workers around
the world visit patients at home, assess their health, and link them with clinics and hospitals.
In Haiti, where PIH’s community health worker program originated, they are called
accompagnateurs to emphasize the importance of accompanying people in their journey
through sickness and back to health.

20

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
Living in the communities where they work, community health workers are trusted
and welcomed into patients’ homes to provide high-quality services for a wide range of health
problems. A patient beginning treatment for tuberculosis, for example, is paired with a health
worker who visits every day to supervise treatment and ensure the patient takes medications
regularly and correctly. For people living with HIV or other chronic diseases, this support
enables them to live longer and healthier lives.47

In brief, PIH emphasizes community collaboration in extending its effectiveness as a health
care provider. The accompagnateurs are key partners in treating patients.
Another example of working with others is the Center for a Public Anthropology’s
collaboration with Altmetric.com on the Metrics Project. Working together, we provide metrics
on anthropological articles and books highlighted in the world’s major news outlets, thereby
broadening the metrics used to assess a faculty member’s intellectual work. By offering clear
metrics of public engagement to both deans and department chairs, we hope to support
anthropologists becoming more publicly engaged—thereby addressing the first puzzle noted
at the beginning of the chapter.
It would be impossible for the Center to gather the data needed for the Metrics Project, which
are collected using digital object identifiers (DOIs) of articles and books to search for references in
media around the world. Altmetric is proficient in gathering these data in the social sciences; the
center is not. But Altmetric tends to work with librarians, the Center with social science chairs
and deans. With the Metrics Project, the Center broadens the reach of Altmetric’s work.
A third example is the Center’s work with members of the U.S. Congress. Until recently,
relatively few researchers—approximately 11 percent—complied with the NSF requirement to
submit project outcome reports following completion of their research to report the benefits of
their work. Working with student volunteers, the Center brought this problem to the attention of
members of Congress, who in turn raised the issue with NSF. Over a four-month period,
completion of the benefit reports rose to roughly 80 percent. Obviously, the Center could not
facilitate greater completion of the project outcome reports on its own. Congress was not aware of the
problem until the Center and students brought it to light. Working together, the Center and
congressional members were able to raise the percentage of NSF project outcome reports
substantially.
(4) Benefiting others—Moving beyond “doing no harm” to demonstrating how anthropology
actually benefits others. Presently, the American Anthropological Association’s code of ethics
(2012) focuses on “doing no harm.” What happens, however, when—as occurs at many
fieldwork sites—the people the anthropologist is studying are suffering from a range of maladies?
Do anthropologists leave the people be because they are not the source of the maladies or do
they try to help the people who are helping them with their research?
The agencies that fund anthropological research are entitled to ask whether it is enough for
anthropologists receiving grants to “repay” the funding agency and, more generally, the larger
society by affirming that they did no harm to anyone in spending the thousands of dollars given
them. Or should the funding agency expect a more positive response—that the anthropologists
actually sought to address a problem that would benefit a group of people in some helpful way?
Contrary to popular belief, the Hippocratic Oath that medical students affirm on becoming
doctors does not primarily focus on “do no harm.” The original phrasing of the oath in
Epidemics, I,II states that, “As to disease make a habit of two things—help, or at least, to do no
harm.” The phrase “first, do no harm” likely derives from Thomas Inman, a nineteenth century
house surgeon. Why anthropologists should focus on “do no harm” in their code of ethics—rather

Public Anthropology

21

than on helping others—is an interesting question.
Anthropology’s “do no harm” standard is both out of date and somewhat self-serving. It is
drawn from a period in the late 1800s and early 1900s when anthropologists sought to differentiate
themselves from missionaries and colonial administrators who sought to reshape indigenous societies. Anthropologists did not try to remake these societies; they consciously tried to avoid changing
them. But this context no longer holds. The “do no harm” ethic is now self-serving in that it allows
anthropologists to skirt certain moral dilemmas and obligations. When you ask people for help–
such as in your research–you are usually expected to return the favor in some form at some time.
That reciprocity is a key principle of social relations (articulated in an anthropological classic, The
Gift, by Marcel Mauss in 1925.
Returning for a moment to the Yanomami, there have been questions over the years about whether
the unconfirmed reports of their violence harmed the Y anomami. Focusing on this question has
allowed anthropologists to side-step a critical concern: What tangible benefits have come to the
Yanomami for helping a host of anthropologists in their research over several decades? Chagnon
made well over a million dollars from his various books and movies. Other anthropologists have not
made as much, but their publications have allowed them to gain promotions and salary increases that
put their standard of living well above the average American’s. Mostly they supplied the Yanomami
with minor goods and guns. Only a few individuals, such as Bruce Albert, sought to address the
critical health problems decimating the Yanomami highlighted in Kopenawa and Albert’s The Falling
Sky (2013).
Rather than focusing on not harming others, which can be interpreted in various ways by
people with different agendas, anthropologists might focus on helping the people who help
them in tangible ways, which would certainly enhance indigenous groups’ perceptions of anthropologists. It would also enhance public perceptions of anthropological endeavors—presenting them not as self-serving exercises in career building but as mutually beneficial efforts in
understanding and helping others.

FACILITATING SOCIAL CHANGE
The preceding strategies are aimed at improving how the public perceives anthropology—especially in terms of anthropology’s credibility and value. In this section, we turn to specific ways anthropologists could facilitate change. The standard model for anthropologists is to be hired by companies
or government agencies interested in helping others—in the role of consultants, cultural intermediaries, or researchers. The suggestions presented here are somewhat different. They offer alternative
approaches that anthropologists might pursue. They are meant to offer additional possibilities.
(1) If you accept my point regarding how cultural hegemonic structures shape
resistance to change, then collaborating with others beyond the academy is critical. What is
needed are the staying power and resources that large organizations provide. Given concerns in the
broader society about accountability and transparency in higher education, anthropologists have a
means for reaching out to various public groups. The value of targeted transparency—providing key
institutions with truthful public information needed to discredit the claims of competitors—is that
there are groups ready to publicizing the information anthropologists provide. We see this
particularly in the next two strategies—conceptualizing important issues and exposés.

22

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

(2) Conceptualizing important issues: At its core, anthropology embodies comparison. By
comparing one group to another, anthropology allows people to step outside their parochial
perspectives. It provides frameworks that voters, politicians, officials, and activists can use to
conceptualize a problem and take effective action to address it. Here is an example.
Based on comparative work in Pakistan and Norway, Norwegian anthropologist Fredrik Barth
wrote that “Contrary to what is still a widely shared view, I [have] argued that ethnic groups are
not groups formed on the basis of shared culture, but rather the formation of groups on the
basis of differences of culture . . . The contrast between ‘us’ and ‘others’ is what is embedded in
the organization of ethnicity.”48 He asserted that there are few clear, distinct cultural boundaries.
Rather, a range of continuous variation exists across a geographic area. Oppositions make cultural
distinctions come alive. Barth suggests that behind many cultural conflicts—such as the bitter
tensions between Arabs and Christians, Ukrainians and Russians, Sunni and Shiite Arabs—are
“ethnic entrepreneurs.”
The conflicts we see today are the work mainly of middle echelon politicians who use
the politics of cultural difference to further their ambitions for leadership. This is
tempting to them because in ethnic identities they see a potential constituency, so to speak,
waiting for them, and all they need to find is the key to set the process in motion. Leaders
seek these constituencies and mobilize them by making select, contrastive cultural
differences more salient, and . . . by linking them to grievances and injustices . . . They engage
in confrontational politics.49
To reduce ethnic conflict, Barth suggests bringing how these political entrepreneurs work into the
open. Rather than letting these entrepreneurs emphasize group differences, we should focus on people’s common ground.
We need to reduce the saliency of . . . particular differences, and draw [people’s] attention
to all the other crisscrossing differences and the joint interests they have. We want to create
arenas, specifically for negotiations, where one can work from common interests and move
outward . . . You don’t start with opposed constituencies and try to bring them together. You
start with the common ground. You ask what the shared interests between the parties are.
Then you negotiate to expand that common ground.50
In a sense, this is what Boas did in his work on race—and is why Time magazine recognized
him. Anthropologists can conceptualize new ways to solve serious public problems. Through their
clarity, documentation, and power, they can draw politicians, key decision-makers, and the larger
public to give them serious consideration. It involves the power of ideas to reframe and clarify
problems so as to facilitate effective action. But to do so, anthropologists must collaborate with
others and target their insights to those who are most willing to use them effectively. They
cannot simply speak out, expecting others to listen, as occurs in their classes. Anthropologists need
to identify the individuals and organizations that can take advantage of their innovative framings
and strive to insure that those individuals and organizations make use of them.
Could you apply Barth’s insight to help reduce racial and social tensions at your university?
If so, how? If not, why not?
(3) Exposés—Effectively speaking truth to power. There is an excitement in challenging authority, especially when you can expose illegal or inappropriate activity. There is less excitement in what

Public Anthropology

23

frequently follows. You are often ignored. Not every exposé makes headlines. Moreover, those that do
are often forgotten in the onslaught of later news. In announcing an exposé, the question is how
you can get others to recognize it and take action to address it. Let’s explore two case studies.
Nancy Scheper-Hughes, an anthropologist at UC Berkeley, used her ethnographic skills to
facilitate the trial of the first person ever convicted of organ trafficking. The following report
appeared in Bloomberg Business.
A New York man admitted to brokering black-market sales of human kidneys to three
Americans, becoming the first person convicted in the U.S. of organ trafficking. Levy Izhak
Rosenbaum, 60, pleaded guilty today to three counts of organ trafficking and one count
of conspiracy in federal court in Trenton, New Jersey. He said three ailing people in New
Jersey paid him a total of $410,000 to arrange the sale of kidneys from healthy donors and an
undercover FBI agent paid him $10,000. A 1984 U.S. law bans the sale of human organs.51
Interestingly, most of the news reports did not mention the role Scheper-Hughes played. However,
Wikipedia in its description of “Operation Bid Rig,” the New Jersey political corruption scandal
based on an FBI “sting operation,” noted that “anthropologist and organ trade expert Nancy Scheper-Hughes claimed that she had informed the FBI that Rosenbaum was ‘a major figure’ in international organ smuggling.”52 Quoting Scheper-Hughes:
I went to the media, to CBS, to 60 Minutes, and then to 48 Hours, which did send an
investigative reporter, Avi Cohan, to meet me in Israel where we spoke to patients who had had
‘undercover’ transplants at hospitals in NYC, Philadelphia, the Bay Area, and Los Angeles.
CBS decided not to do the exposé. I was stumped. No one wanted to accuse surgeons, or
prevent a suffering patient from getting a transplant, even with an illegally procured kidney
from a displaced person from abroad.53
Thus, it took several more years for the New Jersey FBI office to arrest Rosenbaum in 2009 as part
of a much larger organized crime sting. Because Rosenbaum was involved in another case that was
more important from the FBI’s perspective, the agents finally followed up on Scheper-Hughes’ information.
A second exposé continues to make world news—Edward Snowden leaking classified
government documents about the activities of the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA).
Wikipedia summarizes the case:
On May 20, 2013, Snowden flew to Hong Kong after leaving his job at an NSA facility
in Hawaii and in early June he revealed thousands of classified NSA documents to
journalists Glenn Greenwald, Laura Poitras, and Ewen MacAskill. Snowden came to
international attention after stories based on the material appeared in The Guardian and the
Washington Post. Further disclosures were made by other newspapers, including Der
Spiegel and the New York Times.
It was revealed that the NSA was harvesting millions of email and instant messaging
contact lists, searching email content, tracking and mapping the location of cell phones, and
undermining attempts at encryption via Bullrun and that the agency was using cookies to

24

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology
“piggyback” on the same tools used by internet advertisers “to pinpoint targets for government
hacking and to bolster surveillance. The NSA was shown to be “secretly” tapping into Yahoo
and Google data centers to collect information from “hundreds of millions” of account holders
worldwide by tapping undersea cables using the MUSCULAR surveillance program.54

It might seem obvious that Snowden’s whistleblowing would garner wide public attention since it
involved explosive documentation on the degree to which the NSA was collecting information most
people thought was private. What is less known is that the Washington Post published related
information in articles by Dana Priest and William Arkin before Snowden’s disclosures. They
reported:
Nine years after the terrorist attacks of 2001, the United States is assembling a vast domestic
intelligence apparatus to collect information about Americans using the FBI, local police,
state homeland security offices, and military criminal investigators. The system, by far the
largest and most technologically sophisticated in the nation’s history, collects, stores, and
analyzes information about thousands of U.S. citizens and residents, many of whom have not
been accused of any wrongdoing.55
The disclosure, entitled “Monitoring America,” was turned into a PBS Frontline report, “Top Secret
America.” The Department of Homeland Security, the authors note:
provides local agencies a daily flow of information bulletins. These reports are meant to
inform agencies about possible terror threats. But some officials say they deliver a neverending stream of information that is vague, alarmist, and often useless. “It’s like a garage in
your house you keep throwing junk into until you can’t park your car in it,” says Michael
Downing, deputy chief of counterterrorism and special operations for the Los Angeles Police
Department.56
The disclosures by Snowden and Priest/Arkin differ in emphasis. Priest/Arkin focused
solely on data collected in the United States while Snowden focused on a global surveillance
program. Snowden’s disclosures violated national security laws; Priest and Arkin did not, though
presumably they made a number of NSA officials uncomfortable. They were suggesting that a
vast amount of secret information was being collected that was mostly useless. It might be
suggested that Snowden was simply expanding their analysis. The results of these exposés are
interesting. Edward Snowden is forced to live in Moscow since, if he returns to the United States,
he will be tried and likely imprisoned. Dana Priest holds the Knight Chair in Public Affairs
Journalism at the University of Maryland.
Why the dramatic difference in these two exposés? One key reason is that Priest and Arkin
are journalists who played by the accepted rules and did not violate any laws. The agencies involved
knew what they were going to announce and apparently did not strenuously object. After a big
splash, their report was mostly forgotten. Hence, there was no need for the NSA to react. But as
soon as Snowden made his disclosures, he not only attracted worldwide attention but created a
number of international incidents with U.S. allies such as Germany, which accused the United
States of violating its citizens’ privacy. Leaking secret information as well as the conflicts
created with American allies made Snowden an international outlaw forced to live beyond
the reach of the U.S. judicial system. Because he did not play by the accepted rules, he

Public Anthropology

25

garnered more attention and had a much greater impact than Priest and Arkin.
If you were to speak out as a public anthropologist—speak truth to power—what type of exposé would you try to make? How would you go about doing it? What do you think the personal
cost, if any, might be?
(4) Writing narratives with impact. When discussing the first puzzle in the chapter’s section,
I emphasized that non-anthropologists tend to write the most popular anthropology-oriented books.
It is not that anthropologists cannot write for broader audiences. Rather, they operate within academic contexts that discourage such writing. That said, some anthropologists, focusing on books
used in course adoptions, do rather well financially. Chagnon’s introductory ethnography on the
Yanomami, for example, has run through five editions and sold well over a million copies. Part of
what makes the book successful is that teachers can use a set of vivid ethnographic videos that make
the book’s descriptions come alive.
Chagnon also depicts his interactions with the Yanomami in a lively manner, portraying himself
as an Indian Jones type figure. To my knowledge, no other anthropologist has ever discussed how
particular members of the tribe being studied purposely sought to kill them (with a gun in Chagnon’s
case). Such incidents might have happened to other anthropologists, but they have never bragged
about them as Chagnon has done. Anthropologists generally take pride in displaying tolerance toward people who are different from themselves, showing respect for those with whom they live and
work while conducting their research. Chagnon moved in the opposite direction, giving a dramatic,
and at times pejorative, flair to his depictions of the Yanomami.
Yet many undergraduates enjoy Chagnon’s book. It brings out their prejudices—emphasizing
Amazonian Indians as exotic “savages.” This was not necessarily Chagnon’s intent. He wanted to
stress that the Yanomami were just as barbaric as Americans—no more, no less. But that is not what
students tend to take away from his book. They take away their superiority to the Yanomami. What
does one do with a popular ethnography such as Chagnon’s? While it offers a detailed description of an Amazonian group, it also goes against an anthropological tenet of describing people
studied in fairly favorable terms. What would you do?
Most anthropologists resist the notion that they produce works of fiction. They do not compose
their ethnographies out of thin air—as many suspect Carlos Castaneda did in The Teachings of Don
Juan. Most anthropological ethnographies sell around 2,000 copies—a pittance compared to the
millions of books Castaneda has sold. It is not always clear where facts leave off and fiction begins in
some colleagues’ accounts. Anthropologists claim they are objective; they claim they present accurate
accounts. But few visit the field sites of other anthropologists to test this assumption. It makes for
better relations with colleagues if they do not.
You have read many books. Some have excited you; others have not. If you were to write a
popular anthropology book that involved a sense of professional scholarship, what topic would
you select if you wanted to sell a hundred thousand copies (and gain 10 percent of the selling
price)? How would you write to capture students’ attention without moving too far into fiction
or demeaning those with whom you worked?
Let us review what I have discussed and see whether you recall key ideas made in each section. We
started this chapter with (a) two puzzles stemming from anthropology’s interactions with the broader
public. I then turned to (b) describing public anthropology especially varying perceptions of it and
its relation to applied anthropology. Next, I discussed (c) four of the field’s central strategies for transforming anthropology in order to enhance its credibility with the larger public. Finally, I explored

26

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

(d) suggested ways to facilitate change. In this chapter, I have sought to help you not only understand
the problems public anthropology addresses but also consider effective ways for anthropologists to
reach out to the public. Did you get these points or did you keel over with boredom? Did some of
the points seem relevant to you?

CONCLUDING QUESTIONS
First, in an earlier section, I highlighted the Center for a Public Anthropology’s work with Altmetric. Please look over the website and explore the data it presents. Do you think it will prove
effective in broadening the standards for promotion by highlighting faculty publications in the
world’s media? If so, why? If not, why not?
Second, below is an account of how introductory students like yourself, working with the Center
for a Public Anthropology in coordination with key Brazilian groups facilitated the return of blood
samples taken from the Yanomami in the late 1960s. What strategies highlighted in this chapter
do you think proved effective in this effort? I counted four. How many do you find in this
account? How would you draw media outlets to this story so it will reach the broader public?
As an example of public anthropology (following the model of the Kahn Academy), Dr.
Borofsky has created short 10–15 minute videos on key topics in anthropology for introductory students. All 28 videos are available from the Perspectives: An Open Introduction
to Cultural Anthropology website.

CENTER FOR A PUBLIC ANTHROPOLOGY PROJECT: HOW THE
BLOOD CAME BACK TO THE YANOMAMI
More information about this project along with the full set of references can be found on the
Center for Public Anthropology website. Students and instructors are welcome to participate in the
Community Action Project.
STAGE ONE: The issue seemed fairly straightforward—before it became a question of legal liability. Initially, one’s perspective on returning the blood to the Yanomami came down to where you
stood on a continuum between advocating for
science and advocating for indigenous rights.
At stake were blood samples collected from
the Yanomami during the late 1960s by an
American research team that included James
Neel, a geneticist, and Napoleon Chagnon,
an anthropologist. [S1-a] Unbeknownst to
the Yanomami, the blood samples were subsequently stored at a number of American
institutions, most prominently Pennsylvania
State University. The Yanomami only
discovered this fact following the
Figure 1: Yanomami Portrait by Claudia Andujar. All
publication of Patrick Tierney’s Darkness in
rights reserved.
El Dorado (2000).

Public Anthropology

27

Tierney wrote the Yanomami blood samples were stored “in an old refrigerator at Penn State University.” [S1-b]
For the Yanomami, this was deeply upsetting. Some Yanomami felt they should be compensated
better than they had been since the samples were helping researchers’ in their careers. But many more
felt it was a religious sacrilege to retain, rather than return, the samples so they could be properly
disposed of in accord with Yanomami tradition. [S1-c]
The Yanomami had been promised that their blood samples would be used to learn more about
the diseases ravaging them. [S1-d] (They were collected, it should be noted, in the midst of a measles
epidemic.) Unfortunately, this did not occur. A few researchers used the samples for their personal
research. But judging from the publications produced over the more than forty years the samples
were stored at various institutions, they were not widely studied, nor were they ever used in a way
that directly benefitted the Yanomami. Hence, what appeared to be a conflict between science and
indigenous rights was, for the first few years at least, mostly a conflict between those who wanted to
save the samples for some vague, future use (such as the Human Genome Project) and the Yanomami
who wanted the blood returned for religious reasons.
But the frame of reference changed significantly when, to help resolve the dispute, lawyers became
involved. The focus then turned to a question of legal liability and the fear of being sued.
STAGE TWO: Davi Kopenawa, a
prominent Yanomami leader in Brazil,
first learned about his relatives’ blood
samples being stored in the United
States from Bruce Albert during a conversation about Tierney’s book. The
Pro Yanomami Commission (CCPY),
working with Kopenawa, brought
the matter to the federal attorneys of
the MPF (Federal Public Ministry)
residing in Roraima (the state where
most Yanomami lived in Brazil) as
Figure 2: Davi Kopenawa. Photo by Claudia Andujar. All
rights reserved.
well as in Brasila, Brazil’s capitol. In
2002, Deputy Attorney Ela Wiecko
Volkmer de Castilho corresponded with Dr. Kenneth Weiss, who was storing Pennsylvania State
University’s samples. [S2-a] Subsequently, Albert wrote Weiss, including a note from Kopenawa.
[S2-b] Paralleling this correspondence, key Yanomami wrote letters to the Indian Resource Center in Washington D.C. [S2-c] Little resulted from this correspondence. In 2005, Deputy Attorney of Brazil Mauricio Frabretti, wrote to Weiss [S2-d] as well as Dean Susan Welsh of Penn
State [S2-e] and Binghamton University’s Vice President for Research, Dr. Gerald Sonnenfeld.
[S2-d] Once more, little happened. Welch’s response emphasized the considerable problems preventing Penn State from returning the blood. [S2-e]
STAGE THREE: Penn State’s response turned more positive in 2006, following the involvement
of the Center for a Public Anthropology working in collaboration with students from across North
America. Emails from these students to Weiss had little effect. [S3-a] But a formal letter to Pennsylvania State University’s President, Dr. Graham Spanier, from the Center combined with student letters
supported by scores of other students [S3-b] had a positive impact. One need only contrast Provost
Dr. Rodney Erickson’s reply to these letters [S3-c] with Welch’s reply to Fabretti to see the difference.

28

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

At roughly this same time, Dr. Joseph
Fraumeni, a director within the National
Cancer Institute (NCI), in correspondence
with Deputy Attorney Fabretti, indicated
that the Institute was “willing to return the
[blood] specimens to Yanomami representatives.” [S3-d] Knowing this, Provost Erickson
suggested that Pennsylvania State University’s
transfer of the blood “could ideally take place
at the same time and under the same circumstances” as the NCI’s. [S3-c]
But what seemed reasonable at first, beFigure 3: Photo by Victor Englebert. All rights
reserved.
came problematic. While Dr. Fraumenini’s
assistant, Dr. Karen Pitt, made a significant
effort to facilitate the return of the samples, others—at NCI, at Pennsylvania State University, and in
Brazil—obstructed the process, at times spreading false rumors.
STAGE FOUR: It remained unclear for several years who or what was delaying the return of the
blood samples. American lawyers insisted on a formal legal agreement waiving all liability and warranties on their part related to the blood. The Brazilians, puzzled by this insistence and not sure what
they were consenting to, hesitated to sign such an agreement. The Deputy Attorney of Brazil, Mr.
Antonio Morimoto, suggested that the blood samples simply be turned over to the Brazilian Embassy
in Washington, D.C. [S4-a] But Pennsylvania State University and the National Cancer Institute refused. The fact that the blood samples were going to be ritually disposed of soon after being returned
to the Yanomami, [Globo video S5-c3] and this was part of the final agreement [S5-b1a 2.4] was
irrelevant to the NCI’s lawyer. She insisted an agreement waiving liability be signed before the samples could be returned. The final transfer agreement held NCI “harmless with respect to any action
arising from the use of Samples prior . . . to [the] transfer.” [S5-b1a, 2.3]
For several years, there was a standoff. On one side, Pennsylvania State University and NCI insisted they wanted to return the blood and, on the other, the Brazilian government insisted it wanted
the blood returned. But they could never agree on how it would be done.
Given this situation, those wanting the blood returned had only one option—to pressure the parties involved to come to some agreement. In the United States, the Center for a Public Anthropology
repeatedly contacted key figures involved, assisted Deputy Attorney Morimoto [S4-b] (as
well as Bruce Albert) in their efforts when
possible, and sought to attract media attention. [S4-c1, S4-c2, S4-c3, S4-c4, S4-c5, S4c6, S4-c7, S4-c8, S4-c9] On the Brazilian
side, returning the blood samples became a
priority for the Hutukara Yanomami Association (HAY), a Yanomami NGO (non-governmental organization) created in 2004 with
CCPY assistance, and partner organizations,
especially the Instituto Socioambiental (ISA),
Figure 4: Photo by Victor Englebert. All rights
which absorbed CCPY in 2007. Davi Kopenreserved.

Public Anthropology

29

awa, HAY’s president, played a key role in keeping the issue alive, encouraging articles in Brazilian,
French, and British media. [S4-c1, S4-c2, S4-c3, S4-c4, S4-c5, S4-c6, S4-c7, S4-c8, S4-c9]
STAGE FIVE: Ultimately, the Brazilian pressure was key. Through multiple meetings with the
Federal Public Ministry’s (MPF’s) attorneys, ISA learned, quoting ISA’s skilled lawyer, Ana Paula
Caldeira Souto Maior: that “new Brazilian government agencies were brought to the case due to the
requirements made by the contacted American institutions . . . [relating to] a Biological Material
Transfer Agreement. Besides the Foreign Ministry, ANVISA [Brazil’s FDA equivalent], and the AGU
[the Attorney General of Brazil] were also involved [because of American concerns over] . . . the safety
conditions and the final destination of the samples.” Finally, “MPF was able to solve the bureaucratic
obstacles on the Brazilian side and, through clarifying conversations with the American Institutions,
felt able to sign the Agreement for the return the samples insisted upon by the Americans.”
In April 2015, Pennsylvania State University returned their blood samples: 2693 vials.
These samples included those that had been
stored at Binghamton University. In September 2015, the National Cancer Institute returned their samples: 474 vials. Readers can
peruse, if they wish, the formal transfer agreements. [S5-a, S5-b1, S5-b1a, S5-b2]
The transfer of the samples back to the
Yanomami was highlighted in the Brazilian
media [S5‑c1, S5‑c2, S5‑c3, S5‑c4, S5‑c5,
S5‑c6, S5-c7], Brazilian government reports
Figure 5: Photo by Victor Englebert. All rights
[S5-d1, S5‑d2, S5-d3] and British media.
reserved.
[S5-e]
It should be noted that none of the rumored dangers emphasized by the transfer’s opponents—
which made the transfers into such a complicated legal matter—ever came to pass, either in terms of
spreading disease or the Yanomami suing the American institutions. Instead, the return of the blood
samples was a deeply moving moment for many Yanomami. One can listen to Davi Kopenawa’s
comments regarding the return of the samples in a video. [S5-c4]
The return of the blood samples also represents an important moment for American anthropology.
Countering various criticisms lodged against the discipline in print [S5-f ] and in film [S5-g], the
return of the blood constitutes a clear case of American anthropologists helping the Yanomami – on
Yanomami terms, not on their own. It portrays American anthropology in a much more positive light
vis-à-vis the Yanomami than has been the case in recent years.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Robert Borofsky is Professor of Anthropology at Hawaii Pacific
University. A distinguished scholar, he has authored or edited six
books as well as published articles in the discipline’s leading journals.
Dr. Borofsky is editor of the Public Anthropology Book Series
published by University of California Press, Director of the Center
for a Public Anthropology, and webmaster of the http://www.
publicanthropology.org and http://www.publicanthropology.net

30

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

websites. Selected publications include: Making History (1987), Assessing Cultural Anthropology
(1994), Remembrance of Pacific Pasts (2000), and The Yanomami: The Fierce Controversy and What We
Can Learn From It (2005).

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Barth, Fredrick. “Ethnicity and the Concept of Culture.” Program on Nonviolent Sanctions and Cultural
Survival Seminar Synopses. Paper presented to the Conference “Rethinking Culture,” Harvard
University, 1995.
Bloomberg Business. “Kidney Broker Pleads Guilty in First U.S. Organ Trafficking Prosecution.” Bloomberg
Business. October 27, 2011. http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-10-27/kidney-broker-pleadsguilty-in-first-u-s-organ-trafficking-prosecution.
Catalogue for Philanthropy. “Partners in Health: A Non Profit Corporation.” http://www.
philanthropydirectory.org/charity/partners-health-nonprofit-corporation
Doughty, Paul L. “Ending Serfdom in Peru: The Struggle for Land and Freedom in Vicos.” In Contemporary
Cultures and Societies of Latin America, edited by Dwight B. Heath, 225–243. Prospect Heights, IL:
Waveland Press, 2002.
Douglas, Mary. Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Pollution and Taboo. New York: Routledge, 1966.
Erwin, Alexander. Applied Anthropology: Tools and Perspectives for Contemporary Practice. New York:
Pearson, 2005.
Firth, Raymond. “An Appraisal of Modern Social Anthropology.” Annual Review of Anthropology 4
(1975):1–25.
Fiske, Shirley J. “Global Climate Change from the Bottom Up.” In Applying Anthropology in the Global
Village, edited by Christina Wasson, Mary Odell Butler, and Jacqueline Copeland-Carson, 143–172.
Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2012.
Givens, David, Patsy Evans, and Timothy Jablonski. “American Anthropological Association Survey
of Anthropology PhDs.” http://www.americananthro.org/LearnAndTeach/ResourceDetail.
aspx?ItemNumber=1499
Glasziou, Paul. “Reducing Waste from Incomplete or Unusable Reports of Biomedical Research.” Lancet
383 no. 9913 (2014):267–276.
Hale, Charles R. “What is Activist Research?” Social Science Research Council, 2, no. 1–2 (2001):13–15.
Kiste, Robert C. and Mac Marshall. American Anthropology in Micronesia: An Assessment. Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press, 1999.
Kuper, Adam. “Anthropology.” Times Literary Supplement. March 30, 2009.
Lemann, Nicholas. “The Bell Curve Flattened,” Slate, January 18, 1997. http://www.slate.com/articles/
briefing/articles/1997/01/the_bell_curve_flattened.html.
Lock, Margaret. Twice Dead: Organ Transplants and the Reinvention of Death. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 2001.
Macleod, M. R., Susan Michie, Ian Roberts, Ulrich Dirnagl, Iain Chalmers, John P. A. Ioannidis, Rustam
Al-Shahi Salman, An-Wen Chan, and Paul Glasziou. “Biomedical Research: Increasing Value, Reducing
Waste.” Lancet 383 no. 9912 (2014):101–104.
Mead, Margaret. “Changing Styles of Anthropological Work,” Annual Review of Anthropology 2 (1973):1–2.
Miklikowska, Marta and Douglas Fry. “Natural Born Nonkillers: A Critique of the Killers-Have-MoreKids Idea.” In Nonkilling Psychology, edited by Daniel Christie and Joan Evan Pim. Honolulu: Center for
Global Nonkilling, 2012.
National Association for the Practice of Anthropology, “The Practice of Anthropology.” http://
practicinganthropology.org/practicing-anthro/
National Institutes of Health, Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences. “The Contribution of Behavioral
and Social Sciences Research to Improving the Health of the Nation.” https://obssr.od.nih.gov/wpcontent/uploads/2016/09/OBSSR_Prospectus_2007.pdf
National Science Foundation. “Grant Proposal Guide: Chapter III—NSF Proposal Processing and Review:
A. Review Criteria.” http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2004/nsf042/3.htm.

Public Anthropology

31

Priest, Dana and William M. Arkin. “Monitoring America.” Washington Post, December 19, 2010. http://
projects.washingtonpost.com/top-secret-america/articles/monitoring-america.
Research Councils United Kingdom. “Embedding Public Engagement in Research,” www.rcuk.ac.uk/pe/
embedding.
Salzstein, Dan. “Chill Out, Mom and Dad.” The New York Times, September 4, 2016, BR23.
Scheper-Hughes, Nancy. “The Rosenbaum Kidney Trafficking Gang.” Counterpunch. November 30, 2011.
http://www.counterpunch.org/2011/11/30/the-rosenbaum-kidney-trafficking-gang.
Singer, Merrill. “Why I Am Not a Public Anthropologist.” Anthropology News 41 no. 6 (2000):6–7.
Stocking, George W. “Ideas and Institutions in American Anthropology: Thoughts Toward a History of
the Interwar Years.” In Selected Papers from the American Anthropologist, 1921–1945, edited by George W.
Stocking, 1–50. Washington, DC: American Anthropological Association, 1976.
Trotter, Robert, Jean Schensul, and Kristin Kostick. “Theories and Methods in Applied Anthropology.”
In Handbook of Methods in Cultural Anthropology, edited by H. Russell Bernard and Clarence Gravlee,
661–693. New York: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015.
Warren, Kay B. “Perils and Promises of Engaged Anthropology: Historical Transitions and Ethnographic
Dilemmas.” In Engaged Observer: Anthropology, Advocacy, and Activism, edited by Victoria Sanford and
Asale Angel-Agani, 213–227. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2006.
Wikipedia. “Edward Snowden.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Snowden.
Wikipedia. “Operation Bid Rig.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Bid_Rig.
Wolf, Eric. “They Divide and Subdivide, and Call It Anthropology.” The New York Times, November 30,
1980: E9.

NOTES
1. Anne Fadiman, The Spirit Catches You and You Fall Down (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1997), front matter.
2. Chronicle of Higher Education, “Academics Should Do More to Shape Public Debate,” The Chronicle Review, November
11, 2016, B9.
3. Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger: An Analysis of Pollution and Taboo (New York: Routledge, 1966), 123.
4. Eric Wolf, “They Divide and Subdivide, and Call It Anthropology,” The New York Times, November 30, 1980, E9.
5. Dan Salzstein, “Chill Out, Mom and Dad,” The New York Times, September 4, 2016, BR23.
6. Alexander Erwin, Applied Anthropology: Tools and Perspectives for Contemporary Practice (New York: Pearson, 2005), 149.
7. Ibid.
8. Ibid., 102–104.
9. Tom Greaves, Ralph Bolton, and Florencia Zapata, Vicos and Beyond: A Half Century of Applying Anthropology in Peru
(Lanham MD: AltaMira Press, 2010), viii.
10. Paul L. Doughty, “Ending Serfdom in Peru: The Struggle for Land and Freedom in Vicos,” in Contemporary Cultures and
Societies of Latin America, ed. Dwight B. Heath (Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 2002), 238.
11. Ibid., 239.
12. Shirley J. Fiske, “Global Climate Change from the Bottom Up,” in Applying Anthropology in the Global Village, ed. Christina Wasson, Mary Odell Butler, and Jacqueline Copeland-Carson (Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2012), 162.
13. “The Fifty Years War: What Has Changed Since the Federal Government Went to War in the Hollows,” The Economist,
May 21, 2015.
14. Margaret Lock, Twice Dead: Organ Transplants and the Reinvention of Death (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
2001), front matter.
15. Thomas Hylland Erikson, Engaging Anthropology: The Case of a Public Presence (New York: Berg, 2006), back cover.
16. Kay B. Warren, “Perils and Promises of Engaged Anthropology: Historical Transitions and Ethnographic Dilemmas,” in
Engaged Observer: Anthropology, Advocacy, and Activism, ed. Victoria Sanford and Asale Angel-Agani (New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press, 2006), 213.
17. National Association for the Practice of Anthropology, “The Practice of Anthropology.” http://practicinganthropology.
org/practicing-anthro/
18. Charles R. Hale, “What is Activist Research?” Social Science Research Council, 2, no. 1–2 (2001):13–15. www.utexas.edu/
cola/anthropology/_files/PDF/Hale.pdf.
19. George W. Stocking, “Ideas and Institutions in American Anthropology: Thoughts toward a History of the Interwar
Years,” in Selected Papers from the American Anthropologist, 1921–1945, ed. George W. Stocking (Washington, DC: American
Anthropological Association, 1976), 1.
20. Raymond Firth, “An Appraisal of Modern Social Anthropology,” Annual Review of Anthropology 4 (1975):4.

32

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

21. Andrew Abbott, The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of Expert Labor (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1988), 119.
22. Robert Trotter, Jean Schensul, and Kristin Kostick., “Theories and Methods in Applied Anthropology,” in Handbook of
Methods in Cultural Anthropology, ed. H. Russell Bernard and Clarence Gravlee (New York: Rowman & Littlefield, 2015),
661.
23. Merrill Singer, “Why I Am Not a Public Anthropologist,” Anthropology News 41 no. 6 (2000):6–7.
24. Margaret Mead, “Changing Styles of Anthropological Work,” Annual Review of Anthropology 2 (1973):1–2.
25. Robert C. Kiste and Mac Marshall, American Anthropology in Micronesia: An Assessment (Honolulu: University of Hawaii
Press, 1999), front book flap.
26. David Givens, Patsy Evans, and Timothy Jablonski, American Anthropological Association Survey of Anthropology PhDs,
http://www.americananthro.org/LearnAndTeach/ResourceDetail.aspx?ItemNumber=1499
27. Ibid.
28. Victor Turner, The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-Structure (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969), 96.
29. Ibid., 203.
30. Deborah L. Rhode, In Pursuit of Knowledge: Scholars, Status, and Academic Culture (Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press, 2006), 11.
31. Ibid., 46.
32. National Science Foundation, Grant Proposal Guide: Chapter III—NSF Proposal Processing and Review. A. Review Criteria.
www.nsf.gov/pubs/2004/nsf042/3.htm.
33. National Institutes of Health, Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences, https://obssr.od.nih.gov/pdf/OBSSR_Prospectus.
pdf.
34. Research Councils United Kingdom, “Embedding Public Engagement in Research,” www.rcuk.ac.uk/pe/embedding.
35. Adam Kuper, “Anthropology,” Times Literary Supplement, March 30, 2009, 23.
36. Abhijit V. Banerjee and Esther Duflo, Poor Economics: A Radical Rethinking of the Way to Fight Global Poverty (New York:
Public Affairs, 2011) 49–50, 57–58.
37. Ibid., back cover.
38. Mary Furner, Advocacy and Objectivity: A Crisis in the Professionalization of American Social Science, 1865–1905 (Lexington, KY: University of Kentucky Press, 1975), 324.
39. M. R. Macleod, Susan Michie, Ian Roberts, Ulrich Dirnagl, Iain Chalmers, John P. A. Ioannidis, Rustam Al-Shahi
Salman, An-Wen Chan, and Paul Glasziou, “Biomedical Research: Increasing Value, Reducing Waste.” Lancet 383 no. 9912
(2014):101.
40. Paul Glasziou, “Reducing Waste from Incomplete or Unusable Reports of Biomedical Research.” Lancet 383 no. 9913
(2014):267.
41. “Tested and Found Wanting,” The Economist, November 5, 2016.
42. Benedict Carey, “Many Psychology Findings Not as Strong as Claimed, Study Says,” New York Times, August 27, 2015.
43. Napoleon A. Chagnon, “Life Histories, Blood Revenge, and Warfare in a Tribal Population” Science 239 no. 4843 (1988):
985–992.
44. Marta Miklikowska and Douglas Fry, “Natural Born Nonkillers: A Critique of the Killers-Have-More-Kids Idea.” In
Nonkilling Psychology, edited by Daniel Christie and Joan Evan Pim (Honolulu: Center for Global Nonkilling, 2012), 61.
45. Nicholas Lemann, “The Bell Curve Flattened,” Slate, January 18, http://www.slate.com/articles/briefing/articles/1997/01/
the_bell_curve_flattened.html.
46. Catalogue for Philanthropy, “Partners in Health: A Non Profit Corporation,” http://www.philanthropydirectory.org/
charity/partners-health-nonprofit-corporation
47. The Partners in Health approach and mission are described in http://www.pih.org/pages/our-mission; http://www.pih.
org/pages/our-principles; and http://www.pih.org/priority-programs/community-health-workers.
48. Fredrick Barth, “Ethnicity and the Concept of Culture.” Program on Nonviolent Sanctions and Cultural Survival Seminar
Synopses Paper presented to the Conference “Rethinking Culture,” Harvard University, 1995, 1.
49. Ibid., 7.
50. Ibid., 8.
51. “Kidney Broker Pleads Guilty in First U.S. Organ Trafficking Prosecution, Bloomberg Business, October 27, 2011, http://
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-10-27/kidney-broker-pleads-guilty-in-first-u-s-organ-trafficking-prosecution.
52. “Operation Bid Rig,” Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Bid_Rig.
53. Nancy Scheper-Hughes, “The Rosenbaum Kidney Trafficking Gang,” Counterpunch, November 30, 2011, www.counterpunch.org/2011/11/30/the-rosenbaum-kidney-trafficking-gang.
54. “Edward Snowden,” Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Snowden.
55. Dana Priest and William M. Arkin, “Monitoring America.” Washington Post, December 19, 2010, http://projects.
washingtonpost.com/top-secret-america/articles/monitoring-america.
56. Ibid.

Appendix: Teaching Resources

Video Presentations
By Robert Borofsky, Hawaii Pacific University, Center for a Public Anthropology
These videos have been included in the teaching resources for Perspectives: An Open Introduction to
Cultural Anthropology with permission from Dr. Borofsky and may be used for educational purposes
by instructors and students.
Video Title

Length

Defining Anthropology - Lecture 1
Defining Anthropology - Lecture 2

12:52
7:02

Historical Trends - Lecture 1
Historical Trends - Lecture 2
Historical Trends - Lecture 3
Historical Trends - Lecture 4

10:33
11:23
10:54
10:26

Political Economy - Lecture 1
Political Economy - Lecture 2
Political Economy - Lecture 3
Political Economy - Lecture 4
Political Economy - Lecture 5
Political Economy - Lecture 6

9:42
12:35
8:48
8:35
9:44
10:24

Ethics - Lecture 1
Ethics - Lecture 2

13:26
16:57

Informants - Lecture 1
Informants - Lecture 2

18:20
15:19

Anthropology’s Value - Lecture 1
Anthropology’s Value - Lecture 2
Anthropology’s Value - Lecture 3
Anthropology’s Value - Lecture 4

11:26
17:13
14:21

Public Anthropology - Lecture 1
Public Anthropology - Lecture 2

12:16
17:39

Religion - Lecture 1
Religion - Lecture 2
Religion - Lecture 3

15:20
14:45
12:14

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Video Title
Social Organization - Lecture 1
Social Organization - Lecture 2
Social Organization - Lecture 3

Length
9:51
9:33
11:32

All rights to these videos are reserved by Dr. Robert Borofsky. The videos are not creative commons
licensed and may not be copied, edited, or included in other works without his permission.

Anthropology in Our Moment
in History: Interview with
Philippe Bourgois
Robert Borofsky, Hawaii Pacific University, Center for a Public Anthropology
borofsky@hpu.edu
http://www.publicanthropology.org/

How did you become an anthropologist?
Discovering anthropology for me was like falling in love. I was a freshman in college and I knew
nothing about the subject. I didn’t have a major. I took one of those big introductory classes in a
large lecture hall because I was curious, but I didn’t really have any idea what anthropology might be.
The very first lecture blew my mind. It was by an old-style style anthropologist talking about his
fieldwork in the Amazon. He introduced us to the Yanomami, an indigenous people who were at
the center of a huge anthropological debate about the nature of violence at the time: How much of
human violence is cultural? How much of it is at the essence of human nature? How much of it is
imposed by larger historical and economic forces? The teacher described to us their “shaman” who
sniff hallucinogenic drugs to communicate with spirits and to protect their village from sickness
and attack by neighbors. The Yanomami shaman are the Amazonian equivalent to our philosophers,
scientists, doctors and religious or political officials. I couldn’t believe what I was hearing. Here is an
academic discipline that sends its practitioners around the world to immerse themselves in utterly
unfamiliar, foreign cultures in order to explore the meaning of human existence.
I adored the class even with all its old-fashioned faults—it did, after all, “exoticize” indigenous
people as if they were not our contemporaries but lived in a bubble, oblivious to the effects of global
power relations and colonial conquest. The teacher did alert us, however, to the contemporary invasion of non-indigenous settlers, miners and cattle barons who were—and still are—destroying
indigenous ways of life all around the world. I quickly signed up to major in anthropology.
What do you find special about anthropology?
There are a few things that I think are magical about anthropology but, what I like best is our
methodology of “participant-observation ethnography”, our insight on “cultural relativism” and our
multi-disciplinarity. Our methodology is extraordinarily powerful but simple. To put it commonsensically, it is the technique of deep “hanging out” in a setting to attempt to see the world through the
eyes of the people or society you want to find out about. You engage with people in a friendly, empathetic way, and participate in their daily life activities so as to avoid distorting interactions or calling
excessive attention to yourself. This allows you to break through appearances and simultaneously
experience emotionally and document rationally life in that setting. We have developed strategies of
note-taking, tape-recording and, most importantly, of self-reflexive skepticism. You have to learn to
be careful not to see only what you want to see and not to confuse the way you want the world to
be with the way the world really is. You try to figure out how things really work by being aware of
your own biases.

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Participant-observation methodology forces you to break through the barriers of status that limit
people’s lives: economic class, race and ethnicity, gender, and social conventions—to name a few.
Anthropology tells you: “Go out there and explore the world; open your mind to all kinds of different perspectives and settings—or take a long close critical look at your own society. Treat your own
culture and its common senses as if you were an outsider confronting the bizarre logic of an exotic
people for the first time. You discover that there is nothing more normal or right about your culture
than anyone else’s culture.”
Anthropology pushes you to dare to break through, what we have called the “intimate apartheids”
(Bourgois and Schonberg 2007) that confine us to our narrow little segregated worlds that we find
most comfortable. Too often these intimate apartheids turn us into ethnocentric, or even racist individuals, who think so highly of ourselves and our way of being that we end up disrespecting and
mistreating anyone who is different from us.
Respect for others is a related core value of anthropology and is reflected in our core value of cultural relativism which is not a theory, but simply a heuristic device, (a technique) that enables us to
learn about others without being blinded by prejudgments. In a nutshell, cultural relativism declares
that cultures are not good or bad; they all have a logic. Our job as anthropologists—and indeed as
human beings—is not to judge culture along righteous moral lines, but to find out how its internal
logic makes it operate. Often the first reaction of people confronted with something different is,
“Ewww gross!” simply because it is different from what they are used to and what they consider to be
normal, or moral, or the proper way to do things.
Anthropology tells us to throw out our preconceptions and biases and recognize our own culture’s
brain-washing and instead become aware of why people do things, because those different ways of
doing things inevitably have a meaning and a logic to them. All people everywhere are convinced
that they too are moral, good, and normal in the same way we think we are moral, good—and for
the most part normal. No matter how horrific/crazy/cool/mean or beautiful a cultural practice may
appear to be at first, our job as anthropologists is to jump into its logic to see how it makes sense to
the people engaging in that practice. It is this combination of participant-observation ethnography
and cultural relativism that can make anthropology powerfully anti-racist, self-critical and alert to
power inequalities and disparate life chances across the world, and in our own society—or even in
our own families!
Finally, anthropology is also an unusual field of study because it spans the scientific boundaries
that divide academic disciplines. We include multiple subfields—cultural anthropology, archeology,
linguistics, biological anthropology, and medical anthropology —that transcend the academic gulfs
between the humanities, the social sciences, and the natural sciences. I happen to be a cultural (sometimes called a social) anthropologist and also a medical anthropologist. The questions important to
me draw from theories and methods from both the humanities and the social sciences. Furthermore,
as a medical anthropologist concerned about HIV, addiction and violence I find myself in dialogue
with laboratory scientists and epidemiologists who operate with very different (primarily quantitative) definitions of facts and who are often initially unfamiliar with, and sometimes fail to recognize,
the value of qualitative anthropological research.
Anthropology makes you realize that academic disciplines are like cultures. They each have their
logics and insights, as well as their blinders and biases. Anthropology has a long history of melding
together different epistemologies—that is to say different techniques of understanding the world. We
read widely in philosophy, literature, history, economics, art, architecture, poetry, biology, law—you

Anthropology in Our Moment in History: Interview with Philippe Bourgois

3

name it. This makes our theoretical approaches to understanding why the world is the way it is especially innovative.
What do you like best about anthropology?
Conducting fieldwork is the best part of being an anthropologist. I think I am happiest when I’m
in the middle of a participant-observation ethnographic fieldwork project. Some mornings I have
to pinch myself when I wake up. It seems like a dream that I am paid to spend my time in so many
different, interesting—sometimes scary—settings and with such compelling people to learn from
and about them.
Much of my work has been in the U.S. inner city. These are settings beset by social inequality,
poverty, violence and substance abuse. As part of my fieldwork, for example, I lived for almost five
years in a rundown tenement apartment building in East Harlem, New York with my family, right
when the crack and HIV epidemics hit. I watched many of my friends and neighbors get swept off
their feet by crack, and some died of AIDS. I befriended a network of crack dealers operating on my
block and they invited me into their homes. I wrote a book about how they and their families made
sense of their world and struggled to survive (Bourgois 2003). I also became a medical anthropologist
to try to contribute usefully to policy and advocacy in the field of public health and HIV prevention.
My neighbors and friends were suffering real poverty. Most were unemployed, struggling with
addiction, and engaging in violence. There was a great deal of gun violence. The mid-1980s through
the early 1990s were a dangerous and stressful era on U.S. inner city streets. But on another level,
it was an exciting and fun moment of history to be in East Harlem. It was the birth of hip-hop and
rap. People were eager to talk, full of hope and the illusions of going from rags to riches. I tried to
make their suffering, struggle, and dreams less invisible and more humanely comprehensible to the
rest of America.
I wanted readers of my book to understand the historical tragedy of inner city poverty, the effects
of de-industrialization, racist segregation and the loss of jobs. The economy was in shambles, because
of the disappearance of factory jobs to lower wage, countries that repressed unions and human rights.
The global narcotics industry flooded in to this devastated economic vacuum overwhelming all of
us. These were “structural forces” that were badly managed by U.S. politicians and misunderstood by
the press. The young men and women I befriended could not find legal jobs that would pay enough
money to feed a single individual—let alone their families and loved ones. Schools were not working;
abandoned buildings were going up in flames, and crack offered a seductive promise of sudden, easy
access to the American Dream: Get rich quick through risky entrepreneurship.
Setting up a crack house at that time was not so different from founding a high-tech start-up company today except that your product was illegal and you had no access to loans from banks, or to legal
protection for enforcing contracts. You had to rely on your wits or brute force to start your business,
stay alive and keep off of drugs. At that moment in history, politicians and the press vilified crack
dealers as public enemies, but in fact, they were the logical product of powerful social and political
forces that trapped them into a destructive, violent relationship with their community. More often
than not they ended up as victims themselves, becoming addicts and spending the rest of their lives
rotating through prison, because this was the moment when mass incarceration was taking hold of
the United States.
Since that time, I’ve done similar fieldwork in other inner city settings. I co-authored a book on
homeless heroin injectors and crack smokers, called Righteous Dopefiend, with a student, Jeff Schon-

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

berg, who is also a great photographer (Bourgois and Schonberg 2009). Jeff is now an anthropology
professor at San Francisco State University. We combined the documentary and aesthetic/emotional
effects of photography with the analytical tools of anthropology to convey the human suffering of
homelessness, social inequality, and addiction. We also critiqued the dysfunctional effects of the war
on drugs and offered practical solutions such as harm reduction and “housing-first” interventions
and diversified medical treatment options—including opiate prescription—for indigent addicts.
What was your first fieldwork as a student?
My first fieldwork was in Central America among the Miskitu Indians in Nicaragua. They are an
extraordinary people who were at the center of a terrible cold war conflict in the 1980s. A populist
leftisat revolution had triumphed in Nicaragua overthrowing a brutal, U.S.-supported dictatorship
that had been in power for forty years. I literally jumped on a bus heading for Nicaragua and presented myself at the New Agrarian Reform Office saying, “I’m an anthropologist. I’d like to work for
your socialist experiment.” They replied, “Oh, you’re a gringo [i.e. from the United States] anthropologist. You must like indigenous people.” This is the stereotype of anthropologists. And frankly it
is largely true, cultural relativism guides anthropologists to respect indigenous cultures. The revolutionaries sent me out to Miskitu territory in the jungle along Nicaragua’s Atlantic coast, and I took
a leave-of-absence from graduate school. That is how I found myself among the Miskitu Indians in
revolutionary Nicaragua in 1979-1980 instead of in school. Unfortunately the revolutionary leaders
were just as racist against the indigenous minorities in their country as the right wing dictator had
been before them. The Miskitu people were excited about the revolution, but they wanted to retain
control over their culture, language, land, and natural resources and rebelled against the revolutionary central government’s racism. Unfortunately the CIA stepped in to manipulate the conflict
because of its Cold War era anti-communist obsession and flooded the Miskitu territory with AK-47
machine guns. A bloody civil war erupted.
The revolutionary leadership in Nicaragua failed to recognize that the cultural demands of the Miskitu were just as legitimate as the economic demands of the poor, Latino non-indigenous population
for whom they had fought and overthrown the dictatorship. Most Latino Nicaraguans viewed the
Indians as being from a “lower cultural level.” But again, cultural relativism tells us there is no such
thing as a lower cultural level. There are simply different ways of organizing society. All cultural forms
are legitimate in their own social uniqueness. The Miskitu conflict made me realize that anthropology
can have a very important role to play in changing the world for the better.
Several anthropologists with whom I was working in the agrarian reform ministry co-authored a
report and published a book calling for the decolonization of the Miskitu territory and the establishment of an autonomous local government of indigenous regional autonomy (Philippe Bourgois and
Jorge Grunberg 1981). The revolutionaries could not understand our anthropological perspective.
Instead they pursued a hard line against the Miskitu and repressed everyone demanding cultural
rights. I was thrown out of the country and returned to graduate school. Four years later, the revolutionary government realized that its policy had backfired, and it granted regional political autonomy
to the Miskitu territory. They invited me back to Nicaragua in 1985 to evaluate their experiment
in autonomous indigenous territorial and political rights. Unfortunately the Nicaraguan revolution
foundered three years later—that often happens to populist revolutions. The regional autonomy they

Anthropology in Our Moment in History: Interview with Philippe Bourgois

5

initiated, however, is still an interesting model for indigenous people around the world and has a
great deal of potential.
Have others benefited from your work?
My commitment to engaging with urgent contemporary social and political problems has taught
me that it is important not to think we have all the answers, know the truth, or even ask the right
questions. We have to be careful about taking ourselves too seriously as anthropologists. The crack
dealers I had befriended in East Harlem came to the book opening party for In Search of Respect
Selling Crack in El Barrio hosted by Cambridge University Press. They received copies of the book
and liked the fact that their words were published to make a complex theoretical and policy analysis
of de-industrialization, racism, and gender power relations. Nevertheless, one of the most violent,
main characters in the book insightfully poked fun at me, “Oh Felipe you make us sound like such
sensitive crack dealers.” Another one resisted the linearity of my argument about the impact of structural forces on the neighborhood and his life, “I don’t blame nobody but me, myself and I for the
bad I’ve done.”
I still keep in touch with several of the main characters in the book and I asked my best friend
from the scene, whom I called Primo, if he minded if I could publish a follow-up article about his
addiction to heroin (Bourgois 2000). He was ashamed of being a heroin user and I didn’t want to
embarrass him or violate his privacy. He looked at me in a super hesitant and pained way. I thought,
“Oh no! He’s going to tell me I can’t publish this!” Instead, he said, “I don’t mean to disrespect you...
but you can write whatever you want to write. No nobody reads the shit you write—at least not no
one that I know.”
It made me realize that we have to be humble as academics. Our anthropological publications only
reach a small section of college-educated people. My books on the inner city, for example, are mostly
read by college students. That is frustrating on some level. But college students are at a turning point
in their lives. They can open their minds up to new perspectives and transform their ways of thinking
in ways that can alter the course of their lives and the future of their society.
Some of the readers of my books in college classes send me feedback through email. I also occasionally get letters from prisoners who somehow gained access to my books through crummy,
underfunded prison libraries. Sometimes they tell me they see themselves or their parents reflected in
the pages of In Search of Respect and in Righteous Dopefiend: “I was always so angry at my [violent or
addicted or neglectful] father—or my mother—but now I can begin to understand what was going
on . . .”
Working in public health on HIV prevention as an anthropologist has also been rewarding but
challenging, especially with the government wasting so much money on locking people up, which
simples makes the problem of violence, addiction, and unemployment worse. But frankly, we need
to figure out how to reach more people more broadly and more effectively. That is where future
generations can help with the explosion of digital technology and social media. The new technology
offers new ways of communicating anthropological insights. It is very effective to show images and
display audio at the same time that you present on anthropological analysis. It can render off-limits
places and problems more humanely visible or it can help set the individual experience of viewers in
the larger context of our moment in history.
Remember, an anthropologist can study almost anything. You can enter the world of stockbrokers or crack dealers, doctors or homeless heroin injectors, indigenous hunter-gatherers or suburban

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

commuters and shed light on what gets taken for granted but may actually be problematic, urgent or
complex or is simply beautiful and inspiring. New access to online technologies gives anthropology
greater potential to address the urgent questions of our contemporary moment in history and reach
wider audiences. But, we still have to figure out how to use these platforms effectively. We have to
be wary of becoming inadvertent pornographers or manipulators of the truth like reality TV shows.
I think anthropology should be at the forefront of the digital communication tide and it will be the
new generation that embraces these new possibilities. Digital technology has already transformed
public health and politics and most nefariously big business is enslaving us to it and monopolizing
online access. It is up to the new generation to wrench back its potential.
Any Closing Thoughts?
I want to end by saying that ethnographic fieldwork and theoretical analysis can help us understand the invisible negative effects of power, domination, and social inequalities. Actions that seem
immoral or look horrendous—behaviors that seem to be pathological—may often be imposed on
individuals by larger structural forces—harsh economic conditions, environmental assaults, repressive public policies, and discriminatory social hierarchies—that constrain the lives of the individuals
we study ethnographically. In some sense we are all trapped into doing the things that we do. This is
certainly the case for addiction, HIV and the violence surrounding drug distribution and mass incarceration. Anthropology’s ethnographic method gives us intimate access to people’s daily lives while
simultaneously allowing us to grasp the bigger picture. The challenge is to use anthropology’s critical
tools to recognize the burning issues of our moment in history and go out into the world to change
some corner of it for the better—or at least try to help stop it from imploding.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bourgois, Philippe., and Jeff Schonberg. “Intimate Apartheid: Ethnic Dimensions of Habitus among
Homeless Heroin Injectors.” Ethnography 8 no. 1(2007): 7–31.
Bourgois, Philippe. “Disciplining Addictions: The Bio-Politics of Methadone and Heroin in the United
States.” Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry 24 no. 2(2000): 165–195.
Bourgois, Philippe. In Search of Respect: Selling Crack in El Barrio. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2003.
Bourgois, Philippe, and Jeff Schonberg. Righteous Dopefiend. Berkeley: University of California Press,
2009.
Philippe Bourgois, and Jorge Grunberg. “Informe de Una Investigacion Rural En La Costa Atlantica
Norte.” In La Mosquitia En La Revolucion. Jaime Wheelock Roman, ed. Pp. 89–149. Managua: Centro
de investigacion y estudios de la reforma agraria [CIERA], Colección Blas Real Espinales, 1981.

Can Anthropology Save the
World?
Nancy Scheper-Hughes, University of California, Berkeley
We are living in difficult times, facing out of control, escalating wars in the Middle East for which
we are partially to blame and destructive political wars at home. We are a divided nation within a profoundly divided world despite globalization and its allegedly democratizing effects. The gap between
North and South, Middle East and Mid-West, between haves and have-nots has become a chasm
making all of us less free and less safe.1
Two weeks ago, I was giving lectures in Rome and Prague on the plight of political refugees in
detention and deportation camps cropping up in Europe. It was a sobering visit, as many countries
including Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Denmark were taking moves to build walls and
to reject the waves of refugees fleeing wars and drought in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan
and crushing poverty in Somalia. It is the largest migration of people in Europe since World War II.
Smugglers are legion and they defraud frightened refugees of their money and even of their kidneys,
demanded in exchange for basic necessities. One of the smugglers involved in this shady business is
a human trafficker who I have run into before named Boris Wolfman. Indeed as the old adage goes,
“man is wolf to man.”
In Prague hate, rather than love was in the air driven by a new nationalism and popular calls for
rights to cultural, racial, and religious homogeneity. Czech police began pulling refugees off trains
and wrote numbers on their arms with felt-tip pens, a creepy (rather than creeping) xenophobia, Islamophobia, and a re-emerging anti-Semitism within the country. In the beautiful historical center of
Prague, resisters began to plaster the walls and windows of certain hotels, museums, and restaurants
with posters announcing: “Hate Free Zone” as if this was the exception. This could happen to us. At
the DOX Centre for Contemporary Art, where I gave my lectures, I found it difficult to talk about
human trafficking in a way that would jibe with the art exhibition on the Soul of Money. While
humans and animals might have souls, I was pretty sure that money did not.
The trip to Prague was painful because I was born in 1944 into a Czech immigrant family growing
up in Williamsburg, Brooklyn when it was still a slum and “Holocaust haunted.” Eastern European
Catholics and Hassidic Jews lived side by side but mostly in silence about our histories. What could
we say? Meanwhile, the public health department periodically appeared to shoot educational films
about the East River rats and garbage on our streets and in our tenements. Today these same buildings that have survived are worth a fortune.
My older brother and I were the first in our large extended family to go to college. I didn’t quite
get the hang of it and I dropped out of Queens College (City University of New York) twice, first to
join the Peace Corps in 1964-1966, and then, after an abortive return to Queens College, I dropped
out to go South to the Civil Rights Movement in Selma, Alabama in 1967-1968 in part to memorialize and to replace one of my classmates, Andrew Goodman, who was killed with two other rights
workers during Mississippi Summer in 1964. I joined SNCC, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating
Committee, as one of the last two white civil rights workers under the auspices of the Lowndes
County Black Panthers and the Black Power Movement.
Thanks to an undergraduate mentor at Queens College, CUNY, Hortense Powdermaker, the author of an anthropological memoir, Stranger and Friend: The Life of an Anthropologist, I followed her

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

to Berkeley in 1969 where Powdermaker had retired to work on her last anthropological research
project, youth culture. I was invited to be her research assistant while completing my B.A. at U.C.
Berkeley and going on to get my doctorate in Cultural and Medical Anthropology.
I chose the life of an anthropologist, because it was a field so open, so free, that it allowed one to be
a freethinker, to think outside the box, as my colleague Laura Nader puts it. So let me suggest based
on my life as a dedicated anthropologist and obsessive fieldworker some rules to live by. I’ll call these
rules “Operation Instructions for the New Generation of Anthropologists.”

Operating Instruction: Rules to Live By
Rule 1: Everything in life is an Experiment. There are no winners and no losers. There’s just a
precious amount of time to live.
Rule 2: Work is essential, but it should not be an obsession. Peter Maurin, a French peasant philosopher who lived on the margins of New York City wrote in his book, Easy Essays: “There’s always
work, there’s just not always paid work.” He added: “The world would be better off if people tried to
become better. And people would become better if they stopped trying to become better-off.”
Rule 3: Drop Out—Take a Break! Gap years are important before jumping into the fray. Join the
Peace Corps or go on a road trip or cross the country by bicycle (as Professor Harley Shaken does
each summer). Find work as you go along. Carry a paperback copy of Mark Sundeen’s book: The
Man who Quit Money.
Rule 4: Be disciplined, that is, be a disciple. Find someone wise, or smart, or creative and follow
him or her. Seek out people who are doers and thinkers, artists and artisans, philosophers, innovators
and inventors, authors and scholars, political leaders, surgeons and country doctors. I’ve had so many
mentors in my life I’d be here until tomorrow morning and would not get to the end of the list that
includes former professors, colleagues, collaborators as well as people whose writings changed my life
or way of thinking: Ivan Illich, Oliver Sacks, the Irish poet Seamus Heaney, the anti-apartheid lawyer
Albie Sachs, and the Italian radical psychiatrist Franco Basaglia. The forensic pathologist Claude
Snow gave me the courage to refashion myself as a cultural medical forensic anthropologist. My students have taught how to teach and how to write, while my companions in the field— hundreds of
them—have been my lifelong teachers. Alfred Kroeber, the founding father this department, always
answered the question, occupation: as student of humanity.
Rule 5: Be inspired by others. Everyone doesn’t have to be a leader. I’ve been an intellectual heretic
for most of my life and I don’t often seek to lead. When I do I often find it uncomfortable. I’d rather
be commenting sotto voce from the sidelines, a trickster, of sorts. Mario Savio inspired me when he
was an awkward and extremely shy student at Queens College. But he had a soul on fire. In 1963
I followed Mario— who then called himself Bob Savio and 38 other Queens College students who
traveled by bus from New York City to Guerreo, Mexico to work with local activists on building
schools, and working in hospitals and public clinics. A local newspaper in New York City announced
our project in unflattering terms: “QC Students Invade Mexico to Help Peons.” Our bus tickets were
two feet long and it took us a week to arrive in Guerrero. After crossing the border, we traveled by
Flecha Roja through desolate desert areas. Bob Savio and several guys were assigned to work in Taxco.
Three of us were sent to Chilpancingo where no one knew quite what to do with us. In letters home,
I wrote that that racism toward indigenous communities was rampant. I began to wonder why we
had come and what we could possibly accomplish.

Can Anthropology Save the World?

3

We heard rumors that Bob Savio was stirring up a storm in the beautiful post-colonial city of
Taxco, doing what we had hoped to do, advocating for social justice among the rural and indigenous
communities. So Marsha Steinberg and I left Igula and Chilpancingo to see what was going on in
Taxco and if we could lend a hand. But by the time we arrived Bob had returned to the U.S. The sole
survivor of his group, Kevin Donavan, told us that Bob and the local Catholic Bishop didn’t get along
and that Bob had been ordered to leave the country.
Kevin was in awe of Savio and told us of Bob’s transformation, as he emerged, chrysalis-like,
into a powerful speaker and organizer who had participated in demonstration by indigenous people
protesting their inhumane treatment by landowners. The local Bishop was so flummoxed by Savio
that he sent Bob and his team packing. I was amazed at the story of the man who we knew as almost
incapable of carrying on a conversation, a profound stutterer who had no Spanish to speak of. How
had he managed to reach people across language, class, and culture? The Savio we knew was a modest,
solitary fellow. We couldn’t fathom how Bob had managed to stir up so much trouble and what it
was that he could have possibly conveyed to indigenous Nahunta speakers. He was “inspired” was all
that his buddy could tell us.
Bob moved to California and enrolled in U.C. Berkeley where he changed his name to Mario and
in December 1964 Mario jumped on top of that car and he let freedom ring. He said those unforgettable words: “There is a time when the operation of the machine becomes so odious, makes you
so sick at heart, that you can’t take part; you can’t even passively take part, and so you’ve got to put
your bodies upon the gears and upon the wheels, upon the levers, upon all the apparatus, and you’ve
got to make it stop. And you’ve got to indicate to the people who run it, to the people who own it,
that unless you’re free, the machine will be prevented from working at all!”
Rule 6: Admit to Errors and Correct Them. Our Berkeley anthropology founding father, A L
Kroeber, made a huge mistake following the death from tuberculosis of the Yahi Indian known as
Ishi. He sent his brain in a bottle with cotton and formaldehyde to a racist physical anthropologist
working at the Smithsonian Institution. Kroeber never spoke of Ishi again. He could not stand it, he
wrote, acknowledging the genocide that preceded Ishi’s living in what was then the Lowie Museum
as a custodian and a spectacle — the last wild Indian. But he helped his wife to write the book he
could never have written himself: Ishi in Two Worlds—The Last Wild American Indian. First published
in 1961, the book names what actually happened in California beginning with the Gold Rush, in
chapters with titles: A Dying People; The Long Concealment, and The Yahi Disappear.
Rule 7: Engage in dialogue those with whom you most disagree. Cross those aisles. In my work
on human trafficking, I’ve had to work with an Afrikaner cop who spoke rudely about his Zulu
assistant and in Israel I worked with a military man and Zionist forensic pathologist. In both cases,
we changed each other as well as got some good work done. In April 2015, I got to meet up close a
man who I had lambasted, in an article entitled “Can God Forgive Jorge Bergoglio?,” of being a poor
choice for the Pope who would replace the dogmatic Rottweiler of the Vatican, Pope Benedict XVI.
Bergoglio, I argued, was a weak protector of Argentine people, ordinary people, and priests and nuns
when he was the principal head of the Jesuits in Argentina during the Dirty War. I had accumulated a
lot of evidence that he had led leftist-leaning men and women dedicated to liberation theology which
the Argentine junta targeted as Marxist insurrection. My article was sardonic, suggesting that God
could, after all, forgive any sin, no matter how grave, but first, the penitent needed to acknowledge
their fault, to confess it, to do penance and to create a new social contract.
When I received an invitation to present my work on human trafficking in the Vatican it came
with a Xerox copy of a handwritten note by Pope Francis saying that “organs trafficking” would be

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

part of the plenary session held inside the Vatican and I was to be “it,” that is the only participant
invited to speak on the topic. Of course, I expected it was a mistake and that as soon as I arrived I
would be banned from entering the Santa Marta residence where we would be housed during the
conference, on the same floor where Pope Francis had his simple two-room apartment. I died a
dozen deaths on entering the lunchroom to find Pope Francis sitting a few tables from mine. On
meeting Papa Francisco after the first three days at a special Papal audience, I stood at the very end
of the reception line carrying a Spanish translation of my book, Death Without Weeping, with a long
inscription, and paperclips marking the pages I hoped he might possibly read that linked the hunger
and death of angel babies of the Alto do Cruzeiro, Brazil to the Vatican’s ban on contraception and
abortion. As I awkwardly knelt to kiss his papal ring I begged him: “Remember the women!” Papa
Francisco pulled me up on my feet. Of course, he wore no papal ring, and no pink papal slippers
either. From the floor I could see that his shoes were black and scruffy. The bodyguards in tuxedos
rushed up to grab the books and articles I had brought to the Pope. He pushed them aside and nodding his head he said. “Pray for me.” What a lesson in humility.
Rule 8: Humor is Mandatory. Our iconic humorist, the late Alan Dundes, is no longer with us.
He was often criticized for making politically incorrect jokes. But Professor Dundes held nothing to
be too sacred, taboo, or even too disgusting to be a source of humor. He said that sacred cows made
the best hamburgers. He saw jokes as Geiger counters of the spirit— as expressions of deep-seated
social anxieties and conflicts. When I was writing my book Death Without Weeping on mother love
and child death in Brazil, Alan mischievously stuffed a reprint of his analysis of “Dead Baby” jokes
in my campus mailbox. I was shocked at first, but then I sat down to read the article and found his
analysis sobering and insightful. He argued that these offensive jokes were an unconscious cultural
expression of American ambivalence toward babies, a kind of fallout from the sexual revolution that
had produced a new generation of adults who wanted sex without babies.
Alan knew that “folklore” had the capacity to act as a force for evil as well as for good, as his book
on the Blood Libel Legend—as a history and projection of centuries of anti-Semitism powerfully
demonstrated. Ironically, Dundes, who was Jewish, was accused of anti-Semitism by conservative
American Jews who asked for his dismissal in 1988 following an article he wrote about German jokes
set in Auschwitz that had been published in Harper’s Magazine. The subject outraged Alan’s accusers.
Likely, they had not read his analysis. Alan saw these jokes—offensive as they were—as keeping alive
the memory of Auschwitz in the German collective consciousness. Comedy and tragedy were two
sides of the same coin and black humor—even Auschwitz jokes—albeit culturally insensitive and
inadequate—allowed Germans to come to terms with the unimaginable horrors that occurred at
German death camps. The jokes were an acknowledgement of, rather than a denial of the tragic history
of the Holocaust.
Rule 9: Beware political correctness—be self-critical, be sensitive but be honest and openly expressive. Resist censorship and even worse self-censorship.
Rule 10: Flexibility as needed: All rules can be amended or suspended.
In two days, I fly to Recife and Timbauba in Northeast Brazil to work with 120 community health
agents with middle school educations who are the first and often the only responders to the needs
of pregnant women infected by the Zika virus, which carries the threat of severe birth defects and is
complicated by Brazilian laws that still prohibit abortion. The public health crisis is occurring during
the near collapse of the Brazilian economy and the real threat of a coup d’etat against the Workers

Can Anthropology Save the World?

5

Party President Dilma Rousseff whose impeachment by Brazil’s congress was an attempt to avoid
corruption charges against themselves.
We are facing another kind of populist coup d’etat in the United States. And you, dear class of
2016, are walking into a booby-trapped terrain, a world not of your making, and ill-equipped, you
might think, with little more than a degree in anthropology. But never more was that degree more
valuable and more needed. First of all we need to erect real intellectual barriers against xenophobia,
the dangerous fear and hatred of strangers.

Xenophilia
I think we have a little known secret in anthropology. The opposite of xenophobia would be xenophilia, a term that barely exists on the internet except with reference to certain botanical species
that seem to adjust to cohabiting with alien plants. Taking that botanical metaphor, xenophilia is
not so much the love of difference as freedom from the fear of difference, and a healthy curiosity
and desire to understand strangers who anthropologists have always seen as precious repositories of
human knowledge. Can anthropologists—cultural, biological, medical, linguistic and archaeological—deploy our deep commitment to human and biological diversity to resist the forces of hate, fear
and xenophobia?
Anthropologists are restless and nomadic people. We are a tribe of hunters and gatherers of human
artifacts, human cultures, life ways, and human values. Anthropology requires us to become intimate
with the people we want to understand—getting inside their skin, standing in their shoes kind of
thing. Ethnography is an art form, a work of translation, that demands all the senses—the observant
eye, the attentive ear, a keen sense of smell, touch, and a sense of taste—a “gusto” (in Portuguese) that
carries a double valence—a taste not only for new foods and spicy condiments, strong drinks—but
also a taste for the sentient life through which a “society” is embodied—catching its sense of time and
timing, its movements and gestures, its patterns of work, play, and devotion, its sense of humor and
its sense of justice, its sense of dignity.
Anthropology also requires strength, valor, and courage. Pierre Bourdieu called anthropology a
combat sport, an extreme sport as well as a tough and rigorous discipline. Anthropologists are the
Green Berets of the social sciences. Archaeology teaches not only a deep appreciation and reverence
for the past and for “small things forgotten,” as Jim Deetz described historical archeology. It teaches
students not to be afraid of getting one’s hands dirty, to get down in the dirt, and to commit yourself,
body and mind. Susan Sontag called anthropology a “heroic” profession—one that required brains
and strength, sensitivity and guts. It was not just a job, not just a profession. It was, she said, one of
those very few rare and true vocations.
You, the next generation of anthropologists are the ones in which your professors have invested
their hopes and their trust. We need your intelligence, your initiative, your risk-taking, and your energy. We look to you as the next generation of “loyal rebels”—loyal to what anthropology has taught
you: to value diversity; to embrace and enjoy (not just tolerate) human difference; to be open to the
wisdom of strangers and resolute in refusing any proposals that denigrate other ways of living and
being in the world. You are the heirs to a great tradition of anthropology. May it give you the courage
to work in the service of all humankind and be conservative protectors of all the creatures and plants
and bio-diversity that sustains Mother Earth. May you be wise and strong and steadfast in building
a better world than the one you have inherited.

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

NOTES
1. This text was prepared as a commencement address and was delivered at the Department of Anthropology graduation
ceremony at the University of California, Berkeley, May 19, 2016.

Envisioning a More Public
Anthropology:
Interview with Fredrik Barth
Robert Borofsky, Hawaii Pacific University, Center for a Public Anthropology
borofsky@hpu.edu
http://www.publicanthropology.org/

Fredrik Barth: Let me begin with a general preamble to our conversation. Since anthropology
draws on the ethnography of the whole world—as it must and should—it has a unique potential to
supplement Western science and Western humanism. It can contribute broadly to human thought,
to human imagination.
Robert Borofsky: You are referring to anthropology’s role in broadening people’s perspectives?
FB: Yes, to opening up windows of human reflection on the human condition in radically new
directions, that people have never really imagined. Certainly anthropology has not been very good
at doing this, at shaping an image of the diversity of how people live. But nonetheless, something is
there and we must cultivate it and harvest it much more actively.
RB: Why do you think anthropology has not succeeded in this goal?
FB: Well as far as American anthropologists and American anthropology are concerned, and this
probably will not be popular, I think one difficulty is the emphasis that American anthropologists
have placed on an evolutionary perspective. It’s a fine perspective for some purposes, but it gives a
license for others to say, “How interesting, how great, yes, if I was interested in the past I would listen
to you, but I’m interested in the present.” It shunts anthropology off to the side when what we should
do is speak about issues now and the human condition now. We should consider the issues people
presently engage with. Implicit in this is a view that democratic societies need a wide and public
discussion of ideas.
RB: Let’s talk more about anthropology’s role in this regard.
FB: I think it’s very important that if we want influence in the world, we should speak up about
issues that are important to others, not just ourselves. Even more important than voting, though that
is important, is presenting a view, a voice, on issues because that may influence public policy. One
should, of course, realize the difficulties here. But speaking out is much better than only responding
to the packages that the political system presents. That is part of being a citizen—finding the occasions and the places where you can have public influence.
RB: What forms do you think a more publicly-engaged anthropology might take?
FB: I think it important that we enter into as many discourses as possible that are already going on
where there is an audience that is already engaged and knowledgeable. What we want to do is find
ways of bringing something additional into public conversations that are already going onthereby
subverting the established position and contributing something that may catch people’s attention.
RB: Can you provide a concrete example?
FB: One example is Unni Wikan’s work on the new immigrants of Europe. Here is an issue that
lots of people were thinking about, talking about, and in fact being quite confused about. The main
discussion of Norwegian immigration policy focused on how many immigrants we should let in?
Unni was allowed a two-minute statement on Norwegian public television on the topic: She said we

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

should be talking about what are we doing for the welfare of those who are here already rather than
focusing on those who might come. With this intervention, she helped redefined the entire discourse
on the subject. It led to people voicing their concern about what was happening inside Norway and
to developing programs that could be critiqued and argued about. It broke a political silence about
the issue.
RB: A more publicly-engaged anthropology in this sense, then, would be directly engaging in
public discourses about public problems.
FB: It would try to find ways of reframing publicly-articulated issues. To do this, however, you
need some kind of cultural capital so that people will say, “listen, this may be important.”
RB: How do you gain such capital?
FB: You need to speak out but speak out carefully, with limited purposes in every case – not to
grab the microphone to give a lecture on anthropology, but to formulate something that really pricks
people’s attention regarding one aspect of the problem. Rather than disrupting the conversation that’s
going on, you become a part of it. If you are too ambitious, and feel this is your one chance to speak
out, then you start lecturing others. You become irrelevant to what is going on in the conversation.
We need to develop an ability to focus and make our points relevant to others’ concerns.
RB: Would you say that there is more of this sort of public engagement, by academics, in Europe
or America?
FB: There is more of an audience for it in Europe because people are more prepared to believe that
academics have cultural capital. There is the idea that academics are competent to address the world’s
problems. Many countries, both in Eastern and Western Europe, have cabinet ministers who are
professors, not just professors of political science, but professors of other subjects as well: humanists,
historians and scientists. It affirms that academics are thoughtful people to be listened to while in
America academics tend to be looked down upon as impractical intellectuals.
RB: To what might you attribute this dynamic of American intellectual life?
FB: Brad Shore (at Emory University) once commented to me that his neighbors felt sorry for him
because he do not make as much money as they did. Here is a very crude measurement of private
influence and judgment. But, of course, it is reciprocal. Many anthropologists think going public is
less than respectable. The public does not respect us so we do not respect them. If you want to speak
to the public effectively, you have to respect them.
RB: Where in Europe do you see an active intellectual tradition, among anthropologists, that
contrasts with the one in America?
FB: I guess the place where there is the most of this is in France. I think it used to be in England
– Malinowski was fashionable and his seminars were famous. Intellectuals in England talked about
him. In France, of course, Levi-Strauss has been very famous. But other French anthropologists also
have followings and public visibility. It thus becomes interesting for a French reading public to know
what French anthropologists are saying about the issues of the day. Also in India, in Mexico, in Brazil,
and perhaps in Scandinavia, there is more public interest in this way than in the U.S.
RB: What specific steps might be taken to draw American anthropologists into such public engagements?
FB: The image that comes to mind is of American anthropologists, like penguins on the edge of an
ice sheet afraid that something in the water will eat them. They stand on the ice and push and push
each other until one falls in, and then they see what happens to him. If nothing bad happens, then
they might be willing to dive in, too. I do think many people would like to have some input, and if
they see that it’s possible, they would jump. But they must do it individually.

Envisioning a More Public Anthropology: Interview with Fredrik Barth

3

I think one of the difficulties that’s hidden somewhere in this syndrome, is that there is in America,
because of the media hype that one is used to, a sense that you have to be tactical. You can’t speak as a
free spirit, you can’t afford to be self-critical and honest. You must find some way of projecting some
facile image, and take a tactical position, or else you will be totally ineffective. And this is contrary to
academic quality and intellectual integrity. I think the way we see it constantly is in the roles played
by ecologists and political scientists. When they speak on public television, they are hung up in the
tactical game of trying to manipulate audiences instead of speaking honestly. They hold back things
that they know are relevant but seem politically incorrect or critical of their own constituencies. At
times there seems to be almost a pre-set agenda. We shall touch on these things and not on those
because they are contrary to American interests. Let’s not talk too clearly about them, let’s position
ourselves in ways that don’t raise ugly issues.
I think it is important to speak out in contexts that are not made up only of anthropologists. I
should speak to historians and political scientists who say things about the clash of civilizations. But
I would not lay out the problem as an anthropological issue. I would try to disturb and subvert their
frames of reference by undermining one or more of the premises on which they base their arguments,
showing how it does not make sense from a broader perspective.
RB: Could you give an example?
FB: Well I presume that’s what Boas did long ago. Boas addressed something that everybody was
concerned with—race—and had a specific point he wanted to make. He had professional research
supporting his position regarding the cultural, rather than genetic, basis of behavior which was highly
relevant to other people who weren’t anthropologists.
Perhaps the whole controversy around Samuel Huntington’s Clash of Civilizations is a lost opportunity. Instead of piling abuse on Huntington for what he said, we might have undermined particular
positions presented in a careful scholarly way that other scholars would take note of.
Dr. Gro Harlem Brundtland (the former Director-General of the World Health Organization) was
on a United Nations commission regarding the environment and coined the idea of “sustainability.”
Her idea was not all that well thought out at the time. Still, it changed the frame of reference. It replaced the optimistic sense that we will invent our way out of our environmental problems to asking
what we can so as not to reduce options for future generations.
One final example: I’ve just written an op-ed for the main Oslo newspaper on the university’s
function. There have been committees that have tried to plan and redesign universities so that they
are more responsive to the specific needs of contemporary society, to make them more accountable.
What I did was to say, look here, we must not forget that the university’s first task is to produce
competently trained personnel for a changing world. It is not simply offering skills for today but
preparing these students for the world they will find themselves in tomorrow. The point, I am saying,
is to suggest new ways of looking at problems.
RB: What type of response, would you hope for, from your op-ed piece?
FB: I would hope that more of those who engage in the university debate will start saying: But the
issue is not only how some established kind of knowledge or competency can be deployed in society
but rather how we must secure a place where creativity and imagination can flourish for the future.
We must train people who are intellectually awake. Disciplines are breaking down. We must be able
to be creative as an academic community to cope with a changing world. I would hope the government’s department of education, which is in charge of universities, would review plans for reorganizing the university from a different perspective. My colleagues might also start using this argument in

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

the defense of more money for research, more advanced training, more investment in post-doctoral
students rather than simply addressing the problem as others have framed it—of being accountable.
I would not mind if I were called to argue this with others. Others might say that they have certain
priorities that must be taken care of, and I would then have to show how they could be better taken
care of in the way I suggested. They might well challenge me. They might examine my arguments
and find points that are factually distorted, incomplete, partial, or where the logic failed. But the
discussion would change—we would be arguing over facts and logic from a shared position. Yes, we
all want universities to train professionals in a better way, yes we want them to be more publicly responsible and so on. We would be arguing about different ways to approach the problem that would
not follow the political packaging and rhetoric of the moment.

Interview with Carolyn
Nordstrom
Robert Borofsky, Hawaii Pacific University, Center for a Public Anthropology
borofsky@hpu.edu
http://www.publicanthropology.org/

Robert Borofsky: Where would you like to begin?
Carolyn Nordstrom: I’ll start with what I was thinking about this morning. As I was walking my
dog, I was reflecting on what makes anthropology so cool. I thought about all the definitions I know,
the introductory texts I have read, and the various things anthropologists converse about.
All of a sudden, I thought: Wait a minute. When I think about what’s in my heart, what is it that
anthropology offers to others as well as myself? I realized I needed to go back to the Enlightenment
of the 1700s. The Enlightenment asserted that the world was logical, that it was linear. It portrayed
people as objective, as rational. Building on this perspective, various sciences categorized, classified,
and boxed people and things in the world. Our theoretical systems are based on the rational nature of
existence and the rationality of people. This perspective has produced many important innovations—
engineering, harnessing electricity and energy sources, medical breakthroughs.
But you know what? A whole lot of the world is defined by chaos theory. Humans are anything
but fully rational beings. We create incredibly noble values. We create things that bring me to tears.
I see things in the world that are so moving. But this creativity is far from being logical, far from
being rational.
We are this hot bed of rationality and irrationality all mixed together like a fine stew. We’re logical
as well as mystical and magical, we’re absurd as well as practical. We are all these things, often at the
same time. We don’t merely live in contradictions; we embrace them. We at times deny them; we
frequently argue over them. Still we embed them in our lives.
Anthropology opens these dynamics to us. It lets us touch these realities. I often ask my classes
“How many textbooks have you read in your life that you loved and remembered?” The most anyone
has ever answered is five, the average is one or a couple. I know it’s painful for some academics to
hear. Textbooks teach us important “stuff.” But they don’t often touch the reality of how we live our
lives. Anthropology gives us tools to touch the heartbeat of humanity. I think that’s anthropology’s
gift to the world.
Education in the West draws strongly on this model of logical, rational reality. We keep applying
it over and over again in systematic, ordered ways. It would be better to ask: How can we apply
models of rationality in irrational ways? The world is embracing digital and virtual realities, globalization, chaos and quantum theory, and multidimensional solutions to pressing issues. People today
are breaking down many boundaries of what we take to be ourselves, our genders, our nations. Anthropology is well positioned to help us understand this changing, fluid world.
Robert: Could you share with students why you become an anthropologist?
Carolyn: Why wouldn’t you become an anthropologist? You can go anywhere, study any issue.
You are not bound to only follow it through the lens of politics and political science, or the highs and
lows of economics. Your explorations can range from the offices of elites to the most remote locations
on earth. You can ask any question. You can study borders and their breakdowns simultaneously. You

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

can study traditions amid change. You can study how people love and kill at the same time. You can
do research and work anywhere in the world. No other discipline lets me do that.
Robert: What particularly excites you about anthropology?
Carolyn: Obviously, the big question is what does it mean to be human? That’s fascinating. I grew
up a world where everything had its “place.” People were from places and things were put in “appropriate” places. One thing was in one place and not in another. We’re now entering an era where we’re
able to move beyond this framework.
It’s exhilarating because this new era is still uncharted, un-mapped. We are creating it as we go
along. We know place is important; but things are also unplaced. How do you intellectually deal with
holding both of those ideas in your head at the same time? It is this realization regarding migrant
flows, cultural flows, and virtual flows that is reformulating how we think about place and how place
affects us. We are studying something that is very much in motion.
For example, clothes are symbols. They involve values, which are full of stereotypes, morals, joys,
and a range of other emotions. When I see people, if they’re wearing clothes like mine, I often feel
a certain kind of affinity. I make certain kinds of judgments. I can tell you what I have on and
what particular place I’m in at the moment. But how does this information get all mixed together
in today’s flows? Just sitting here looking at what I have on, my clothes are a product of work from
numerous countries. Clothes, indeed goods in general, flow from place to place and thus are “multiplace” and yet, at the same time, exist in very specific places.
How do we understand global financial flows? How do we understand the changing lives of people? How do we understand the experiences of Syrians, for example, given the horrors many of them
are living through? What’s home for them? What’s family? What’s safety? How do they understand
humanity and security as they travel from Syria into Turkey and across Europe often faced with grave
dangers?
Another topic I find fascinating is “invisibility.” The world’s full of things that we can see and
others we are trained “not to see”—things that societies try to keep hidden from public awareness.
Anthropology offers vibrant approaches for investigating and bringing to light these “made-invisible” realities, as I call them, so we are better able to forge solutions to problems that have seemed
insurmountable in the past. What really goes on at the frontlines of wars, and in the elite command
bunkers—and what impact does war leave in its stead? Why did Wall Street crash; what stories aren’t
they telling us? What’s it really like to be a kid living on the street—in a rich urban city, in an impoverished shanty, or in a natural disaster? Governing institutions seldom ask the kids, making their
stories, their perceptions, invisible to the public realm. In sheer objective fact it makes good sense
to include children representatives on city councils, national committees, development programs,
and United Nations assemblies addressing children’s issues—but the idea seems ludicrous to cultures
whose adults define only adults as capable of making fully informed and morally responsible decisions.
Understanding creativity is equally important to me. How do societies, advancements, beliefs get
created: how do we produce social change, values, cultural ideas, innovation, new senses of ourselves?
How do we create new worlds? How do we create answers to our questions?
Robert: You did fieldwork in war zones. What was that like?
Carolyn: I had no intention of studying war or violence. I was a medical anthropologist doing my
graduate research in Sri Lanka, a country then often seen as one of Asia’s tropical paradises. It was
one of two countries in the world that had very high health standards for a relatively lower GDP—
and this in a country facing both the spectrum of illnesses associated with urban educated life, and

Interview with Carolyn Nordstrom

3

tropical diseases in developing regions. It was anomalous because a strong link exists globally between
lower economic rankings/lower health indices. Sri Lanka had created a very successfully health system, and I was intrigued to find out how.
In the midst of this research, I realized that as a student, and even as a medical anthropologist,
I had never seen a definition of “illness.” I had seen thousands of definitions of different kinds of
illnesses, but not of what defined the very core phenomenon of illness itself. So I started looking into
what people viewed as illness.
This led me to devoting three months in Sri Lanka asking people—from urban to rural areas, doctors to patients, young to old—“What is illness?” I got some very intriguing answers. They were not
what I expected. But they made sense. It changed my perspective, and helped shed light on bigger
issues like why some aspects of medicine simply aren’t able to achieve desired results. I realized if we
asked questions like this, we could provide better health care to people. We often seem to be treating
things that people do not see as illness and not treating things that they do, or ignoring aspects of
treatment patients deem important while focusing on some they find alienating.
In the middle this fieldwork, severe rioting erupted nationwide in Sri Lanka. In seven short days,
one-sixth of the entire country was destroyed. Thousands died. I was in the middle of this weeklong
massive slaughter; there was no escaping it. I got caught in places where entire city blocks were in
flames, every building and vehicle set on fire. People were massacred in the streets, pulled from their
homes, cars, and businesses and beaten to death or set on fire. I found I needed to try to make sense
of what I saw: both for my own peace and mind, and to try to help correct many of the misconceptions in explanations of political and civil violence.
I had been taught about the exhilaration and glory of war all my life – in school, by public media,
through books. Societies create myths about war that are widely believed. But there was nothing
attractive about what I saw, nothing glorious. Seeing a body chopped up into pieces isn’t nice or
wonderful. There’s no glory in burning people to death. If we show that reality, how horribly it affects
everybody—victims, witnesses, and perpetrators alike—people might do a lot less of it.
I wondered why people killed each other like this? It lacked any ultimate sense. Why would someone drive a nail into someone else’s head? Why would someone see children, unarmed women, harmless grandfathers as dangerous—to be killed? This is not the exception, but the norm: today globally
90 percent of the casualties of political violence are non-combatant civilians. I began to ponder what
violence involves. What motivates people to act in this way?
It’s important to stress that I also saw some amazing acts of altruism in the midst of this violence.
People risked their lives in the middle of these riots for complete strangers. I witnessed the full
spectrum of humanity, seeing extremes we normally do not see in our lives. It became obvious that
what is portrayed in texts, media, and movies about such violence only scratched the surface, and
generally presented “facts” that, as I wrote in one book, are 180 degrees the opposite of what really
takes place in war.
This unexpected event in my life changed the direction of my research for decades to follow: for
caught in the middle of this violence and seeking ways to survive it, I realized we needed a much
better understanding of the dynamics behind how humans create and react to violence like this.
Robert: Students in my introductory anthropology class enjoy reading your book, Global Outlaws. How did you come to study the illegal global interchanges you discuss?
Carolyn: After studying political violence on several continents for more than fifteen years after
Sri Lanka, I was pretty burned out with dealing with such traumas. Through the years I had collected lots of data on large smuggling systems running through war zones. I realized delving into this

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

allowed me to continue working with war and peace while giving me a respite from the frontlines
violence.
People in societies at war need smugglers because governing, financial, and economic institutions
are impaired, support services are interrupted, legal systems break down, and trade routes, industry,
agriculture, etc. are disrupted. People can’t get what they need to survive, from food and medicines
to weapons and technology. I kept seeing a lot of the same international “players” wherever I traveled
in the world—the same arms merchants, the same vendors of critical necessities, the same smugglers.
I thought what’s going on here; how does smuggling, how does the extra-legal in general, operate?
Such inquiries lead to questions on a bigger level: how do these extra-legal economies surrounding
smuggling and politics affect global economies in general? It’s impossible to have wars without it;
and as I later learned it’s impossible to do business today at all without some extra-legal activities. But
there is little written about it.
Around this time, people were talking about blood diamonds, and I thought this might be a good
place to begin studying illegal economies “on the ground”—where it’s all taking place. I started in the
center of Angola during one of the worst periods of the country’s civil war. It quickly became obvious
that smuggling didn’t just involve diamonds and weapons. It involved a vast range of things—clothing, food, petroleum, computers, medical equipment, building supplies, vehicles, cooper wire, paint,
pharmaceuticals, agricultural tools and seeds, lights, industrial supplies, textbooks, clean water—anything and everything that could transported.
This extra-legal trade is profoundly international: goods come in from and go out to countries
all over the world. And it is essential: the legal markets in any warzone I’ve been in are not able to
provide anywhere close to what the country’s population needs to survive. A small proportion of all
smuggling is devoted to military supplies, the majority of it brings in survival and development supplies for the whole country, or carries out valuable resources (gold, diamonds, oil, timber, fish, etc.).
Smugglers seldom match the common media stereotypes of violence: young male adults (bearded,
clad in leather jackets, and disenfranchised from society). Curiously, most smugglers are pretty peaceful people. Many see themselves are regular businesspeople. Some are considered noble by societies
caught in war: people bringing in essential medicines, food, communications equipment, clothing,
tools to make a survival living, ad infinitum. As true as the classic of “blood diamond for weapons
of war exchange” is as an icon of horrendous violence, suffering, and war-profiteering—it is equally
true that smuggling often involves getting critical necessities to the front lines, saving people’s lives.
Since I found goods from all over the world in the middle of a remote warzone, I decided to follow
how everything from massive Mercedes transport trucks to pocket-able diamonds got in and out of
a country or, on a broader scale, in and out of a region where there was so much disruption, and ultimately traverses intercontinentally. How do the things that people need or want get across borders?
Across continents? Across oceans? Expensive cameras, Nike shoes, elephants, high-tech products, mega-tons of fish and tomatoes, airplanes, scissors. A whole universe of essential supplies, raw resources,
and luxury goods travel outside the law. All flowing in and out of Angola, of all warzones—and
because many of these raw resources and goods went to, or came from, peacetime nations around the
world—in and out of all virtually all countries.
World Bank, United Nations, and government indices at that time stated only 10% of Angola’s
economy was legal. 90 percent was what I call extra-legal: including informal, illicit, illegal, and
unrecorded. Following extra-legal linkages globally, it became obvious that perhaps half the global
economy—including both wartime and peacetime nations – involves extra-legality.

Interview with Carolyn Nordstrom

5

Yet there are no formal economic indices that calculate the impact of extra-legal goods, monies,
and exchange on legal economies, on government and financial stability, or for development. There
are no formal methodologies to research, track, analyze, and deal with extra-legal activities; no formal ways to even determine their size with any precision. The repercussions are dramatic: Angola’s
development policies, like all nations, focus on the legal realm only. But if 90 percent of the country’s
economy wasn’t legal coming out of war—how can any development projects that deal with only 10
percent of reality work?
Because these flows in and out of Angola link across countries worldwider—so too do the repercussions. To study this, I followed extra-legal routes, across borders, along payment and laundering
systems, and then globally. I traveled to a number of ports, first in Africa, and then globally (e.g.
Rotterdam, Singapore, Long Beach USA) to look at how goods were entering and leaving; and also
traveled on a freighter internationally.
We don’t really understand economies if we don’t understand their smuggling networks. It’s fascinating. Perhaps a third or up to a half of the world’s economy taken in total is moving across borders
extra-legally in all kinds of ways and we don’t know how to formally chart it. There are formal analyses for GDP, but none for what I call XGDP (extra-legal gross domestic product). What does this
say about our economic analyses? We—government institutions, economic and development organizations, academics, alike—don’t fully understand the vast world of smuggling and the extra-legal,
yet it’s critical to our survival.
Robert: Yes, you make a good point. Turning to another topic, if I may, what advice would you
give introductory students thinking about majoring in anthropology?
Carolyn: I can tell you what I tell my introductory classes. I tell them anthropology is one discipline where you can study how various aspects of our lives and worlds are linked together. Anthropology is a global study not only in what it explores but also in how it thinks about issues. It looks
at the big picturer—not just at a single country, for example, but also at cross-cultural, international
interactions. We take seriously not only understanding other cultures but the ways in which they
fit together with one another to make the world we live in. We’re interested in what takes us from
human to humanity.
Anthropology values both the local and global perspectives. In the twenty-first century, businesses,
medical schools, and NGOs are discovering that their policies do not work if they do not understand
larger cross-cultural issues, the bigger picture that ties things together. Yet at the same time they need
to understand on-the-ground daily realities: What are the rationalities and irrationalities that humans
display in different contexts and at different times? What are the hopes, fears and dreams that drive
people forward? How do these dynamics fit into the way we perceive governance, development, legality; shape our ideas of self, belonging, emotions, human potential; influence our definitions of good
and bad, success or failure, possible or impossible?
One of the things that delights us in anthropology at my university is the fact that our anthropology graduates are equally competitive in getting in medical schools and choice business jobs as those
coming from the traditional medical and business majors. Our students are very successful going into
development, policy, planning, and innovation work—whether local or international—and people
love them because they hit the ground running with cultural sensitivities and valuable field training.
They have knowledge that isn’t necessarily being taught in some of the others disciplines: they know
how to cross intellectual as well as physical borders; link the micro to the macro; weave together
seemingly different aspects of life to better understand societies, to problem-solve, and to gain a
better understanding of why people act as they do.

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Anthropology is well prepared to address future advances. For example, if I were to work in the
civilian Space X program founded by Elon Musk, I’d want to be an anthropologist. The technical
aspects are critical, of course—but technology has no meaning apart from the heartbeat of humanity
that animates it. It would be fascinating to explore what goals and hopes guide the people involved
in long-term space flight. What facilitates space travel, ensuring it doesn’t totally disrupt the travelers – mentally and physically? What social bonds and human interactivity do people require, do
societies wherever they are in space, depend on? What is human intelligence, as we increasingly turn
technological control over to artificial intelligence—and what is not/human as people and digital
technologies merge in more extensive and complex ways?
What other discipline studies such diverse topics—from smuggling to violence and altruism, from
creativity to space travel, from local family interactions to global dynamics, from the changing definitions of what it means to be human to the vibrant ethnographies of lives being lived – and then
weaves these together in groundbreaking ways?
Robert: Thank you for sharing your thoughts today. It is an exciting and inspiring vision of anthropology.

Image Credits
Many of the images used in this book appear with permission of the copyright holder. None of the
figures in this book should be assumed to be in the public domain or creative commons licensed
unless otherwise noted in the original image information.

The Development of Anthropological Ideas
No images in this chapter.

The Culture Concept
Figure 1: Public domain image from Gulliver’s Travels in Lilliput and Brobdingnag by John Lang.
London: T.C. and E.C. Jack, 1908.
Figure 2: Public domain image from
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:JamesGeorgeFrazer.jpg
Figure 3: Public domain image from Anthropology: An Introduction to the Study of Man and
Civilization by E.B. Tylor 1904. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Anthropology;_an_
introduction_to_the_study_of_man_and_civilization_(1896)_(14760690736).jpg
Figure 4: Public domain image from London School of Economics Library Collections Public
domain.
Figure 5: Photograph of Franz Boas is from the public domain collection of the Canadian Museum
of Civilization, Negative 79-796.
Figure 6: Photograph of Ruth Benedict is public domain from the Library of Congress. https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ruth_Benedict#/media/File:Ruth_Benedict.jpg
Figure 7: Image of Yanomami mother and child by Cmacauley https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Yanomami_Woman_%26_Child.jpg
Figure 8: Photo courtesy of Emily Cowall.
Figure 9: Photo courtesy of Priscilla Medeiros.

Doing Fieldwork: Methods in Cultural Anthropology
Figure 1: Photo by Katie Nelson, 2001.
Figure 2: Photo by Katie Nelson, 2001.
Figure 3: Photo by Katie Nelson, 2001.
Figure 4: Image of Bronislaw Malinowski is public domain from the London
School of Economics Library Collections. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bronis%C5%82aw_
Malinowski#/media/File:Wmalinowski_trobriand_isles_1918.jpg
Figure 5: Image reproduced from Benjamin Lee Whorf, “Science and Linguistics.” MIT Technology
Review: 42 (1940).
Figure 6: Chart courtesy of Katie Nelson.
Figure 7: Photograph courtesy of Katie Nelson.

Language
Figure 1: Illustration by MegSmith from https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Tract.gif

1

2

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Figure 2: Chimpanzee photo from The Green Parent, https://www.flickr.com/photos/
thegreenparent/6943988092/in/photolist-bzBKJC-zDUYsp-7SB2Ti-a1dNpR-o9XYFtQHJxws-5V3K9S-6GGsaB-24BHdf-8PxP51-4bTFt1-g8HhXg-bVPhdX-g8HHEV-djgDGXg9Fokm-3oyJyK-djgDNk-6aYFFn-7MEHY8-dbzPCy-g8GRG8-4wg2PA-7UHWGR-g8HSifbymeE7-g8HGUA-g9G1iF-3oDcjJ-ppg5zK-g8Jjm6-g8HneV-9fb4op-7MEHYk-7UMhkQg8GKPh-L478z-cV3zFW-g8GU42-5oXTdK-4wF5Nb-g8HoqU-poYJLp-g8Hfyu-ppg5Frg8H6Gw-nxDiWa-4TzY8N-q3C5FL-nQ4JKS
Figure 3: Photograph courtesy of James Kim.
Figure 4: Photograph from Cultural Survival and Make Peace Productions
Figure 5: Photograph courtesy of Linda Light.

Subsistence
Figure 1: The carrying capacity image collage contains work by Andreas Lederer. https://
et.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hatsad and Dennis Jarvis https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Agriculture_in_Vietnam_with_farmers.jpg
Figure 2: Includes public domain image from https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fishing_
Katcha_Valai.JPG and https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fish_Farm_Site.jpg
Figure 3: Woolly mammoth figure contains images from https://et.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hatsad by
Andreas Lederer and https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Woolly_mammoth.jpg by
By Flying Puffin.
Figure 4: Maasai herd by ILRI/Lieve Lynen from https://www.flickr.com/photos/ilri/12170593993/
in/photostream
Figure 5: Bean plant image by Perry Quan from https://www.flickr.com/photos/
pquan/6066910690
Figure 6: A culinary shoe pot from Oaxaca, Mexico. Courtesy of the Burke Museum of Natural
History and Culture, Catalog Number 2009-117/536. All rights reserved.
Figure 7: Clay Cooking Pots in the Republic of Suriname. Courtesy of Karina Noriega. All rights
reserved.
Figure 8: Illustration by Nicolle Rager Fuller, National Science Foundation, https://www.nsf.gov/
news/news_images.jsp?cntn_id=104207
Figure 9: Commodity chain figure includes images from Adam C. Baker https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:ElSalvadorfairtradecoffee.jpg and Brian Johnson and Dane Kantner
https://www.flickr.com/photos/danebrian/7798861630 and M.O. Stevens
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Coffee_beans_at_Longbottom_-_Hillsboro,_Oregon.
JPG and Hao Xing https://pl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plik:Employees_work_inside_the_Starbucks_
at_the_Taj_Mahal_Palace_hotel_in_south_Mumbai,_India.jpg
Figure 10: Photo courtesy of Isaac Shearn

Economics
Figure 1: Image by Thelmadatter https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MasaMetate.JPG
Figure 2: Sorting coffee beans image from https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Coffee_beans_
being_sorted_and_pulped.jpg by http://flickr.com/photos/rohsstreetcafe/380885309
Figure 3:Image is public domain from https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chipata_-_
roadside_clothes_vendors.JPG

Video Presentations

3

Figure 4: Image from Bronislaw Malinowski, Argonauts of the Western Pacific (Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1978[1922]), plate xvi. From https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Malinowski_
mwali_plate_xvi.png
Figure 5: From the Institute for Money, Technology and Financial Inclusion
https://www.flickr.com/photos/imtfi/5868331010/in/photostream/
Figure 6: Tea workers image by Shankar S. https://www.flickr.com/photos/
shankaronline/7168516257
Figure 7: Image courtesy of Sarah Lyon

Political Anthropology: A Cross-Cultural Comparison
Figure 1: Age grades and age set, based on Sengree in Peoples of Africa is reproduced with
permission of Kendall Hunt Publishing Company from Cultural Anthropology: A Concise
Introduction by Paul McDowell.
Figure 2: Bilateral Cross-Cousin Marriage from Yanomamo is reproduced with permission of
Kendall Hunt Publishing Company from Cultural Anthropology: A Concise Introduction by Paul
McDowell.
Figure 3: Segmentary :Lineage Model is reproduced with permission of Kendall Hunt Publishing
Company from Cultural Anthropology: A Concise Introduction by Paul McDowell.
Figure 4: Conical Clan Design of Chiefdom is reproduced with permission of Kendall Hunt
Publishing Company from Cultural Anthropology: A Concise Introduction by Paul McDowell.
Figure 5: Matrilateral Cross-Cousin Marriage is reproduced from is reproduced with permission of
Kendall Hunt Publishing Company from Cultural Anthropology: A Concise Introduction by Paul
McDowell.
Figure 6: Image courtesy of Paul McDowell.

Family and Marriage
Figure 1: Courtesy of Laura Tubelle de González.
Figure 2: Courtesy of Thomas McIlwraith.
Figure 3: Courtesy of Thomas McIlwraith.
Figure 4: Courtesy of Thomas McIlwraith.
Figure 5: Courtesy of Laura Tubelle de González.
Figure 6: Courtesy of Mary Kay Gilliland.

Race and Ethnicity
Figure 1: Photo by Mike Graham https://www.flickr.com/photos/mike626/10980456
Figure 2: Illustration from Systema Naturae, Carolus Linnaeus, https://commons.wikimedia.org/
wiki/File:Systema_Naturae_Plate_IV.jpg
Figure 3: Image is from Anthro Palomar
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Map_of_blood_group_o.gif
Figure 4: Image from NMI Portal https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Worldwide_
prevalence_of_lactose_intolerance_in_recent_populations.jpg
Figure 5: Image from UN Women https://www.flickr.com/photos/unwomen/22766182427

4

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Figure 6: Image from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jiichir%C5%8D_Matsumoto#/media/
File:Jiichiro_Matsumoto.JPG
Figure 7: Image courtesy of Laura Gonzalez.
Figure 8: Image courtesy of Justin Garcia.

Gender and Sexuality
Figure 1: Image from Sharma Pictures Publication, 174, Princess Street, Bombay-2. India.
Figure 2: Image from Sharma Pictures Publication, 174, Princess Street, Bombay-2. India.
Figure 3: Image courtesy of Carol Mukhopadhyay, 2010.
Figure 4: Image courtesy of Carol Mukhopadhyay, 2010.
Figure 5: Photograph by Ajay Tallam, 2007. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Men_not_
allowed.jpg.
Figure 6: Photograph by Carol Mukhopadhyay, 1989.
Figure 7: Photograph by Carol Mukhopadhyay, 1989.
Figure 8: Image is from ca. 1405 manuscript “Bellifortis,” by Kyeser von Eichstadt
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Chastity_belt_Bellifortis.jpg
Figure 9: Photograph by Takeaway, 2005. https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Amphoe_
omkoi_lahu_people.jpg.
Figure 10: Photograph by Tami Blumenfield, 2002.
Figure 11: Photograph by Tami Blumenfield, 2002.
Figure 12: Photograph by lecercle, 2009. https://www.flickr.com/photos/lecercle/3707261938.
Figure 13: Photograph by Carol Mukhopadhyay, Tanzania, 2010.
Figure 14: Photograph by Carol Mukhopadhyay, Tanzania, 2010.
Figure 15: Photograph by Carol Mukhopadhyay, 2008.
Figure 16: Photograph by Carol Mukhopadhyay, Tanzania, 2010.
Figure 17: Photograph by Francis Hannaway. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Basankusu_
collecting_firewood_by_Francis_Hannaway.jpg.
Figure 18: Photograph by Tami Blumenfield, 2002.
Figure 19: Reproduced with permission.
Figure 20: Image courtesy of Carol Mukhopadhyay.
Figure 21: Image courtesy of Tami Blumenfield.
Figure 22: Image courtesy of Susan Harper.
Figure 23: Image courtesy of Abby Gondek.

Religion
Figure 1: Image by Matthias Kabel https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Venus_von_
Willendorf_01.png
MatthiasKabel
Figure 2: Photograph by HTO https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Paintings_from_the_
Chauvet_cave_(museum_replica).jpg
Figure 3: Public domain image from https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Taksin_Memorial_
Spirit_House.jpg
Figure 4: Public domain image from https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Nikko_Toshogu_
Outer_Torii_M3032.jpg

Video Presentations

5

Figure 5: Photograph by Christopher Hogue Thompson https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Pentecost_Land_Diving.JPG

Globalization
Figure 1: Image from David and Paulina https://www.flickr.com/photos/davidandpaulina/
Figure 2: Photographs by Jonathan S. Marion. All rights reserved.
Figure 3: Photograph by Lovisa Selander https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Fishing_boat_
Lake_Poopo.jpg
Figure 4: Photograph by André Mellagi https://www.flickr.com/photos/mellagi/
Figure 5: Photograph by Jerome W. Crowder. All rights reserved.
Figure 6: Photograph courtesy of Lauren Miller Griffith.
Figure 7: Photography courtesy of Jonathan S. Marion.

Culture and Sustainability: Environmental Anthropology in the
Anthropocene
Figure 1: Photo by Adalberto H. Vega from
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Cop%C3%A1n_Ballcourt.jpg
Figure 2: Photo by Himalayan Academy Publications, Kapaa, Kauai, Hawaii. https://commons.
wikimedia.org/wiki/File:CowHA.jpg
Figure 3: Image by Christian Palmer.
Figure 4: Image by Christian Palmer.
Figure 5: Image by Christian Palmer.
Figure 6: Image by Christian Palmer.

Performance
Figure 1: Photograph by Mariana Rodriguez Guttierrez https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Ballet_Folkl%C3%B3rico_en_la_Casa_de_la_Cultura.JPG
Figure 2: Photograph by George C. Marshall European Center for Security Studies https://www.
flickr.com/photos/gcmcphotos/with/31874211260/
Figure 3: Photograph from https://pixabay.com/en/man-sitting-back-skateboard-steps-1030859/
Figure 4a: Photograph by Jonathan S. Marion. All rights reserved.
Figure 4b: Photograph by Jonathan S. Marion. All rights reserved.
Figure 5a: Photograph from https://pixabay.com/p-873830/
Figure 5b: Photograph by National Cancer Institute https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
File:Doctor_consults_with_patient_(4).jpg
Figure 5c: Photograph by Jonathan S. Marion. All rights reserved.
Figure 6: Photograph by Insho Impressions https://www.flickr.com/photos/insho/
Figure 7: Photograph by Fanny https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Exercises_at_the_barre,_
Prix_de_Lausanne_2010-2.jpg
Figure 8: Image by Zhu https://www.flickr.com/photos/xiaozhuli/5326211113/
Figure 9: Photograph by Derek Gleeson
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Dublin_Philharmonic_Orchestra_performing_
Tchaikovsky’s_Symphony_No_4_in_Charlotte,_North_Carolina.jpg
Figure 10: Photograph courtesy of Lauren Miller Griffith.

6

Perspectives: An Open Invitation to Cultural Anthropology

Figure 11: Photograph courtesy of Jonathan S. Marion.

Media Anthropology: Meaning, Embodiment, Infrastructure, and
Activism
Figure 1: Photograph by Bryce Peake. Licensed CC BY-SA.
Figure 2: Photograph by Bryce Peake. Licensed CC BY-SA.
Figure 3: Photograph by Bryce Peake. Licensed CC BY-SA.
Figure 4: Photograph by Bryce Peake. Licensed CC BY-SA.
Figure 5: Photograph by Bryce Peake. Licensed CC BY-SA.
Figure 6: Photograph by Bryce Peake. Licensed CC BY-SA.
Figure 7: Photograph by Bryce Peake. Licensed CC BY-SA.
Figure 8: Photography Bryce Peake. Licensed CC BY-SA.

Health and Medicine
Figure 1: Photograph by Mlogic https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Ancient_Tibetan_
Medicine_Poster.jpg
Figure 2: Public domain image from
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Hua_t08.jpg
Figure 3: Photograph by Sgerbic
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Botanica_store_close_up.JPG
Figure 4: Photograph by Ton Rulkens
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:AIDS_awareness_in_Machaze_district_(4513750269).
jpg
Figure 5: Photograph by African Union Mission in Somalia (AMISOM) https://www.flickr.com/
photos/au_unistphotostream/with/10418757505/

Seeing Like an Anthropologist
Figure 1: Image courtesy of Logan Cochrane

Public Anthropology
Figure 1: All rights reserved. Claudia Andujar 1 (black and white)
Figure 2: Davi Kopenawa. All rights reserved. Claudia Andujar
Figure 3: All rights reserved. Victor Englebert
Figure 4: All rights reserved. Victor Englebert
Figure 5: All rights reserved. Victor Englebert
Figure 6: Image by Robert Borofsky

