http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html
We ship printed books within 1 business day; personal PDFs are available immediately.

Forced Migration and Mortality
Roundtable on the Demography of Forced Migration,
Committee on Population, Holly E. Reed and Charles B.
Keely, Editors, National Research Council
ISBN: 0-309-50266-7, 160 pages, 6 x 9, (2001)
This PDF is available from the National Academies Press at:
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

Visit the National Academies Press online, the authoritative source for all books
from the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering,
the Institute of Medicine, and the National Research Council:
• Download hundreds of free books in PDF
• Read thousands of books online for free
• Explore our innovative research tools – try the “Research Dashboard” now!
• Sign up to be notified when new books are published
• Purchase printed books and selected PDF files

Thank you for downloading this PDF. If you have comments, questions or
just want more information about the books published by the National
Academies Press, you may contact our customer service department tollfree at 888-624-8373, visit us online, or send an email to
feedback@nap.edu.

This book plus thousands more are available at http://www.nap.edu.
Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.
Unless otherwise indicated, all materials in this PDF File are copyrighted by the National
Academy of Sciences. Distribution, posting, or copying is strictly prohibited without
written permission of the National Academies Press. Request reprint permission for this book.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

FORCED

MIGRATION

&
MORTALITY

Roundtable on the Demography of Forced Migration
Committee on Population
Holly E. Reed and Charles B. Keely, Editors

Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences
and Education
National Research Council

National Academy Press
Washington, D.C.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

NATIONAL ACADEMY PRESS 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W. Washington, D.C. 20418
NOTICE: The project that is the subject of this report was approved by the Governing Board
of the National Research Council, whose members are drawn from the councils of the
National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and the Institute of
Medicine. The members of the committee responsible for the report were chosen for their
special competences and with regard for appropriate balance.
This study was supported by a grant to the National Academy of Sciences by the Andrew
W. Mellon Foundation. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed
in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
organizations or agencies that provided support for the project.
Suggested citation: National Research Council (2001) Forced Migration and Mortality.
Roundtable on the Demography of Forced Migration. Committee on Population. Holly E.
Reed and Charles B. Keely, eds. Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Forced migration and mortality / Roundtable on the Demography of Forced
Migration, Committee on Population ; Holly E. Reed and Charles B. Keely,
editors ; Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education,
National Research Council.
p. cm.
Chiefly papers presented at a workshop organized by the Roundtable on
the Demography of Forced Migration, held in Nov. 1999 in Washington,
D.C.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-309-07334-0 (pbk.)
1. Refugees—Mortality—Congresses. 2. Forced migration—Congresses.
I. Reed, Holly. II. Keely, Charles B. III. Roundtable on the Demography
of Forced Migration. IV. National Research Council (U.S.). Committee on
Population. V. National Research Council (U.S.). Commission on
Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education
HV640 .F57 2001
304.6′4—dc21
2001000942

Additional copies of this report are available from National Academy Press, 2101 Constitution Avenue, N.W., Lockbox 285, Washington, D.C. 20055; (800) 624-6242 or (202) 334-3313
(in the Washington metropolitan area); Internet, http://www.nap.edu
Printed in the United States of America
Copyright 2001 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

National Academy of Sciences
National Academy of Engineering
Institute of Medicine
National Research Council

The National Academy of Sciences is a private, nonprofit, self-perpetuating society of distinguished scholars engaged in scientific and engineering research, dedicated to the furtherance of science and technology and to their use for the general
welfare. Upon the authority of the charter granted to it by the Congress in 1863,
the Academy has a mandate that requires it to advise the federal government on
scientific and technical matters. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts is president of the National
Academy of Sciences.
The National Academy of Engineering was established in 1964, under the charter
of the National Academy of Sciences, as a parallel organization of outstanding
engineers. It is autonomous in its administration and in the selection of its members, sharing with the National Academy of Sciences the responsibility for advising the federal government. The National Academy of Engineering also sponsors
engineering programs aimed at meeting national needs, encourages education
and research, and recognizes the superior achievements of engineers. Dr. William
A. Wulf is president of the National Academy of Engineering.
The Institute of Medicine was established in 1970 by the National Academy of
Sciences to secure the services of eminent members of appropriate professions in
the examination of policy matters pertaining to the health of the public. The
Institute acts under the responsibility given to the National Academy of Sciences
by its congressional charter to be an adviser to the federal government and, upon
its own initiative, to identify issues of medical care, research, and education. Dr.
Kenneth I. Shine is president of the Institute of Medicine.
The National Research Council was organized by the National Academy of Sciences in 1916 to associate the broad community of science and technology with
the Academy’s purposes of furthering knowledge and advising the federal government. Functioning in accordance with general policies determined by the Academy, the Council has become the principal operating agency of both the National
Academy of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering in providing
services to the government, the public, and the scientific and engineering communities. The Council is administered jointly by both Academies and the Institute of
Medicine. Dr. Bruce M. Alberts and Dr. William A. Wulf are chairman and vice
chairman, respectively, of the National Research Council.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

ROUNDTABLE ON THE DEMOGRAPHY
OF FORCED MIGRATION
CHARLES B. KEELY (Chair), Walsh School of Foreign Service,
Georgetown University
RICHARD BLACK, School of African and Asian Studies, University of
Sussex
BRENT BURKHOLDER,* South East Asia Regional Office, World
Health Organization, and International Emergency and Refugee
Health Program, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia
GILBERT BURNHAM, Center for Refugee and Disaster Studies, School
of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University
WILLIAM GARVELINK, U.S. Agency for International Development,
Eritrea
STEVEN HANSCH, Center for Disaster and Humanitarian Assistance
Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, Maryland
KENNETH HILL, Center for Refugee and Disaster Studies, School of
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University
BELA HOVY, Division of Operational Support, United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, Geneva
ALLAN JURY, Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration, U.S.
Department of State
JENNIFER LEANING, François-Xavier Bagnoud Center for Health and
Human Rights, School of Public Health, Harvard University
STEPHEN LUBKEMANN, Watson Institute for International Studies,
Brown University
CAROLYN MAKINSON, The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, New
York
SUSAN FORBES MARTIN, Institute for the Study of International
Migration, Georgetown University
ERIC NOJI, National Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia
W. COURTLAND ROBINSON, Center for Refugee and Disaster
Studies, School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University
SHARON STANTON RUSSELL, Center for International Studies,
Massachusetts Institute for Technology
PAUL SPIEGEL,** International Emergency and Refugee Health
Program, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia
BARRY STEIN, Department of Political Science, Michigan State
University
v

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

DAVID TURTON, Refugee Studies Centre, University of Oxford
RONALD WALDMAN, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia
University
ANTHONY ZWI, Department of Public Health and Policy, London
School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine

*Through December 1999.
**As of January 2000.

vi

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

COMMITTEE ON POPULATION
JANE MENKEN (Chair), Institute of Behavioral Sciences, University of
Colorado, Boulder
CAROLINE H. BLEDSOE,* Department of Anthropology, Northwestern
University
JOHN BONGAARTS,** The Population Council, New York
ELLEN BRENNAN-GALVIN, Population Division, United Nations,
New York
JOHN N. HOBCRAFT, Population Investigation Committee, London
School of Economics
F. THOMAS JUSTER, Institute for Social Research, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor
CHARLES B. KEELY, Walsh School of Foreign Service, Georgetown
University
DAVID I. KERTZER, Department of Anthropology, Brown University
DAVID A. LAM, Population Studies Center, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor
LINDA G. MARTIN,* The Population Council, New York
MARK R. MONTGOMERY,* The Population Council, New York, and
Department of Economics, State University of New York, Stony
Brook
W. HENRY MOSLEY, Department of Population and Family Health
Sciences, Johns Hopkins University
ALBERTO PALLONI, Center for Demography and Ecology, University
of Wisconsin, Madison
JAMES P. SMITH,** RAND, Santa Monica, California
BETH J. SOLDO,* Population Studies Center, University of
Pennsylvania
JAMES W. VAUPEL, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research,
Rostock, Germany
KENNETH W. WACHTER, Department of Demography, University of
California, Berkeley
LINDA J. WAITE, Population Research Center, University of Chicago
BARNEY COHEN, Director
HOLLY E. REED, Research Associate
BRIAN TOBACHNICK, Project Administrative Coordinator
ELIZABETH WALLACE,** Committee Administrative Coordinator

*Through October 1999.
**Through October 2000.

vii

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CONTRIBUTORS
BRENT BURKHOLDER, South-East Asia Regional Office, World Health
Organization, and International Emergency and Refugee Health
Program, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia
GILBERT BURNHAM, Center for Refugee and Disaster Studies, School
of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University
MANUEL CARBALLO, International Centre for Migration and Health,
Geneva, and Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University
STEVEN HANSCH, Center for Disaster and Humanitarian Assistance
Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, Maryland
PATRICK HEUVELINE, Population Research Center, National Opinion
Research Center, and University of Chicago
KENNETH HILL, Center for Refugee and Disaster Studies, School of
Public Health, Johns Hopkins University
CHARLES B. KEELY, Walsh School of Foreign Service, Georgetown
University
MYUNG KEN LEE, School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University
DOMINIQUE LEGROS, Epicentre/Médecins Sans Frontières, Paris
PIERRE NABETH, Epicentre/Médecins Sans Frontières, Paris
CHRISTOPHE PAQUET, Institut de Veille Sanitaire, Paris
HOLLY E. REED, Committee on Population, Division on Behavioral
and Social Sciences and Education, National Research Council
W. COURTLAND ROBINSON, Center for Refugee and Disaster
Studies, School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins University
PETER SALAMA, International Emergency and Refugee Health
Program, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia
PAUL SPIEGEL, International Emergency and Refugee Health Program,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia
RONALD J. WALDMAN, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia
University

viii

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

Preface

Over the last few years, there has been a growing appreciation of the
need for more information about complex humanitarian emergencies in
order to develop understanding about and more effective reactions to
such events. The number, frequency, magnitude, and sheer difficulty of
forced migrations in recent history have contributed to the need for more
data. In addition, operational personnel realize that cumulative knowledge does not simply emerge from repetitions of prior experience. Insight, better protocols, and more effective reactions require analysis, comparison, and testing new approaches. To accomplish this, the field needs
systematic data collection to assess behaviors, to ask questions, and to
formulate alternatives.
Demographers and epidemiologists can provide some of these services. These population-related disciplines have long histories of applied
work, based on the mathematical and statistical methods they have developed. They have not built up a cumulative body of knowledge, however,
about complex emergencies.
In response to the need for more information about the measurement
and estimation of displaced populations and their vital rates, the Committee on Population held a workshop on the demography of forced migration in 1998. The report of this workshop, published in 1999, summarized the field and suggested some potential directions for further
research, as identified by participants.
As there was an obvious need for a vehicle for further exploration of
these topics and others, the Committee on Population, with support from
ix

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

x

PREFACE

the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, developed the Roundtable on the
Demography of Forced Migration. The Roundtable provides a forum in
which a diverse group of experts can discuss the state of knowledge about
demographic structures and processes among people who are forced to
move, whether to escape war and political violence, to flee famine and
other natural disasters, or by government projects or programs that destroy their homes and communities. The Roundtable’s task is often confounded by definitional problems (e.g., what is “forced migration”), and
by a lack of data or data whose representativeness is unknown.
The Roundtable includes representatives from operational agencies,
with long field and administrative experience. It includes researchers
and scientists with both applied and scholarly experience in medicine,
demography, and epidemiology. The group also includes representatives from government, international organizations, donors, universities,
and non-governmental organizations. The Roundtable is organized to be
as inclusive as possible of relevant expertise and to provide occasions for
substantive sharing to increase knowledge for all participants with a view
toward developing cumulative facts to inform policy and programs in
complex humanitarian emergencies. The accomplishment of this goal
will necessarily advance our knowledge about demographic structures
and processes during and following high levels of social stress. This
cannot help but enlighten demography as a field regarding comparative
situations, such as famine, as well as provide contrasts to more “normal”
social histories and the lives of people.
The first workshop organized by the Roundtable was on “Mortality
Patterns in Complex Emergencies.” Held in Washington, D.C., in November 1999, it was the first of a planned series of meetings attempting to
survey what is known in the literature, what needs to be illuminated, and
what current situations may tell us about the demography of current and
future complex humanitarian emergencies. The objectives of the workshop were to explore patterns of mortality in recent crises and consider
how these patterns resemble or differ from mortality in previous emergencies.
This volume emerges from the papers that were first presented at the
workshop as well as the discussion at the workshop. It provides a basic
overview of the state of knowledge about mortality in past complex humanitarian emergencies. Case studies on Rwanda, North Korea, and
Kosovo, commissioned for the workshop, and on Cambodia, added after
the workshop, provide focused reflection on complex emergencies as they
have been in the past, as they are today, and as they appear to be for the
near future.
The papers in this volume have been reviewed by individuals chosen
for their diverse perspectives and technical expertise in accordance with

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

xi

PREFACE

procedures approved by the Report Review Committee of the National
Research Council (NRC). The purpose of this independent review was to
provide candid and critical comments that would assist the institution in
making the published volume as accurate and as sound as possible and to
ensure that it meets institutional standards for objectivity and evidence.
The review comments and draft manuscripts remain confidential.
We thank the following individuals for their participation in the review of this volume: Richard Black, School of African and Asian Studies,
University of Sussex; Allan G. Hill, Center for Population and Development Studies, School of Public Health, Harvard University; Jennifer Leaning, François-Xavier Bagnoud Center for Health and Human Rights,
School of Public Health, Harvard University; Stephen Lubkemann,
Watson Institute for International Studies, Brown University; M.
Giovanna Merli, Department of Sociology, University of Wisconsin, Madison; Kathleen Newland, International Migration Policy Program, Carnegie
Endowment for International Peace; Eric Noji, National Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; Susanne
Schmeidl, Institute for Conflict Resolution, Swiss Peace Foundation; William Seltzer, Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Fordham University; and David Turton, Refugee Studies Centre, University of Oxford.
Although the individuals listed above have provided many constructive comments and suggestions, they were not asked to endorse the papers nor did they see the final drafts before publication. The review
process was overseen by David Kertzer, Departments of Anthropology
and History, Brown University. Appointed by the National Research
Council, he was responsible for making certain that an independent examination of these papers was carried out in accordance with insitutional
procedures and that all review comments were carefully considered. Responsibility for the final content of this volume rests entirely with the
authors and editors of this volume.
We are also grateful to the staff and associates of the National Research Council. In particular, Holly Reed, who was instrumental in the
organization of the workshop, coordinated the contributions of the authors, co-authored the overview chapter, and coordinated the review process. Brian Tobachnick and Elizabeth Wallace expertly coordinated the
logistical and travel arrangements for the workshop. Randi M. Blank
edited the volume. Christine McShane guided the manuscript through
the publication process and skillfully assisted with the editing. Sally
Stanfield and the Audubon team at the National Academy Press handled
the technical preparation of the report. Development and execution of
this project occurred under the general guidance of the director of the
Committee on Population, Barney Cohen.
We thank the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, for its continual sup-

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

xii

PREFACE

port of the work of the Roundtable as well as many others working in this
field. A special thanks is due to Carolyn Makinson, Program Officer for
Population and Forced Migration at the Mellon Foundation, for her enthusiasm and significant expertise in the field of forced migration. She
has been an intellectual driving force behind the Roundtable’s work.
We also wish to thank Charles Keely, of Georgetown University, a
member of the Committee on Population and chair of the Roundtable, for
his excellent work on the workshop and this volume, and his continued
intellectual guidance for the Roundtable. Finally, we wish to recognize
Ronald Waldman, of Columbia University, for his important substantive
contributions in helping to organize the workshop.
Most of all, of course, we are grateful to the authors and other participants in the workshop, whose ideas have been captured in this volume.
We hope that this publication helps to ensure the continuation of study
about topics related to forced migration and ultimately contributes to
both better policy and practice in the field.

Jane Menken
Chair, Committee on Population

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

Contents

1

2

3

4

Understanding Mortality Patterns in Complex Humanitarian
Emergencies
Charles B. Keely, Holly E. Reed, and Ronald J. Waldman

1

Appendix: Five Illustrations of Uncertainty: Mortality in
Afghanistan, Bosnia, North Korea, Rwanda, and Sierra Leone
Steven Hansch

38

The Evolution of Mortality Among Rwandan Refugees
in Zaire Between 1994 and 1997
Dominique Legros, Christophe Paquet, and Pierre Nabeth

52

Famine, Mortality, and Migration: A Study of North Korean
Migrants in China
W. Courtland Robinson, Myung Ken Lee, Kenneth Hill,
and Gilbert Burnham
Methods of Determining Mortality in the Mass
Displacement and Return of Emergency-Affected
Populations in Kosovo, 1998-1999
Brent Burkholder, Paul Spiegel, and Peter Salama

xiii

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

69

86

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

xiv
5

6

CONTENTS

The Demographic Analysis of Mortality Crises:
The Case of Cambodia, 1970-1979
Patrick Heuveline
Reflections
Manuel Carballo

INDEX

102

130

137

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

1
Understanding Mortality Patterns in
Complex Humanitarian Emergencies
Charles B. Keely, Holly E. Reed, and Ronald J. Waldman

The term complex humanitarian emergency is widely used to describe a
particular type of disaster: a situation in which a large civilian population
is affected by a combination of civil or international war, or a gross attempt to restructure the state or society (such as a genocide), leading to
large-scale population displacement with accompanying deterioration of
living conditions (such as food, potable water, shelter, and sanitation)
creating the potential for a significant increase in mortality typically during some limited period of time, but sometimes lasting much longer.1
Man-made complex humanitarian emergencies have existed throughout
history. A small and arbitrary subset of examples includes events like the
Roman attack on Carthage, the Goths’ attack on Rome, and conquests by
Islamic and Crusader forces. In the 20th century, complex humanitarian
emergencies include the Holocaust in Europe in the 1930s and 1940s, the
Bengal famine of 1943, and the murder or expulsion of the Chinese from
Indonesia in the 1960s. Examples of complex humanitarian emergencies
in even more recent years include wars, ethnic cleansing, forced migration, and genocide occurring in places as varied as Somalia, Bosnia,
Rwanda, Kosovo, Sierra Leone, and East Timor.
One justification for a detailed review of mortality in such situations
is the widespread assumption among the health and assistance communi-

1 This definition is adapted from Toole and Waldman (1997). It has been somewhat
modified to take a wider variety of complex humanitarian emergencies into account.

1

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

2

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

ties that “(t)he crude mortality rate (CMR) most accurately represents [in
a single measure] the health status of emergency-affected populations”
(Toole and Waldman, 1997). Mortality is indeed a valuable event to
measure in emergencies; although it refers to only one dimension, it is a
useful summary measure of the scale of the crisis and its impact, as well
as the performance of those working to provide aid. Mortality estimates
can be highly inaccurate, but they are often better and more easily captured than other health indicators, which may be subject to different definitions and cultural interpretations. There are many other potential outcomes of complex humanitarian emergencies, including morbidity, a
possible change in fertility, migration, changes in family and household
structures, broader societal changes, psychological effects, and potential
cultural shifts. Mortality, however, has so far been one of the most easily
and accurately measured indicators in an emergency setting. Since the
mid-1980s, therefore, mortality rates have become a basic indicator in
complex humanitarian emergencies (Hansch, 1999).
Concern for human life raises many questions about the causes, consequences, correlates, and measurement of mortality in complex humanitarian emergencies:
• How do mortality patterns differ in different kinds of complex
humanitarian emergencies?
• How do mortality rates differ between refugee and internally displaced populations?
• How do mortality patterns differ in various types of geographic
settings?
• How do mortality patterns differ by gender, age, or other groupings?
• How do mortality patterns in complex humanitarian emergencies
differ from (or are similar to) “normal” mortality patterns?
• How does the distance traveled by refugees affect mortality?
• How does the length of a crisis affect mortality?
• How does food insecurity affect mortality? and
• What are the effects of various humanitarian interventions on
mortality?
The case studies in this volume and the collected wisdom based on
several decades of relief aid in emergencies provide a good starting point
for understanding mortality patterns in complex humanitarian emergencies. However, much of this knowledge is based on data collected in
camp settings and must be adapted for different situations. There are still
many issues that remain unresolved and many new issues that must be
examined. It is also important to realize the potential policy and program

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

3

implications of such research. If researchers gain a better understanding
of mortality patterns in emergencies and their underlying causes, then
this may point to new interventions and/or improvements to current
interventions that could reduce mortality in future emergencies. Many of
the public health policies and recommendations that humanitarian assistance agencies use today are a direct result of the findings of research
conducted in emergency settings in earlier decades.
This introductory overview presents some key definitions and a crude
typology of complex humanitarian emergencies, summarizes current
knowledge about mortality in complex humanitarian emergencies, outlines some of the new contexts that may affect complex emergencies, and
discusses how data constraints affect existing knowledge. Finally, the
contents of the volume are briefly previewed and some potential next
steps are presented. We have also included an appendix of five case
studies of mortality patterns in complex humanitarian emergencies, compiled by Steve Hansch. The appendix further illustrates some of the
points made in this paper with reference to the difficulties of obtaining
even rough estimates of mortality in complex humanitarian emergencies
during or immediately following a crisis when assistance needs critically
depend on these estimates. It may also serve to enrich some readers’
understanding of the nature of complex humanitarian emergencies.
DEFINITIONS AND TYPOLOGY
Definitions
“A disaster may be defined as a relatively acute situation created by
man-made, geophysical, weather-related, or biological events that adversely impacts on the health and economic well being of a community to
an extent that exceeds the local coping capacity” (Toole and Waldman,
1997: 284). Complex humanitarian emergencies2 are distinguished from
acute natural disasters because population displacement and the lack of
basic services available to a migrating population result in indirect or
secondary health and mortality effects to a degree not usually present in a
natural disaster. The disruption of services and life generally can often be
addressed with some rapidity, especially if the population remains more
or less in place. The difference between a complex emergency and a
natural disaster is not necessarily in the mortality rate per se. Natural
disasters can result in huge loss of life as a result of earthquake, weather,

2 For the sake of brevity, the term “complex humanitarian emergency” will simply be
“complex emergency” throughout the rest of the chapter.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

4

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

or other natural causes. Complex emergencies, in addition to being caused
by human beings, typically involve large-scale population displacements
and the disruption of normal life to an extent that is beyond the means of
typical coping mechanisms of a society. People may be displaced either
within a country—internally displaced persons (IDPs)—or between one
or more countries—refugees. It is the unusual and threatening conditions
brought on by the disruption of society that lead to negative health and
mortality consequences for such populations.
The concept crude mortality rate (CMR) is discussed frequently
throughout the volume, which demographers often refer to as the crude
death rate (CDR). The concept denotes the number of deaths in a given
period of time divided by an estimate of the population at risk of dying
during that period (Shryock and Siegel, 1976). In this chapter, we will
refer to the number of deaths per 10,000 population per day as the daily
crude mortality rate or CMR, and to the number of deaths per 1,000 population per year as the annual crude death rate or CDR. The two expressions are convertible by multiplying the CDR (more familiar to demographers) by 36.5 to obtain the CMR (more familiar to epidemiologists
working in complex emergency situations).
Baseline mortality is the “normal” mortality level in a given population. Epidemiologists often refer to a “return to baseline level,” which
indicates a stabilization of the situation and potential end to the mortality
crisis. However, with refugee or internally displaced populations, it is
often difficult to define the baseline, because the population of comparison may not be clearly defined, populations may have chronically high
mortality rates due to ongoing conflict and other problems, and surveillance may have started well into the period of elevated mortality.
Typology
Grouping various complex emergencies into distinct categories may
help emergency aid organizations to identify the types of assistance that
are most likely to be needed early in a crisis. One such typology distinguishes between five types of crises based on their settings and patterns
of population risk (Hansch, 1999).
• Rural Famine or Refugee Paradigm: This is the model on which most
relief work has traditionally been based. Populations are expected to be
rural, poor, and illiterate, with low vaccination coverage and high chronic
malnutrition, and they are generally housed in high-density camps. Mortality is often due to communicable diseases compounded by malnutrition. Deaths generally occur disproportionately among children less than
five years of age. Examples of this type of crisis include: Biafra, Nigeria,

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

5

in 1968; the Sahel in 1973, and Sudan, Ethiopia, and Somalia in the late
1980s and early 1990s.
• Ethnic Cleansing or Genocide: This type is increasingly common and
is characterized by armed forces (sometimes assisted by civilians) attacking large numbers of civilians in an effort to kill or displace them. Mortality is due in large part, if not mainly, to physical injury, not communicable
diseases or malnutrition. Disability and mental health trauma are other
important consequences of this type of emergency. Examples of this type
of emergency include: Rwanda in 1994; Bosnia in the early 1990s, and
Kosovo in 1999.
• Urban Services Collapse or Urban Depopulation: This type of crisis
occurs when generally healthy and well-nourished populations who are
dependent on urban services become refugees due to war. Mortality is
usually due to chronic diseases and lack of sophisticated health systems
(i.e., kidney dialysis machines). This type of crisis has occurred within
larger crises in Somalia, Bosnia, and Kosovo.
• Conflict Among Combatants: Most mortality occurs among armed
combatants due to battle injuries, landmines, collateral damage, or communicable diseases associated with the effects of war. This type of emergency includes: Cambodia and Angola in the 1980s and 1990s (where
landmines were a significant mortality risk) and Chechnya.
• Short-Onset, Short-Duration Natural Disaster: Hurricanes, tornadoes,
and earthquakes can create high mortality rates at the beginning of a
crisis based on physical trauma or environmental exposure. However,
these types of disasters can lead to longer-term problems such as famine
and disease if they are not addressed immediately. Examples include:
floods in Bangladesh and earthquakes in Mexico and South America.
This type of emergency is not discussed in detail in this volume because it
is generally caused more by natural than political factors.
Clearly, these categories are rarely completely distinct and often overlap, but may be useful in a debate about how the nature of complex
emergencies are evolving over time (see below).
CURRENT KNOWLEDGE
Extent of the Problem
Although complex emergencies have been occurring for centuries,
systematic data on the numbers of forced migrants in the world have only
been available for approximately the past 40 years. The number of refugees and IDPs in the world has increased dramatically during the past
four decades. As Figure 1-1 shows, by the end of 1998, there were over

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

6

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES
30
Refugees
IDPs
25

Millions

20

15

10

5

0

1964

1968

1972

1976

1980

1984

1988

1992

1996

Year

FIGURE 1-1 Global trends in refugees and internally displaced persons, 19641999. United States Committee for Refugees and United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, various years.

11.6 million refugees, almost twice as many as there were 36 years ago.
Yet in recent years, since about 1991, the number of refugees has generally
declined, despite a brief rise in the late 1990s (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 2000). Meanwhile, the number of IDPs has grown
quite rapidly, reaching over 25 million by 1994, although this figure also
declined slightly in the late 1990s to about 17 million by 1998. The map
that follows page 18 shows that, refugees and internally displaced persons are located around the globe—in Africa, Central and South America,
Eastern Europe, the Middle East, and Central and Southern Asia (United
States Committee for Refugees, 2000). Due to the political nature of flows
of refugees and internally displaced persons, one must acknowledge not
only the effect of global and local political events, but also the willingness
of states and international organizations to count persons as refugees and
IDPs. This varies with circumstances; therefore, interpretations of trends
in the number of forced migrants require caution.
Although not every refugee or IDP in the world is currently affected
by a complex emergency, complex emergencies do produce forced migrants. The number of complex emergencies has also increased over the

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

7

past decade. In 1989, there were 14 ongoing emergencies; in 1992, there
were 17. By 1996, there were 24 ongoing complex emergencies in the
world, and there were about 30 by the end of 1999 (Natsios, 1997; United
States Committee for Refugees, 2000). However, the realignment of state
boundaries and the creation of additional states in places such as the
former Soviet Union and former Yugoslavia may have some effect on
these statistics. This apparent increase in emergencies has been accompanied by a parallel increase in emergency foreign aid expenditures by the
United States. In 1989, the U.S. spent $300 million in bilateral aid for
foreign disasters and crises. By 1994, it was spending $1.3 billion. There
is a corresponding trend in multilateral expenditures for emergency assistance. Between 1984 and 1989, for example, the World Food Program
spent 25 to 40 percent of its annual assistance budget on relief activities.
By 1992-1993, this was up to over 60 percent (Natsios, 1997). However, it
is important to note that an increase in emergency foreign aid does not
necessarily translate into an increase in overall foreign aid.
Levels of Mortality
In complex emergencies, the crude mortality rate (CMR) is often expressed as the number of deaths per 10,000 population per day during the
acute phase of an emergency. Calculating a daily rate has been considered to be appropriate since conditions can change dramatically on a
daily basis and the large base of 10,000 per day is used to express events
in whole numbers. In developing countries, the median crude death rate
(CDR) for the total population is 9 deaths per 1,000 per year (Population
Reference Bureau, 2000). This translates into a daily rate of 0.25 deaths per
10,000. A threshold of 1.0 per 10,000 per day is widely used as the benchmark of elevated mortality, on the recommendation of the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (1992). This threshold of 1 per 10,000 per
day is equivalent to an annual CDR of 36.5 per 1,000.3

3 Throughout the rest of this chapter, the term crude death rate (CDR) will be used to refer
to a rate of deaths per 1,000 population per year, while the term crude mortality rate (CMR)
will be used to refer to a rate of deaths per 10,000 population per day. It should be noted,
however, that although the threshold CMR of 1 death per 10,000 per day is widely used, it
is unclear how elevated this really is. Mortality in the early stages is most likely to affect
vulnerable groups like the chronically ill, the malnourished, and the population under five
years of age. Since CMRs are calculated for the whole population, they do not show decomposition by age groups. If mortality is to a large extent confined to the under-five
population, and if deaths take place within the first months after flight, then a return to
baseline mortality measured as a CMR may indicate that the surviving population has
achieved mortality rates lower than the pre-flight levels. For example, in Baidoa, Somalia,

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

8

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

Although the CMR and CDR are essentially the same concept, there
are reasons for preferring to use one rather than the other. Demographers
have traditionally favored longer reference periods for demographic rates
as they are generally interested in average mortality over a period of time.
Epidemiologists working in emergencies, however, are interested in the
“instantaneous” rate. Therefore they use the daily rate (CDR)4 to observe
rapid changes in the mortality rate which shows whether or not the situation is stabilizing.
Elevated CMRs in complex emergencies vary widely. Table 1-1, based
on data in Toole and Waldman (1997) provides a dozen examples of
CMRs and CDRs expressed in terms of daily rates per 10,000 and annual
rates per 1,000. The table has the virtue of providing information on
emergencies in different parts of the world around the same time period,
as well as estimates for some of the same countries at different times and
estimates for refugee populations from the same origin country in different asylum countries.
The data shown in Table 1-1 indicate a daily CMR on a base of 10,000
of over 1 in all of the cases given. The range is between 1.2 in the case of
Mozambicans in Malawi in June 1992 to some of the highest levels ever
measured—between 19.4 to 30.9 deaths per 10,000 per day at the height of
the Rwandan crisis in July 1994. The Rwandan levels, if sustained, would
have meant that every refugee would have been dead in less than a year.
(The level of 1,127.9 per 1,000 per year means annihilation in less than a
year.)
The heavy reliance on data collected from camp populations may
distort understanding of the levels and trends of mortality among the
total refugee and internally displaced populations. Camp populations
may benefit from earlier and more effective assistance interventions that
lead to a reversal of the high mortality levels associated with the emergency and result in a more quickly stabilized situation in terms of food,

in 1992, about 75 percent of children under five years of age died in a six-month period and
the percentage of children under five years of age in the population dropped from 18.3
percent to 7.8 percent (Moore et al., 1993). However, an occurrence like this does not
change the life expectancy for survivors; it means that those who were at the greatest risk of
dying have already died, and therefore the mortality rate may be lower than it was before
the emergency. It may also be possible that the provision of food, shelter, sanitation, immunizations, and basic primary care may increase the life expectancy for the remaining population and therefore, result in lower mortality rates for survivors compared to their baseline
experience. In any such event this must be offset by the traumatic experiences suffered by
these populations during war, famine, flight, and refuge.
4 Note that the so-called “daily” rate may not actually be a daily rate as it is often based
on the average mortality experience over a number of days. It still gives a sense of the
mortality levels in relatively “real time,” however.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

9

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

TABLE 1-1 Estimated Daily Crude Mortality Rates (CMRs) and
Annual Crude Death Rates (CDRs) in Selected Refugee Populations,
1990-1994
Date

Asylum Country

Origin Country

July 1990
June 1991
March-May 1991
March-May 1991
March 1992
March 1992
June 1992
June 1992
August 1992
December 1993
August 1994
July 1994

Ethiopia
Ethiopia
Turkey
Iran
Kenya
Nepal
Bangladesh
Malawi
Zimbabwe
Rwanda
Tanzania
Zaire

Sudan
Somalia
Iraq
Iraq
Somalia
Bhutan
Burma
Mozambique
Mozambique
Burundi
Rwanda
Rwanda

Daily CMRa
2.3
4.6
4.1
2.0
7.3
3.0
1.6
1.2
3.5
3.0
3.0
19.4-30.9

Annual CDRb
84.0
167.9
149.7
73.0
266.5
109.5
58.4
43.8
127.8
109.5
109.5
708.1-1,127.9

aExpressed as deaths per 10,000 per day.
bExpressed as deaths per 1,000 per year.

Source: Toole and Waldman (1997: Table 2)

shelter, sanitation, and other basic needs. On the other hand, camp situations may increase the risk of subsequent mortality due to infectious diseases. Although delivering assistance in camps may be more manageable for providers, it may not be more effective for recipients. Under
certain circumstances, self-settlement among a host population may be
more effective (Van Damme, 1995).
Complex emergencies rarely continue indefinitely. In most cases,
international organizations, national governments, nongovernmental organizations, and others intervene to provide some stability for the refugee
population, and minimal services are aimed at reduction of mortality,
reduction of morbidity, and other threats to life. What the data in Table 11 underscore is that the acuteness of the challenge, as indicated by CMRs,
varies enormously from situation to situation.
Internally displaced persons, who often face the same difficult survival conditions as refugees who have crossed an international border,
also face the prospect of elevated mortality. Because of considerations of
sovereignty and the absence of international agreements about the provision of protection and assistance to victims of persecution and war who
remain in their own country, internally displaced persons are less likely
to receive international assistance that might meet survival needs and
provide a modicum of stability. Although mortality data on internally
displaced populations are scarce, most of the situations for which data are
available display very high mortality rates. As shown in Table 1-2, the

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

10

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

TABLE 1-2 Estimated Daily Crude Mortality Rates (CMRs) and
Annual Crude Death Rates (CDRs) Among Internally Displaced
Persons, 1990-1994
Date

Country

Daily CMRa

Annual CDRb

January-December 1990
April 1991-March 1992
April-November 1992
April-December 1992
April 1992-March 1993
April 1992-March 1993
April 1992-March 1993
April 1993
May 1995
February 1996

Liberia
Somalia (Merca)
Somalia (Baidoa)
Somalia (Afgoi)
Sudan (Ayod)
Sudan (Akon)
Bosnia (Zepa)
Bosnia (Sarajevo)
Angola (Cafunfo)
Liberia (Bong)

2.3
4.5
16.7
5.4
7.6
4.5
1.0
1.0
8.2
5.4

84.0
164.3
609.6
197.1
277.4
164.3
36.5
36.5
299.3
197.1

aExpressed as deaths per 10,000 per day.
bExpressed as deaths per 1,000 per year.

Source: Adapted from Toole and Waldman (1997: Table 3).

CMR in Baidoa, Somalia, in 1992 was almost 17 deaths per 10,000 per day
and in both Sudan in 1992-1993 and Angola in 1995, it was over 7 per
10,000 per day. Crude mortality rates among Muslims in Bosnia during
the war in 1993 were about four times the baseline level (Toole et al.,
1993).
Stages of a Crisis
The data in Table 1-1 highlight the degree to which mortality can rise
in crisis situations but reveal nothing about patterns of mortality over the
various stages of a particular complex emergency. Each complex emergency is typically different from the last: different logistics, different politics, different social context, etc. However, some generalizations are possible. Figure 1-2 shows the classic rural famine/refugee paradigm pattern,
which is a refinement of an inverted U-shaped pattern. Note the sharp
increase at the beginning of the crisis (Phase 1), followed by the peak
mortality rate (Phase 2) and then a relatively rapid decline (Phase 3), and
stabilization (Phase 4). These distinctions should be based not so much
on absolute measurements, but on patterns. In other words, in an emergency, population parameters—including mortality—may be quite unstable—either fluctuating or rapidly changing due to interventions or
other reasons. The post-emergency phase is usually marked by more
stable mortality rates, even though they might remain unacceptably el-

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

11

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

1

2

3

4

MORTALITY

6x

4x

2x
BASELINE

0
TIME
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
Phase 4

Beginning of the crisis
Height of the crisis
Arrival of humanitarian assistance
Stabilization of the crisis

FIGURE 1-2 Model of mortality change in a forced migration situation. Source:
Reed et al., 1998, Figure 2.

evated. However, stabilization is what signals the time to shift programming from life-saving interventions to longer-term ones.
Typically, the period of flight and the time immediately after arrival
in a place of asylum are the periods of highest mortality. In 1992, in
Chambuta camp, Zimbabwe, for example, Mozambican refugees who had
been in the camp for less than one month had a CMR of 8 per 10,000,
which was four times that of those who had been in the camp for one to
three months and 16 times the baseline (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 1993a). In Goma, Zaire, among Rwandan refugees, the average daily CMR from July 14 to August 14, 1994, was between 19.5 and 31.2
per 10,000. This was more than 30 times the baseline rate (Goma Epidemiology Group, 1995).
The rate at which mortality rates decline varies across populations,
and the speed of mortality reduction also depends on the rates of mortality and/or out-migration of specific groups at high risk for mortality. For
example, the initial high mortality rates of Cambodian refugees in Thailand in 1979 declined to baseline levels in about one month (Toole and

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

12

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

Waldman, 1990). In Goma, Zaire, among Rwandan refugees, nearly 2,000
deaths per day were estimated on July 21, 1994, but by July 28, there were
over 6,500 deaths per day. By August 4, the number of deaths per day
was less than 1,000 (Goma Epidemiology Group, 1995). Although this is
still a large number of deaths, the acuteness of the crisis moderated with
some rapidity. Other situations, however, are much harder to stabilize,
usually because of political factors. In 1988-1989, for example, under-five
mortality among Somali refugees in Ethiopia remained high for about 18
months, even increasing during some periods (Toole and Bhatia, 1992).
It is important to note that this model does not hold true for all complex emergencies and it has not been systematically validated. It is simply an approximation of mortality patterns that have been observed in
many of these situations in the past. Although it is possible to speculate
about the factors that cause a shift in the mortality pattern, it is impossible
to generalize and often very difficult to measure.
Sometimes it is quite clear why variations in mortality patterns occur,
but generally the relative impact of variables like age and sex composition, proportions and types of vulnerable groups, levels of mortality
among vulnerable groups early in an emergency, and other factors is
unknown. However, one reason for the variation in the speed of the
mortality reduction is obviously the promptness of assistance efforts.
How promptly assistance is provided is a function of many factors, including awareness of the situation, political decisions about whether or
not to assist, ease of access to the displaced population, vulnerability of
the population (because of the conditions and length of their flight), prior
health status of the population, and reported mortality rates (among the
most vulnerable). Although the general pattern is one of elevated mortality, followed by rapid declines with the arrival of assistance and a modicum of stable and safe living conditions, there is wide variation in the
rapidity of mortality declines and improvement in the health and living
conditions of refugee populations.
Reasons for Elevated Risk of Mortality in Complex Emergencies
It is too easy to overlook what are usually the initial direct causes of
mortality and the underlying causes for all other mortality in a complex
emergency. Violence from war and starvation due to famine kill many
civilians directly and are often the reasons for flight which results in
refugees and internally displaced persons. The root of most complex
humanitarian emergencies is that governments and other combatants use
violence and deprivation to seek solutions for political problems.
Violence is a major cause of mortality in complex emergencies. Armed
conflicts, both civil wars and transnational conflicts, have increasingly

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

13

targeted civilians. High numbers of civilian dead, human rights abuses,
forced migration, and socioeconomic breakdown have been the result. In
addition, injuries from war and landmines are common, particularly
among IDPs (Toole and Waldman, 1997). For example, between April
1992 and January 1993 in Sarajevo, Bosnia, 57 percent of all mortality was
due to war trauma (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1993b).
Food scarcity, especially if experienced by a population with already
elevated levels of malnutrition, can also lead to elevated mortality in
complex emergencies. The same is true of lack of access to water. Malnutrition and dehydration can quickly increase mortality rates in a population, especially one in an already weakened state. Data on 42 different
refugee populations between 1984 and 1988 showed a strong positive
correlation between the acute protein energy malnutrition (PEM) prevalence and crude mortality rates. Populations with low PEM prevalence
rates (less than 5 percent) had a low average monthly CDR (0.9 per 1,000
per month). But those populations with PEM prevalence rates of at least
40 percent had an average CDR of 37 per 1,000 (Person-Karell, 1989). In
1988-1989, among Somali refugees in Eastern Ethiopia, malnutrition
prevalence and the CDR were also found to be positively correlated (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1990).
There are many correlates to these causes of mortality, however. Displacement itself, because of the often-harsh conditions and long duration
of flight, may be related to mortality. Deprivations during the ordeal,
additional dangers encountered along the way, and lengthy disruption of
ordinary life put great direct physical stress on people and also indirectly
affect health status through physical and psychological stress that may
increase their vulnerability to health problems and the levels of mortality.
Thus refugees are often at the highest risk for mortality immediately after
they arrive in a host country (Toole and Waldman, 1997).
Weakened populations are also more vulnerable to disease. During
the early phases of an emergency, diarrheal diseases (e.g., cholera, dysentery), measles, acute respiratory infections, and malaria are the most common causes of death (Toole and Waldman, 1997). Among Rwandan refugees in Zaire in 1994, over 90 percent of deaths within the first month of
the crisis were attributable to a severe cholera epidemic followed by a
dysentery outbreak (Goma Epidemiology Group, 1995). Before 1990,
measles epidemics were quite common in many refugee settings and led
to large numbers of deaths in Somalia, Bangladesh, Sudan, and Ethiopia
(Toole et al., 1989). However, since that time, immunization campaigns
have reduced this threat somewhat. Malaria is often a problem in tropical
areas such as Southeast Asia and sub-Saharan Africa. Other diseases that
frequently attack refugees include acute respiratory infections, meningitis, hepatitis, tuberculosis, and HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases (Toole and Waldman, 1997).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

14

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

A collapse of or lack of health services can also contribute to increased
mortality. The breakdown of health services, particularly preventive services such as immunization and prenatal care, is often due to a combination of infrastructure collapse, economic failure, and lack of resources for
public services. Personnel and equipment shortages exacerbated by the
challenge of treating countless war casualties can overwhelm health systems (Toole and Waldman, 1997). Again, the multiplier effect of more
than one element is evident in the particular risk of increases in communicable diseases if there is a combination of bad living conditions and a
collapse of health services (Noji, 1997).
The Age Pattern of Mortality in Complex Emergencies
Another factor that contributes to elevated mortality in complex emergencies is the presence of vulnerable groups in the population. Those
who are already at highest risk are going to be even more vulnerable
during times of displacement and deprivation. The leading causes of
death in refugee situations (with the exception of direct violence leading
to death) are the same killers encountered in ordinary situations, and
those who are most vulnerable in refugee situations are generally the
same persons who are vulnerable under normal circumstances.
Risk clearly varies by age. For example, in 1980, in one camp in
Somalia for Ethiopian refugees, daily mortality rates for those younger
than five during the emergency phase were 28 per 10,000, much higher
than for adults (Toole and Waldman, 1988). In 1985, under-age-five mortality rates among Ethiopian and Eritrean refugees in some Sudanese
camps were one and a half times the CMR (Toole and Waldman, 1988).
And among displaced Iraqis on the Turkey-Iraq border in March to May
1991, children under five years of age made up over 63 percent of all
deaths (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1991). Again, this
pattern of mortality is quite similar to the normal circumstances in many
developing countries.
In more developed regions, however, the elderly are often at greater
risk. For example, in Sarajevo, Bosnia, from December 1993 to March
1994, elderly residents and refugees were found to be a particularly vulnerable group to malnutrition and its effects. The percentage of adults 60
years and older who were undernourished during these four months was
over 15 percent, which was over three times the percentage of undernourishment in the rest of the population (Watson et al., 1995).
A more sophisticated question, however, is to ask how does the shape
of the mortality pattern in complex emergencies differ from the underlying mortality pattern pre-existing in a stable population. By comparing
age-specific mortality rates in emergencies to those occurring in a hypothetical stable population with a similar life expectancy, researchers can

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

15

Crude Death Rate (Deaths/1,000/Year)

900
Coale Demeny "West" Level 12

800

Katale Camp, Zaire
700
600
500
400
300
200
100

59
10
-1
4
15
-1
9
20
-2
4
25
-2
9
30
-3
4
35
-3
9
40
-4
4
45
-4
9
50
-5
4
55
-5
9
60
-6
4
65
-6
9
70
-7
4
75
-7
9
80
-8
4
85
-8
9
90
-9
5

14

0

<1

0

Age Group (Years)

FIGURE 1-3 Age-specific death rates for Rwandan refugees in Katale Camp,
Zaire, July 17-August 5, 1994 and for Coale-Demeny life table “West” level 12.

determine how the relative mortality risk differs for different age groups
during an emergency. Few data on age-specific mortality in emergencies
exist, but it is possible to analyze the data that can be found. We have
analyzed data for three different emergencies by comparing them to agespecific mortality rates from relevant Coale-Demeny West life tables. In
each of these graphs, one can observe the typical “J-shaped” mortality
pattern of the Coale-Demeny curve, with the highest death rates occurring in the youngest and oldest ages (Coale et al., 1983).
In Figure 1-3, the age-specific mortality pattern for a Coale-Demeny
“West” Level 12 life table with an average life expectancy of about 45.5
years5 is compared to the mortality pattern among Rwandan refugees
living in Katale Camp, Zaire, in the summer of 1994 (Davis, 1996). Although only data for broad age groups were collected in the camp (and
therefore the curve is incomplete and not very smooth), the general pattern is similar to the Coale-Demeny curve. Mortality is extremely elevated in the youngest and oldest age groups, compared to the middle
ages. Mortality at most ages appears to be significantly higher than for
the stable population.
5 According to the 1994 World Development Report, the average life expectancy at birth
for Rwanda in 1992 was 46 years. No estimates are available for the years 1993, 1994
(World Bank, 1994; World Bank, 1995; World Bank, 1996).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

16

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES
7000

Relative Risk of Mortality

6000

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

0

<1
14
59
10
-1
4
15
-1
9
20
-2
4
25
-2
9
30
-3
4
35
-3
9
40
-4
4
45
-4
9
50
-5
4
55
-5
9
60
-6
4
65
-6
9
70
-7
4
75
-7
9
80
-8
4
85
-8
9
90
-9
5

0
Age Group (Years)

FIGURE 1-4 Relative risk of mortality for Rwandan refugees in Katale Camp,
Zaire, July 17-August 5, 1994 compared to risk of mortality for stable population
based on Coale-Demeny life table “West” level 12.

Figure 1-4 shows the relative risk of dying in the Rwandan refugee
camp compared to the risk of dying for a stable population with a life
expectancy of 45.5 years at birth (approximately the same as that for the
population of Rwanda before the 1994 crisis). All age groups have an
elevated risk of mortality, but some are enormously high. Children aged
1 to 4 are 6000 percent more likely to die in the refugee camp compared to
the stable population. Adults aged 45-49 also had high risk of mortality;
they were about 3000 percent more likely to die compared to the same
group in the stable population. It is known that cholera and shigella were
the main causes of disease in this camp. It is not surprising that young
children were quite vulnerable to these epidemics. The large risk of death
for adults may also be related to the waves of disease (Davis, 1996).
Figures 1-5 and 1-6 compare male age-specific mortality in a longterm Cambodian refugee camp in Thailand to a Coale-Demeny West Level
14 male life table with a life expectancy of about 49.5 years6 (Elias et al.,
1990). In Figure 1-5, mortality appears to be only slightly elevated among

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

17

850
Coale Demeny Male "West" Level 14
800

Site 2 South, Thailand Male

750

Crude Death Rate (Deaths/1,000/Year)

700
650
600
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
4
59
10
-1
4
15
-1
9
20
-2
4
25
-2
9
30
-3
4
35
-3
9
40
-4
4
45
-4
9
50
-5
4
55
-5
9
60
-6
4
65
-6
9
70
-7
4
75
-7
9
80
-8
4
85
-8
9
90
-9
5

1-

0

<1

0

Age Group (Years)

FIGURE 1-5 Age-specific death rates for male Cambodian refugees in Thailand,
June 1987-May 1988 and for Coale-Demeny life table “West” level 14, males.

the older and younger age groups. As Figure 1-6 shows, however, the
relative risk of dying is over 80 percent greater for male refugees under
one year of age compared to the same age group in the stable population.
Mortality risk for the rest of the male refugee population is lower than for
the stable population. These data demonstrate the stark difference between the crisis of the Rwandan refugee camp and the relatively reduced
mortality risk found in a long-term stable refugee camp that was in existence for over 10 years in Thailand.

6 According to the 1992 World Development Report, the average life expectancy at birth
for Cambodia (Democratic Republic of Kampuchea) in 1990 was 50 years. No estimate is
available for the year 1989 (World Bank, 1991; World Bank, 1992).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

18

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES
200
180

Relative Risk of Mortality

160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20

4
59
10
-1
4
15
-1
9
20
-2
4
25
-2
9
30
-3
4
35
-3
9
40
-4
4
45
-4
9
50
-5
4
55
-5
9
60
-6
4
65
-6
9
70
-7
4
75
-7
9
80
-8
4
85
-8
9
90
-9
5

1-

0

<1

0

Age Group (Years)

FIGURE 1-6 Relative risk of mortality for male Cambodian refugees in Thailand, June 1987-May 1988 compared to risk of mortality for stable population
based on Coale-Demeny life table “West” level 14, male.

Figures 1-7 and 1-8 compare female age-specific mortality in the same
Cambodian refugee camp to a Coale-Demeny West Level 14 female life
table with a life expectancy of about 52.5 years. In Figure 1-7, again
mortality appears to be only slightly elevated among the older and
younger age groups. In Figure 1-8, however, again the mortality risk for
those under one year of age is elevated and almost 20 percent greater
compared to the same age group in the stable population. Mortality risk
for the rest of the female refugee population is also lower than for the
stable population.
Within this volume, both Robinson et al. (Chapter 3) and Heuveline
(Chapter 5) take a closer look at age-specific mortality rates in emergency
settings. In the North Korea study by Robinson et al. (see Figure 3-1),
mortality rates for their sample are somewhat similar to those from the
Coale-Demeny “West” Level 4 life table, although elevated in the younger
and older ages and reduced in the middle ages. Both of these curves
show mortality levels much higher than those estimated by the 1993 North
Korean census.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

19

Coale Demeny Female "West" Level 14

800

Site 2 South, Thailand Female

750

Crude Death Rate (Deaths/1,000/Year)

700
650
600
550
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
4
59
10
-1
4
15
-1
9
20
-2
4
25
-2
9
30
-3
4
35
-3
9
40
-4
4
45
-4
9
50
-5
4
55
-5
9
60
-6
4
65
-6
9
70
-7
4
75
-7
9
80
-8
4
85
-8
9
90
-9
5

1-

0

<1

0

Age Group (Years)

FIGURE 1-7 Age-specific death rates for female Cambodian refugees in Thailand, June 1987-May 1988 and for Coale-Demeny life table “West” level 14,
females.

In Cambodia (see Figure 5-4), Heuveline found that deaths from natural causes followed the typical J-shaped curve for both men and women.
Deaths from violent causes, however, had a completely different age and
sex pattern. Men were much more likely to be killed in the younger age
groups, from about age 5 to age 24 years, but has a lower probability of
dying thereafter. Women, on the other hand, had a much lower probability of death due to violent causes, but the groups that were most vulnerable were very young women (under age 10) and women between the
ages of 40 and 64.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

20

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES
140.0%

Relative Risk of Mortality

120.0%
100.0%
80.0%
60.0%
40.0%
20.0%

14
59
10
-1
15 4
-1
20 9
-2
25 4
-2
30 9
-3
35 4
-3
40 9
-4
45 4
-4
50 9
-5
55 4
-5
60 9
-6
65 4
-6
70 9
-7
75 4
-7
80 9
-8
85 4
-8
90 9
-9
5

0
<1

0.0%

Age Group (Years)

FIGURE 1-8 Relative risk of mortality for female Cambodian refugees in Thailand, June 1987-May 1988 compared to risk of mortality for stable population
based on Coale-Demeny life table “West” level 14, female.

How Can Excess Mortality Be Reduced in a Complex Emergency?
The basic mechanisms to reduce excess mortality in complex emergencies are widely agreed upon in the emergency assistance community
and are based on many years of experience. The first requirements are to
provide a stable situation that allows the displaced persons to stop moving; to be free from violence; and to have access to nutritious food, clean
water, adequate sanitation and shelter, and basic health services, of which
the important aspect is often measles immunizations (Sphere Project,
2000). Note that the requirements to reduce mortality include only one
primarily medical intervention: measles vaccination. What refugees need
is a reduction in the physical demands of flight and then access to the
ordinary means of human survival. The provision of food, water, shelter,
and sanitation allows people to live, to regain strength, and to be protected from common communicable diseases. Protection from measles is
also important because children who are in weakened condition are quite
vulnerable to measles.
In addition to this basic list of provisions, some situations may require attention to specific environmental hazards. A frequent example is
malaria. If malaria is present, a refugee population is likely to be more

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

21

than usually vulnerable. In this case, it is important to implement environmental prevention methods, such as removing any stagnant water
that attracts mosquitoes, distributing bed nets to the refugees, and possibly spraying the area with mosquito repellants. Other environmental
hazards, including other insects and rodents, may require different interventions.
A third component that is necessary in refugee situations is the early
establishment of a surveillance system to monitor the health of the population and detect early signs of emerging problems. Although in some
instances surveillance systems are already in existence (early warning
mechanisms, for example), if displaced populations are in remote or undeveloped areas, it is usually necessary to implement a system immediately. Surveillance systems can utilize community health workers from
the affected refugee population. This requires training, but it may have
positive externalities such as community involvement and increased
knowledge about health conditions among the population.7
Finally, efforts to create new health services or supplement existing
services can be a useful tool to address ordinary health issues as they arise
in refugee situations, such as accidents, pregnancy, or other issues. In
addition to basic survival needs, providing primary care services, addressing specific environmental risks (e.g., malaria), and establishing a
working surveillance system should bring mortality rates back to base
levels relatively quickly.
Knowing what to do in an emergency, however, does not minimize
the difficulty of achieving these goals under field conditions. At times,
the challenges of logistics are enormous, sometimes exacerbated by combatants’ attempts to disrupt assistance. What is clear from a review of the
literature is the confidence, based on repeated experiences, that the international assistance community knows how to reduce mortality to preflight baseline levels and maintain these levels (Waldman and Martone,
1999). Persistent excess mortality in a complex emergency is not the
result of ignorance about effective procedures, but usually the result of
extraordinary difficulties in the logistics of access to the refugees, interference of combatants, or the failure of the international community to provide sufficient resources.
7 The recent experience of scholars who have reconstructed a record of human rights
abuses and murder for criminal tribunals and truth commissions in widely dispersed locations underscores the need for utmost care to protect persons on whom information is
collected. In this regard, surveillance system administrators need to address the issue of
safety and confidentiality of record systems. Discussion between surveillance administrators, statisticians, and demographers conducting forensic research to establish records of
events may help to create models for institutionalizing safeguards for record keeping in
emergencies.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

22

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

NEW CONTEXTS FOR COMPLEX EMERGENCIES
Having provided a brief overview of current knowledge on mortality
in crisis situations, we now turn to the critical question of whether the
nature and scope of complex emergencies are changing over time and
how. There are many facets of today’s complex emergencies that deserve
attention: the shifting geopolitical map, a changing epidemiological context, new actors and new roles for older actors, increasing attention to the
quality of relief, and a growing appreciation of information needs. All of
these issues have important implications for the understanding of mortality patterns in crisis situations.
The Shifting Geopolitical Map
The end of the Cold War marked the beginning of a new geopolitical
context for complex emergencies. In some cases, the withdrawal of U.S.
or Soviet support has led to a destabilization of developing country governments. In addition, many conflicts that were previously exacerbated
by the involvement of the United States and the Soviet Union are now
regional or internal conflicts. On the other hand, however, there are no
longer two distinct ideological camps that create barriers to resolving
conflicts or prevent assistance interventions for fear of reprisal.
In the past, intervention on behalf of forced migrants was often due to
ideological considerations, rather than simply humanitarian concern. The
Eastern Bloc countries were not part of the international refugee regime,
but produced many refugees of their own who were given automatic
asylum in the West. Now these countries are not necessarily producing
refugees (with the exception of the Balkan region), but they are hosting
them. And migrants who do leave Eastern Europe and the former Soviet
Union are much less likely to gain asylum in Western Europe or the
United States (Rogers and Copeland, 1993).
Along with this change, there is a continuing transformation of the
concept of sovereignty. There appears to be a more rapid and more
controversial change process than occurred in the past. Many see an
erosion of the concept, implying a negative shift in global political structure and practice. Others see greater transparency and accountability
demanded of states and thus a positive development for the human, civic,
and social rights of people. Globalization and the integration of economies, the media, the environment, and human rights have increasingly
encroached upon traditional understandings of sovereignty in today’s
world. Many of these forces, in turn, have expanded the concept of security to include non-military issues. One consequence of this expanded
notion of security is that refugee flows are viewed as a security threat

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

23

(Abiri, 2000; Wæver et al., 1993). Some national governments feel so
threatened by these flows that they try to prevent refugees from crossing
into their territory or they may force refugees to repatriate (Rogers and
Copeland, 1993). Thus it has become more difficult to cross a border and
become an official refugee; the number of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) has increased at least partly due to policies such as these (see
Figure 1-1).
In addition, legal barriers to refugee flows have increased, mainly in
the form of restrictions on immigration and citizenship (Kushner and
Knox, 1999). The increase in the number of IDPs makes the job of international organizations and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) more
difficult, since IDPs are often outside of their reach and governments and
other factions may create obstacles to humanitarian intervention (Newland,
1999; Cohen, 1998). Therefore NGOs must be even more innovative in their
efforts to protect and assist these groups and lower morbidity and mortality.
As noted, the human rights movement is one force that has been
chipping away at the notion of sovereignty. Although the United Nations
continues to uphold sovereignty in most instances, the human rights
movement, along with other social, economic, and political interests, has
pushed the world community to act in ways that violate the traditional
notion of sovereignty in recent years: Iraq in 1991, Somalia in 1992, and
Bosnia in 1992-96 (Jean, 1993). This increase in the use of collective action
for the enforcement of human rights still retains a political nature, however, and is not applied universally and impartially. Instead of the EastWest conflict of the Cold War era, interventions increasingly appear to
have a North-South dynamic, with Northern developed countries intervening into regional and internal conflicts in the broadly-defined “South”
(Rogers and Copeland, 1993).
The increase in collective action also raises the potential for greater
collaboration between human rights groups, the military, and NGOs. It
forces organizations like the International Committee for the Red Cross,
humanitarian NGOs, and even UN agencies to reevaluate their position
and often work in areas that are not safe or well protected by the military
of a sovereign state or acting under the mandate of accepted international
law. This has made the NGOs’ job of assistance and protection even more
dangerous and difficult and in turn can lead to increases in mortality
among refugees and relief workers.
Sometimes, however, the changing political context can mean that
NGOs have “unprecedented access” to refugees and IDPs. When governments are weak and therefore unable to limit access to populations within
their borders, then major powers or coalitions of states are able to intervene rather easily. And because of their presence, ability, and resources,
NGOs are the natural choice for humanitarian intervention (Stein, 2000).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

24

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

In this context, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
Sadako Ogata, perhaps ought to be singled out for using her office to call
attention to IDPs. While certainly not alone in identifying IDPs as requiring international attention, her efforts lent authority and legitimacy to
this issue, requiring at least an acknowledgement by states of this issue
and its importance.
A Changing Epidemiological Context
Complex emergencies have generally been operationally defined as
situations of war or civil strife, food insecurity, and/or population displacement that result in an excess mortality rate of more than 1 death per
10,000 population per day. However, many new emergencies, such as
Bosnia and Kosovo, which are occurring in more developed regions of the
world, do not fit this definition. The epidemiological context in developed countries is different from traditional refugee settings, such as subSaharan Africa and Southeast Asia. The populations are generally
healthier and better nourished. Often chronic diseases, rather than communicable diseases, are an important part of the morbidity profile in
developed countries. This is one reason why it is important to think
about including measures of morbidity as well as mortality when assessing new emergencies (Waldman and Martone, 1999).
Health conditions are also changing; no longer are malnutrition and
communicable diseases always the most pervasive threat during an emergency. Although these continue to have major impacts in many complex
emergencies, physical trauma, psychosocial problems, and chronic illnesses are new issues that need attention. Measuring only mortality during an emergency says nothing about sequelae of a complex emergency
that may have profound effects on the population. The psychosocial
effects of trauma and disability resulting from injuries suffered during
the emergency are two examples of indicators that may signify a severe
emergency, even if mortality was low. For example, mortality levels in
the Bosnian and Kosovar cases were lower than generally experienced in
emergencies in developing countries (Waldman and Martone, 1999). Yet
judgments about the severity of emergencies based on the single criterion
of the number of deaths miss the suffering and human tragedy of facts
like the tactical use of rape as a weapon of war, or, as in Sierra Leone, the
practice of intentional mutilation that did not always result in death.
In some of today’s complex emergencies, morbidity may be a better
indicator of population health than mortality, because it may be easier to
react to a broad range of issues as they appear, including health problems
that may not be directly related to mortality, such as psychosocial issues.
Measuring morbidity might also help to change the general assumption

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

25

among some relief workers that their objectives are basic subsistence,
followed by mortality reduction, without any other goals. Although basic
needs and mortality reduction should be addressed, in some cases, morbidity may be an important indicator (Waldman and Martone, 1999). Such
a change, however, carries the danger of overlooking the fact that mortality rates are tragically higher in developing country complex emergencies
compared to those in developed countries. Discounting mortality rates
could be used as a rationale for disproportionate expenditures in developed country crises. The ethical and policy implications are not simply
solved, but need further reflection and serious discussion.
There is already a growing appreciation among the assistance and
medical communities of the importance of morbidity in addition to mortality as a measure of severity and progress in emergency situations. Aid
workers are now beginning to focus on care and counseling to war victims, particularly those who have been victims of rape. In addition, the
issue of reproductive health has received increased attention. Finally, the
experiences of refugees in the Balkans have introduced greater sensitivity
to the issue of chronic illness among refugees and the problems of responding to the chronically ill in a complex emergency. This expanded
mission is based on not only preventing mortality, but also “protecting
life with dignity” (Waldman and Martone, 1999:1484).
New Actors and New Roles for Older Actors
Another recent development is the emergence of new actors and the
creation of new roles for those responding to refugee flows and complex
emergencies. The United Nations has emerged as an important actor in
initiatives involving military assets in the 1990s (after years of general
inactivity during the Cold War). Interventions in Angola, El Salvador,
Cambodia, Bosnia, Somalia, Iraq, and Indonesia have demonstrated that
the UN is now not only focusing on traditional peacekeeping, but also on
“the restoration of law and order and the protection of humanitarian aid
operations” (Jean, 1993; Newland, 1999). This means that the UN is intrinsically involved in protecting NGOs, and often in a de facto position
of non-neutrality. Therefore, the very presence of the UN can draw severe
criticism and even fire from opposing groups.
Other new roles include the presence of the military in the delivery of
humanitarian assistance and a greater role for external military forces in
peacekeeping, refugee protection, and operations under an international
authority. The logistical capacity of many military units is unparalleled.
This was recognized most notably in the case of Kurdish refugees fleeing
from northern Iraq in 1991 (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
1991). In other situations, the ability to deliver materials efficiently and

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

26

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

rapidly has meant that the military was called on to deliver assistance,
despite the typically high cost of the military. Furthermore, there is increasing interaction between military and civilian aid workers in situations where each has more or less different roles but some overlap and a
need to coordinate. Coordination is required between military and both
the NGOs and international (multilateral) organizations (IOs), such as the
UN High Commissioner for Refugees.
Coordination between NGOs and IOs has been and continues to be a
nettlesome issue. Recently, in places like Bosnia, the multiplication of
NGOs and their impact on the local economy and labor force (especially
the professional labor force) has raised deep concerns. It is often the case
that aid workers from more developed countries flood the local labor
market and local specialists are not used to their full potential. This may
mean that relief is more costly than it needs to be and also violates the
current development paradigm of building local capacity.
In other cases, the targeting of aid workers by military or paramilitary
groups raises the need for protection for NGOs in many locations. Guerrilla movements and their increasingly dangerous tactics—often including a lack of respect for human rights, humanitarian principles, and the
Red Cross and NGOs—have made it impossible for NGOs to operate on
their own without protection (Jean, 1993). This makes it even more difficult to provide high-quality relief aid. In this new era of “disengagement
and privatization” by the world’s governments, NGOs are encountering
new responsibilities and risks. They must take control of emergency
situations, because they are often the only organizations who are on the
ground, but they are apt to be ill-equipped to contend with a dangerous
conflict setting (Stein, 2000).
Finally, situations in which a choice must be made between two goods
(or evils) requires some sort of coordinated response. For example, in the
Rwandan case, Hutu forces controlled camps in Zaire, which raised the
possibility that assistance might go to military forces who had committed
genocide, controlled the camps, and planned an armed return to Rwanda.
However, withholding aid meant that civilians in camps controlled by the
military forces would suffer and perhaps die. The question of whether to
give or withhold aid was a difficult one, compounded by the fact that
there were many different NGOs assisting in this area (Goma Epidemiology Group, 1995).
While issues like these have no simple answer, often there is greater
need of field coordination and coordinated response. If there are difficulties in coordination, it can have devastating consequences for refugees
and IDPs, and even for aid workers themselves.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

27

Increasing Attention to the Quality of Relief
Another change in the context of complex emergencies has to do with
setting standards for assistance and protection. International organizations and NGOs have been working to create and implement regulations
for relief aid, especially under the Sphere Project.8 Many NGOs have
joined this project, which focuses on setting minimum standards for aid,
training workers to implement these standards, evaluating assistance programs, and creating accountability. These new trends are helping to ensure that the level and quality of assistance provided in emergency settings is monitored (International Federation of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies, 1998). And standards are critical in continued work to
reduce morbidity and mortality in crisis settings.
These steps are crucial in the new climate of reduced foreign aid
funding. Emergency aid is still high—almost three times its 1990 level—
but within a context of an overall decrease in development aid, crises
continue to flourish (International Federation of the Red Cross and Red
Crescent Societies, 1998). Furthermore, NGOs are under continuous pressure to prove that their funds are being put to work in an efficient and
effective manner to save lives.
A Growing Appreciation of Information Needs
The need for further research and information on complex emergencies is now becoming quite clear to many NGOs, international agencies,
states, donors, and scholars. Several universities around the world have
established centers for research and training on how to deal with crisis
situations. NGOs are forming partnerships with these centers to create
standards, evaluate their own work, and learn new ways to implement
relief efforts more effectively.
Much is already known about mortality in complex emergencies, but
that knowledge is not complete. Much remains unknown about complex
emergencies and issues surrounding appropriate responses, including
ethical issues, management of specific diseases, and understanding how
to treat specific populations. Reproductive health and mental health are

8 “The Sphere Project was launched by a group of humanitarian agencies . . . to develop a
set of universal minimum standards in core areas of humanitarian assistance. The aim of
the Project is to improve the quality of assistance provided to people affected by disasters
and to enhance the accountability of the humanitarian system in disaster response” (Sphere
Project, 2000).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

28

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

two of the most important areas in need of further study (Waldman and
Martone, 1999). In order to improve understanding, response, and assistance to forced migrants, research and collaboration must continue. The
case studies in this volume are an example of a step towards more and
better knowledge of mortality in complex emergencies.
DATA ISSUES
While the international assistance community is confident about the
general course of responses to complex emergencies to reduce mortality
and is beginning to understand the new contexts for complex emergencies, much more still needs to be known about mortality levels and trends
and measurement of them. Why is it important to focus on collecting
good mortality data in emergencies? Approximate data are generally
sufficient for preliminary assessment of a crisis situation and for mobilizing public support and resources. However, as situations develop, the
need for more precise data increases. Relief workers must be able to
better estimate the population’s needs and evaluate their own performance to ensure the best quality relief and the least morbidity and mortality (Reed et al., 1998). Nevertheless, excess mortality data are often the
result of crude attempts to obtain approximate estimates. In addition to
the generally difficult conditions for data collection in ongoing emergencies, there are a number of other issues that hinder the development of
more reliable, comparative data on mortality that would improve the
analysis and understanding of trends in demographic processes among
forced migrants caught in complex emergencies. As Figure 1-9 (in the
Appendix) and the appendix illustrate, even after crises end there is continued uncertainty about the total excess mortality during the crises.
Uniform Protocols for Data Collection
Relief workers, particularly medical personnel, seek the baseline information needed to respond to the most pressing health problems and
develop monitoring systems. However, in the chaotic situation of a complex emergency, these systems are often poorly coordinated and sometimes even duplicate information. Many times, there is no general agreement or protocol on what data to collect or the appropriate methods to
follow to ensure quality, interpretation, and comparability in order to
assess the severity of problems and to provide markers for assessing
progress over time. Field personnel need better systems of data collection
to generate the information they need to plan, even in rudimentary ways,
their response to the specific problems of a complex emergency. It is not
that data collection as it is currently done is without merit. Much knowl-

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

29

edge of mortality in complex emergencies results from such data collection by the medical community. However, questions of quality and comparability retard efforts to accumulate a body of knowledge that would
facilitate sophisticated analysis of the determinants and pace of mortality
change under stressful situations.
Denominators
The estimation of a population at risk in the construction of any demographic rate seems deceptively simple, but unfortunately it is often
wrong and/or the result of compromise. In emergency situations, the
basic estimation of the total number of refugees, which is needed to construct even a crude mortality rate, is elusive. The difficult conditions of
emergency situations can make producing even rudimentary estimates
an extreme challenge (see appendix). In addition, there are several specific reasons for population overestimation in crises. The leaders of displaced persons may try to hide those who are not legitimate refugees
(those who have been involved in war crimes or military operations) in
with the rest of the displaced population and thus inflate the numbers.
Refugees may also try to register themselves more than once in order to
gain more food rations. Out-migrations and deaths may also be
underreported for the same reasons. When refugees are located within a
host country community, local residents may register as refugees in order
to obtain food and medical aid. Finally, refugee events are quite fluid and
change rapidly.
On the other hand, refugee and displaced populations may be underestimated for a variety of reasons. Refugees who are self-settled among
local populations may be difficult to count because they are hidden or
continue to be on the move. If relief workers are not permitted access to
the populations, then they are likely to misestimate their numbers. Those
who are sick, impoverished, or malnourished may be hidden or cut off
from the rest of the group and therefore not counted.
Thus, estimates of the same events taken from different sources often
vary greatly. Perhaps the most familiar example of this is the different
population estimates of the Rwandan refugees in Goma, Zaire, in 1994.
Estimates from different agencies and NGOs ranged from 500,000 to
800,000, making it impossible to determine the mortality rate with any
accuracy (Goma Epidemiology Group, 1995). In many situations, therefore, even if there is confidence in the estimated number of deaths, it is not
a foregone conclusion that one can estimate the mortality rate with any
confidence in the result (see also the case studies on Afghanistan and
North Korea in the appendix).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

30

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

Composition of Denominators
Even more demanding than estimating the total population is obtaining information on the composition of a given population. Of special
interest in the study of mortality is age composition because of the vulnerability of children less than five years of age in developing countries. This
age group is vulnerable even under normal circumstances, but much more
so in situations of conflict, violence, and displacement (Davis, 1996). The
age composition of a refugee population can have very important effects
on the crude mortality rate. A population with a higher proportion of
young children and elderly (like many developing country populations)
will probably have a higher crude mortality rate than a population with a
middle-aged distribution, because children under five years of age will
probably experience higher mortality rates. Whether mortality is “excess” or not and why mortality is “elevated” are both a function of a
population’s age composition. This is a problem in many emergencies
because only crude mortality rates are collected and therefore nothing is
known about age- and sex-specific mortality rates. Even when age-specific mortality rates are known, they are generally only broken down into
two categories: children under five years of age and others, which does
not permit careful analysis.
Thus, age composition may explain some “excess” mortality. However, as noted above, if large proportions of children under the age of five,
who may be over-represented in the refugee population, die in the early
stages of a complex emergency, then the converse of excess mortality may
occur. It is possible that the remaining population might appear to have
lower than normal mortality because of the age composition of the surviving population. Heavy loss of vulnerable populations in an acute
phase of an emergency, followed by the availability of assistance (including some assistance elements, such as vaccinations, that may not normally be available), may result in mortality levels for survivors that are
significantly lower than those in the pre-emergency situation. There are
various scenarios about the effects of early deaths on different groups
within various populations that may affect subsequent mortality patterns.
What is lacking is systematic data on these situations and analysis of
mortality patterns within different populations.
In short, mortality rates in all emergencies should be standardized for
age and sex, which requires some ability to decompose the population by
these characteristics. If this is not done, then reliance on crude mortality
rates as the major indicator of the severity of a complex emergency can
lead to incorrect conclusions.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

31

Collecting Mortality Data
There are many ways to collect mortality data in refugee settings,
including burial site surveillance, collecting information from hospital
and burial records, community-based reporting systems, and population
surveys. However, none of these methods is flawless. Some of the reasons why data may be inaccurate are:
• Poorly representative population sample surveys;
• Failure of families to report all deaths for fear of losing food ration
entitlements;
• Inaccurate estimates of affected populations for the purpose of calculating mortality rates; and
• Lack of standard reporting procedures (Toole and Waldman, 1997:
287).
Mortality rates are often underestimated because of deaths being
undercounted and populations being overestimated. Secure and wellorganized refugee camps seem to have generally produced the best estimates, while it is very difficult to get good mortality data on scattered
populations and internally displaced persons. Mortality may be skewed
in one direction or another because those with the highest risk of death
are drawn to camps where there is food and medical attention or because those with the highest risk of death are in areas with the least
access to the relief aid (Toole and Waldman, 1997). It is very difficult to
compare mortality survey results from different settings because of the
huge variation in methods. In Somalia between 1991 and 1993, 23 field
surveys were found to have extreme differences in populations, sampling methods, units of analysis, computation of rates, and analysis techniques (Boss et al., 1994). However, it is hoped that efforts like the
Sphere Project will increase the comparability between data from different settings.
Sampling
Sampling is the process whereby researchers determine a subset of
the population under study from which to collect data that will hopefully
be representative of the entire population. If the sample is properly
drawn, then one should be able to make inferences about a population
based on the characteristics of a sample. Although sampling is already a
challenging enterprise under normal circumstances, in complex emergencies and refugee settings, it becomes even more difficult. In addition to
“normal” issues that may bias the sample, because the total population is

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

32

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

often unknown and unreachable, it is very difficult to obtain a representative and unbiased sample in an emergency setting.
Again, the major bias of current knowledge of demographic processes
among refugee and internally displaced populations is the heavy reliance
on information gathered from populations in camps. This is because of
the relative ease of sampling and collecting data in a camp setting, where
the sampling frame, or total population, is known, or area samples of a
confined population are used. However, some scholars have argued that
over 60 percent of Africa’s refugees do not reside in camps; they live
among the population in host countries (Harrell-Bond, 1994; Van Damme,
1995). What is known about refugee mortality may not hold true for noncamp populations. The reality is that the potential differences between
these two populations are unknown because most information comes
from camp situations where refugees are collectively aided by relief and
protection agencies.
Furthermore, because estimates of the total size of a refugee population are so difficult to obtain, any attempts to sample from this more or
less unknown universe become problematic. Sampling can move from a
concern with population parameters to sampling geographically or spatially. In camp settings, such approaches have been implemented by
dividing space into coordinated blocks and collecting data within specific
blocks or sampling areas (Médecins Sans Frontières, 1997). In non-camp
settings, such techniques are less useful unless one has knowledge of the
spatial distribution of refugees among the host population. Therefore,
other nonrandom sampling methods, such as snowball sampling, where
one finds one refugee who then identifies other refugees to be included in
the sample, must be used. However, these types of sampling techniques
often mean that some refugees and demographic events, like deaths, may
be missed.
Recall
The effect of the experience of a complex emergency on people’s ability
to recall events, and whether it is more of an issue than in normal situations,
is unknown. Depending on specific cultural beliefs about death, psychosocial trauma, and other issues, it may be quite difficult to get an accurate
estimate of mortality based on a population survey in an emergency setting. The impact of recall on monitoring and surveillance is not trivial
because it is important in trying to develop baseline parameters.
Issues of data quality, interpretation, and methodology are not limited to those mentioned above. These are examples of issues that come up
again and again in discussions of mortality patterns in complex emergencies. In many published papers, there is only a brief allusion in the form

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

33

of a caveat for interpretation of data. Progress in understanding levels,
trends, patterns, determinants, and consequences of mortality in complex
emergencies requires attention to these technical issues from demographers, epidemiologists, and statisticians. Although the issues may seem
sterile and esoteric, they have a large impact on what is known and consequently how relief workers are likely to respond to crisis situations.
OVERVIEW OF THE VOLUME
This introduction covers a broad amount of territory about information on mortality in complex emergencies and related data issues. It
provides a basic overview of the state of knowledge, the gaps that need
attention, and aspects of the social and operational situation that affect
data collection, interpretation, and application. The case studies in this
volume look at the specific examples of Rwanda, Kosovo, North Korea,
and Cambodia. These case studies are drawn from four different regions
and examine four different types of crises. They try to provide a best
estimate of what we know but also illustrate concretely the issues reviewed above and the need for progress in the knowledge base used to
address complex emergencies.
In the first case study, Dominique Legros, Christopher Paquet, and
Pierre Nabeth describe the flight of Rwandan refugees into the forests of
Eastern Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) and discuss
mortality at various stages of the forced migration that occurred following the 1994 genocide. Using a combination of surveillance systems and
retrospective mortality surveys, they estimate mortality rates for the same
refugee population at four different points in time and in four different
geographic locations. The pattern that emerges is quite disturbing; by the
final estimation, only about 20 percent of the original refugee population
remained and the rest were either dead or missing. The authors also
discuss the merits and drawbacks of both mortality estimation methods.
Brent Burkholder, Paul Spiegel, and Peter Salama examine these same
methods—surveillance and retrospective surveys—in an entirely different population: Albanian Kosovar refugees in March to June 1999. One
set of data was collected from surveillance systems that were operational
in refuge areas in Albania and the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia (FYROM) during the refugee crisis. The second data set was
collected in Kosovo in September 1999, after the majority of the refugees
had returned home. The authors compare and contrast the results of
these two efforts and find that overall mortality in the Kosovo crisis was
relatively low. The different nature of the populations and the crisis in a
more developed region raises several methodological issues about esti-

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

34

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

mating mortality, such as the importance of chronic diseases, reproductive health, and psychosocial trauma.
In the third case study, Court Robinson, Myung Lee, Ken Hill, and
Gilbert Burnham use indirect estimation techniques to estimate mortality
rates among an isolated population suffering from famine: North Korea.
By interviewing North Korean migrants who crossed the border into
China in search of food about their own household experiences and the
experiences of a sibling, nonmigrant household, they were able to estimate mortality rates. Although the sample is not representative, the study
gives insight into what is happening inside North Korea.
The final case was not originally presented at the workshop, but commissioned afterwards. Patrick Heuveline describes a variety of data
sources and techniques that can be used to estimate the total excess mortality during the Cambodian crisis of 1975 to 1979. Survey and census
data are discussed, but ultimately the focus is again on indirect estimation
techniques, including demographic projection methods to attempt to estimate total excess mortality and decomposition methods to get at age- and
cause-specific mortality.
Finally, in his reflections on the four case studies, Manuel Carballo
ponders the difficulty and necessity of collecting statistics in emergency
situations. He reminds practitioners and researchers alike that each crisis
is a unique event and must be understood not only on the basis of its
similarities to other events, but on the basis of its specificity.
NEXT STEPS
What are some potential topics for future research on these issues?
There are many issues that researchers and practitioners should examine
as they continue to work on understanding mortality patterns in complex
emergencies:
• Increase and improve the collection of data by age, sex, and other
characteristics in complex emergencies to enhance our understanding of mortality patterns for population subgroups;
• Examine mortality patterns by age group and compare these patterns to those of populations that are not in crisis;
• Improve techniques for the evaluation of humanitarian interventions by NGOs and other aid organizations;
• Improve our understanding of the long-term consequences of complex emergencies on morbidity and mortality, including psychosocial and reproductive health; and
• Document, compare and validate methods for rapid assessment
techniques in emergencies.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

35

These are only a few of the potential research and data needs for
learning more about mortality in complex emergencies. The volume signifies an increased appreciation of the need for data and the shallowness
of the knowledge base about demographic processes among displaced
populations. In addition to continued research on mortality, topics such
as information on reproductive health and fertility and mental illness are
beginning to be studied in forced migrant populations. Perhaps with a
new appreciation of the utility of this information, more attention will be
given to improving the quality of research on refugees and IDPs. With
improved data and analysis, policies and programs can be created and
adjusted accordingly to best assist forced migrants in each situation.
REFERENCES
Abiri, E.
2000 The securitisation of migration. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Peace and Development Research, Gothenburg University.
Boss, L.P., M.J. Toole, and R. Yip
1994 Assessments of mortality, morbidity, and nutritional status in Somalia during the
1991-1992 famine. Journal of the American Medical Association 272:371-376.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
1990 Update: Health and nutritional profiles of refugees—Ethiopia, 1989-1990. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 39:707-709, 715-718.
1991 Public health consequences of acute displacement of Iraqi citizens, March-May
1991. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 40(26):443-446.
1992 Famine-affected, refugee, and displaced populations: Recommendations for public health issues. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 41:RR-13.
1993a Mortality among newly arrived Mozambican refugees: Zimbabwe and Malawi,
1992. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 42:468-469, 475-477.
1993b Status of public health: Bosnia and Herzegovina, August-September 1993. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 42:973, 979-982.
Coale, A.J., P. Demeny, and B. Vaughan
1983 Regional Model Life Tables and Stable Populations, 2nd edition. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press, Inc.
Cohen, R.
1998 Recent trends in protection and assistance for IDPs. Pp. 3-9 in J. Hampton, ed.,
Internally Displaced People: A Global Survey. London: Earthscan Publications, Global IDP Survey, and Norwegian Refugee Council.
Davis, A.P.
1996 Targeting the vulnerable in emergency situations: Who is vulnerable? Lancet
348:868-871.
Elias, C.J., B.H. Alexander, and T. Sokly
1990 Infectious disease control in a long-term refugee camp: The role of epidemiologic
surveillance and investigation. American Journal of Public Health 80(7):824-828.
Goma Epidemiology Group
1995 Public health impact of Rwandan refugee crisis. What happened in Goma, Zaire,
in July 1994? Lancet 345:339-344.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

36

MORTALITY PATTERNS IN COMPLEX HUMANITARIAN EMERGENCIES

Hansch, S.
1999 The Evolution of Mortality Patterns in Complex Emergencies. Unpublished paper
presented at Workshop on Mortality Patterns in Complex Emergencies, National
Academy of Sciences, November 19, 1999, Washington, D.C.
Harrell-Bond, B.
1994 Pitch the tents. The New Republic September 19-26.
International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
1998 World Disasters Report 1998. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Jean, F., ed.
1993 Life, Death, and Aid: The Médecins Sans Frontières Report on World Crisis Intervention.
London and New York: Routledge.
Kushner, T., and K. Knox
1999 Refugees in an Age of Genocide: Global, National, and Local Perspectives during the
Twentieth Century. London: Frank Cass.
Médecins Sans Frontières
1997 Refugee Health: An Approach to Emergency Situations. London: Macmillan.
Moore, P.S., A.A. Marfin, L.E. Quenemoen, B.D. Gessner, and Y.S. Ayub
1993 Mortality rates in displaced and resident populations of Central Somalia during
the famine of 1992. Lancet 341:935-938.
Natsios, A.S.
1997 U.S. Foreign Policy and the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse: Humanitarian Relief in
Complex Emergencies. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers and the Center for Strategic and International Studies.
Newland, K.
1999 The decade in review. Pp. 14-21 in World Refugee Survey 1999. Washington, D.C.:
Immigration and Refugee Services of America.
Noji, E.K., ed.
1997 The Public Health Consequences of Disasters. New York: Oxford University Press.
Person-Karell, B.
1989 The relationship between child malnutrition and crude mortality among 42 refugee populations. Unpublished master’s thesis. Atlanta, GA: Emory University.
Population Reference Bureau
2000 World Population Data Sheet. Washington, DC: Population Reference Bureau.
Reed, H., J. Haaga, and C. Keely, eds.
1998 The Demography of Forced Migration: Summary of a Workshop. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Rogers, R., and E. Copeland
1993 Forced Migration: Policy Issues in the Post-Cold War World. Medford, MA: Tufts
University.
Shryock, H.S., J.S. Siegel, and associates
1976 The Methods and Materials of Demography. Condensed edition by Edward G.
Stockwell. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Sphere Project
2000 Humanitarian Charter and Minimum Standards in Disaster Response. [Online]. Available: http://www.sphereproject.org [December 19, 2000].
Stein, J.G.
2000 New challenges to conflict resolution: Humanitarian nongovernmental organizations in complex emergencies. Pp. 383-419 in International Conflict Resolution After
the Cold War. Committee on International Conflict Resolution, Paul C. Stern and
Daniel Druckman, eds. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

CHARLES B. KEELY, HOLLY E. REED, AND RONALD J. WALDMAN

37

Toole, M.J., and R. Bhatia
1992 A case study of Somali refugees in Hartisheik A camp, eastern Ethiopia: Health
and nutrition profile, July 1988-June 1989. Journal of Refugee Studies 5:313-326.
Toole, M.J., S. Galson, and W. Brady
1993 Are war and public health compatible? Lancet 341:935-938.
Toole, M.J., R.J. Steketee, R.J. Waldman, and P. Nieburg
1989 Measles prevention and control in emergency settings. Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 67:381-388.
Toole, M.J., and R.J. Waldman
1988 An analysis of mortality trends among refugee populations in Somalia, Sudan,
and Thailand. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 66(2):237-247.
1990 Prevention of excess mortality in refugee and displaced populations in developing countries. Journal of the American Medical Association 263:3296-3302.
1997 The public health aspects of complex emergencies and refugee situations. Annual
Review of Public Health 18:283-312.
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
2000 Refugees and Others of Concern to UNHCR: 1999 Statistical Overview. Geneva: Registration and Statistical Unit, Programme Coordination Section, United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.
United States Committee for Refugees
2000 World Refugee Survey 2000. Washington, DC: Immigration and Refugee Services
of America.
Van Damme, W.
1995 Do refugees belong in camps? Experiences from Goma and Guinea. Lancet
346:360-362.
Wæver, O., B. Buzan, M. Kelstrup, and P. Lemaitre
1993 Identity, Migration, and the New Security Agenda in Europe. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.
Waldman, R., and G. Martone
1999 Public health and complex emergencies: New issues, new conditions. American
Journal of Public Health 89(10):1483-1485.
Watson, F., I. Kulenovic, and J. Vespa
1995 Nutritional status and food security: Winter nutrition monitoring in Sarajevo,
1993-1994. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 49:S23-S32.
World Bank
1991 World Development Report 1991: The Challenge of Development. New York: Oxford
University Press.
1992 World Development Report 1992: Development and the Environment. New York: Oxford University Press.
1994 World Development Report 1994: Infrastructure for Development. New York: Oxford
University Press.
1995 World Development Report 1995: Workers in an Integrating World. New York: Oxford University Press.
1996 World Development Report 1996: From Plan to Market. New York: Oxford University Press.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

APPENDIX: FIVE ILLUSTRATIONS OF UNCERTAINTY:
MORTALITY IN AFGHANISTAN, BOSNIA, NORTH KOREA,
RWANDA, AND SIERRA LEONE

Steven Hansch
This appendix presents short narratives of five countries that have
experienced recent conflict, in which data on mortality are difficult to
ascertain. They are included as a kind of rough overview on how general
estimates of mortality are generated in emergencies, rather than a scientific study of mortality estimation in these settings. This is done in order
to give readers a sense of the real difficulties of data collection and analyzing the many different estimates that are produced in situations involving
conflict and forced migration. Five cases are presented:
•
•
•
•
•

Afghanistan in the 1980s and 1990s,
Bosnia-Herzegovina during the period of civil conflict, 1992-1995,
North Korea during its famine crisis of 1995-1998,
Rwanda during the year of genocide in 1994, and
Sierra Leone from 1992 to 1998.

In each case, evidence is culled from a variety of sources, including
interviews, published literature, news wires, and firsthand observations.
In many cases, the data provide only indirect, circumstantial, or limited
views of the mortality pattern, and at times the data were drawn from
points in time outside the periods of interest. Each case begins with a brief
discussion of the situation, followed by evidence for and conclusions
about the estimates of excess mortality. Finally, there is a review of mortality risk factors in each setting. Figure 1-9 shows the range of estimates
of excess mortality for each of these five complex emergencies.
AFGHANISTAN
Afghanistan has suffered cyclical conflict, displacement, massacres,
food insecurity, epidemics, collapsed health services, and earthquakes
since the 1970s. During this period, virtually no international aid organizations have been able to observe conditions in much of the country,
although groups like International Medical Corps (IMC), CARE, and Save
the Children have had periodic access to Kabul and the eastern districts.
Afghanistan’s reported population of 24.8 million is therefore very difficult to confirm, and in any case, millions of Afghan citizens continue to

38

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

39

STEVEN HANSCH
3,500

Total number dead (thousands)

3,000

2,500

2,000

1,500

1,000

500

0
Crisis

FIGURE 1–9
gencies.

Afghanistan

Bosnia

North Korea

Rwanda

Sierra Leone

Range of mortality estimates in five complex humanitarian emer-

live in Iran or in refugee camps in Pakistan, where many of them fled
during the conflict with the Soviet Union that began in 1979.
Evidence of Mortality
Inside Afghanistan
The war in Kabul in 1993 reportedly led to 23,000 deaths, and fighting
in the north during the mid- and late 1990s led to numerous massacres
and disappearances. Indiscriminate shelling during 1994 and the first
three months of 1995 killed 13,000 people, injured 50,000, and left the city
without water or electricity (Cohen, 1996). In 1993, Médecins Sans
Frontières (MSF) conducted a retrospective, population-based, household
survey of 600 families in Kabul and found a crude mortality rate between
0.5 and 1.0. Mortality was highest among those who had lived in Kabul
for a long time and was usually due to gunshot wound. For children,
however, deaths were due to measles, diarrhea, and acute respiratory
tract infections (Gessner, 1994).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

40

APPENDIX: FIVE ILLUSTRATIONS OF UNCERTAINTY

Refugee Camps in Pakistan
Media coverage during the conflict with the Soviet Union characterized the refugees as poor, desperate, hungry, and ill. Due to political
stakes and the media coverage, most Westerners believed that the refugees were living in terrible conditions.
Upon review, however, there was never any substantial excess mortality in the camps. One relief coordinator for Oxfam (a nongovernmental
organization) reported that “The refugee camps themselves were relatively free of any of the problems inside Afghanistan itself. Also, as time
went on, Afghans in the North-West Frontier Province began quite rapidly to find employment; there was very little evidence of malnutrition in
the camps” (Bennett, 1999). In some camps, however, child mortality
was high, particularly in the southern refugee camps, in Queta Province,
due to the failure to immunize the children (Boss et al., 1986).
Estimates of Excess Mortality
The last 20 or more years have been a period of political and social
disintegration characterized by ongoing mass migration, arms trade, and
rule of law at gunpoint. An entire generation has grown up in Afghanistan knowing nothing but conflict; there is no clear baseline mortality rate
and no discrete event or disaster period to contrast to other periods. Many
sources refer to relatively high numbers of casualties (Sliwinski, 1988;
Khalidi, 1991). Wallensteen and Sollenberg (1998) report yearly estimates
of casualty figures in the annual surveys of conflict. But total excess
mortality is unknown; it could lie anywhere between 200,000 and 2 million.
Mortality Risk Factors
Mortality risk factors in Afghanistan include landmines, communicable diseases, food insecurity, and natural disasters.
Afghanistan is one of the more heavily mined countries in the world,
with ongoing risk from one landmine per person and over 10,000
landmine victims (Lindenberg, 1999). In some areas, it is likely that a high
proportion of deaths is attributable to landmines. However, most
landmine injury surveillance comes from hospital reporting, which underestimates those persons killed immediately by the blast (McDiarmid,
1995; Andersson et al., 1995; Coupland, 1991). Landmine injuries tend to
affect men more than women, and adolescents and young adults more
than other age groups.
Communicable diseases account for most of the excess mortality in

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

41

STEVEN HANSCH

areas outside of immediate combat zones. Among children seen in a
Kabul hospital, half of all deaths were related to diarrhea, and two-thirds
of all patients seen were malnourished (Choudhry et al., 1989). A recent
report from Jalalabad finds that roughly half of hospital cases are related
in one way or another to either malaria or typhoid (Pilsczek, 1996).
In 1987, the main concern of humanitarian aid agencies in Afghanistan was food security, especially given large projected returns of refugees to central and southern provinces. However, there are very few data
on food insecurity inside Afghanistan.
In addition to these other factors, Afghanistan has high excess mortality due to natural disasters. One of two earthquakes that occurred in 1998
resulted in 5,000 deaths (Ivker, 1990; International Federation of the Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 1999).
BOSNIA-HERZEGOVINA
In spring 1992, Serbian forces attacked Sarajevo, and thus began a war
for Bosnia-Herzegovina, which had a population of approximately 4.5
million. During the war, roughly 3 million people became refugees; estimates of internally displaced persons inside Bosnia were around 1.2 million. The Serbs laid siege to Sarajevo, cut it off from outside contact, and
began bombing and sniping at civilians in 1993.
Evidence of Mortality
Some sample surveys have shown episodes of high mortality from
various causes, mostly killing: a survey by MSF-Netherlands in April
1993 found a crude mortality rate of 2.3. The event causing the largest
excess mortality of the Bosnia crisis took place in Srebrenica in 1995, when
an estimated 7,300 to 8,000 men (out of an overall civilian population of
40,000) were captured, disappeared, and murdered. While the event itself was widely discussed, the true number of missing men has not been
precisely estimated. These deaths were not combat-related: they were
executions, for which the principal risk factor was being an adult Muslim
male resident of the city.
The International Committee for the Red Cross (ICRC) established a
database of persons reported missing to help disrupted families. Of the
20,000 persons on the list, several hundred have been found, but it is
widely believed that most of the 20,000 who remain missing are dead. The
Bosnia State Commission on Missing Persons estimates that 28,000 are
missing.
Forensics research has been extremely valuable in reconstructing patterns of adult mortality in Bosnia. Between 1995 and 1998, approximately

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

42

APPENDIX: FIVE ILLUSTRATIONS OF UNCERTAINTY

400 mass graves were identified, each holding between 3 and 300 dead
bodies. Various groups working on exhumations are collaborating with
the efforts to trace missing persons, including Physicians for Human
Rights, a U.S. nongovernmental organization (NGO), and the International Crimes Tribunal for Yugoslavia (ICTY). It is difficult to estimate the
true number of mass graves, but there is reason to believe that there may
be as many as 600.
Estimates of Excess Mortality
Total excess mortality from diseases, urban massacres, disappearances, and battles adds up to about 60,000 to 80,000 deaths, yet estimates
of 150,000 to 200,000 deaths have been given credence by some policy
makers (Médecins Sans Frontières, 1995). These high estimates are based
on the assumption that non-Muslim deaths totaled no more than 10,000,
which may be a questionable premise.
The high-end estimate of 200,000 originates from the Bosnian government itself and was taken up by other groups, such as the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), in order to draw world attention to Bosnia. In late 1993, the United Nations estimated that some
230,000 persons were either dead or missing (Minear et al., 1994). Some
government analysts also estimated very high mortality: in November
1995, the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency estimated 156,000 civilian
deaths (Borden and Caplan, 1996). George Kenney, an U.S. Department
of State official involved in the Bosnia crisis, has challenged these estimates. Kenney argued that mortality was substantially lower, based on
Red Cross and other international agency estimates (Kenney, 1995). NGO
aid workers, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, and the Stockholm
International Peace Research Institute generally support his figure of
25,000 to 60,000. Within the U.S. Department of Defense, there is disagreement about the best estimate, but it ranges from 70,000 to 95,000, which is
closer to Kenney’s original 1995 estimate.
Mortality Risk Factors
The main risk factors have been exposure to battle conditions and
gunshots (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1993). Violent
trauma accounted for 15 percent of total morbidity, 56 percent of total
mortality, and affected two-thirds of the civilian population.
By and large, communicable diseases, chronic diseases, and malnutrition did not cause substantial numbers of deaths, although simply being
in a hospital may have been correlated with mortality, since hospitals
were bombed during intense fighting in the town of Mostar (Horton,

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

43

STEVEN HANSCH

1999). When Serbs shelled the Gorazde hospital in April 1994, 700 were
reported killed (Cohen, 1998).
The availability of field hospitals appears to make a large difference in
the survival of the battle-wounded in settings like Bosnia (Maricevic and
Erceg, 1997). Approximately 4,000 trauma and surgical cases were seen
during the first 10 months of war in Zenica. While Bosnia had qualified
surgical personnel, the limiting factors were more often lack of power supply in the hospitals, new equipment, and drugs (Pretto et al., 1994).
The main mortality risk factor in Sarajevo was going to the river to
obtain water for household use, because of the danger of getting caught in
sniper fire. Despite efforts by international humanitarian agencies, internally displaced persons received inadequate protection. One observer has
argued that the creation of exclusion zones could have reduced mortality
(Cuny, 1996:209):
In Bosnia, the imposition of a total exclusion zone for heavy weapons
around the besieged capital of Sarajevo in February 1994 had the potential for ending the war. The Serbs were ordered to either withdraw their
weapons or place them in designated weapons collection points within
the zone. Any heavy weapon firing inside the zone would be subject to
air strikes by NATO. The imposition of the zone dramatically altered
the strategic picture by denying the Serbs the ability to capture the capital. Had similar zones been placed around other Bosnian cities, the
fighting might have ended.

NORTH KOREA
North Korea (the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea) has been
isolated since the fall of the Soviet Union and therefore very vulnerable
during times of crisis. Between 1992 and 1995, government food ration
distributions were drastically curtailed to citizens in the northeastern
provinces. In 1995, after 23 inches of rain fell during 10 days in July and
August, North Korea declared a disaster and appealed for international
food aid while it repaired its damaged agriculture and infrastructure.
This was an unusual shift for the government, which had previously
resisted admission of need or failure. A year later, a drought hit the
country, leading to an even greater need for foreign aid.
The peak of North Korea’s famine appears to have been in late 1996
and early 1997, and international food aid grew during those years, peaking in 1998. It appeared to save large numbers of lives. International aid,
including over a million tons of food from China, and several million tons
of food from the World Food Program and the United States, permitted
new observers to enter North Korea for the first time in decades.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

44

APPENDIX: FIVE ILLUSTRATIONS OF UNCERTAINTY

Evidence of Mortality
Mortality estimates in North Korea are prone to many potential biases, including:
• Observational bias related to lack of access to the population by
independent authorities and international aid workers;
• Observational bias related to the intrinsic invisibility of high-risk
individuals: many manifestations of poverty, malnutrition and
related mortality tend to be hidden;
• Observational bias related to the areas where aid workers work:
this can also lead to over-reporting because of biases on the part of
aid workers;
• Time-frame validity: this may be due to mis-reporting of dates by
individuals or purposeful mis-reporting of dates by governments;
• Construct validity: it is difficult to define deaths due only to famine because of intervening factors;
• Reporting bias for political reasons: this may be mis-reporting by
the government, by civilians, or by refugees; or
• Sampling bias because of the use of data from refugees from North
Korea: refugees who have fled North Korea are more likely to be
fleeing from situations in which crisis is more intense, the risk of
death is higher, and, statistically, more deaths have occurred.
Estimates of Excess Mortality
Estimates of mortality due to famine in North Korea come from a
number of sources. The government of South Korea recently estimated
that 2 million North Koreans have died due to the crisis. The North Korean government’s official estimates are that 220,000 deaths have occurred.
One recent study indicates that mortality peaked in 1997, with a crude
mortality rate of 56.0 deaths per 1,000 population per year. The average
rate over three years (1995 to 1997) was 43.0 (Robinson et al., 1999). This
research is the strongest evidence to date of confirmed mortality in North
Korea, although it represents only one geographic portion of the country.
Since 20 deaths per 1,000 per year would be normal for a country like
North Korea, a three-year average rate of 43 implies excess mortality of
about 23 per 1,000 during this period, or net 69 deaths per 1,000 population. If this is representative of about one-third of North Korea’s total
population, this would translate to approximately 450,000 excess deaths.
Over the last two years, World Vision and the Korean community in
the United States have publicized interviews conducted by Buddhist
monks of refugees fleeing North Korea into South Korea, coming up with

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

45

STEVEN HANSCH

estimates of closer to 3 million deaths. These groups may have political
motives for overestimating mortality, however.
Another key report is by former U.S. disaster coordinator Andrew
Natsios (1999). Applying the mortality rates derived by Robinson et al.
(1999) to the general population, he concludes that roughly 2.4 million
people died. This high-end estimate is apparently based on an arbitrary
extrapolation, however, and may be very unrealistic.
Mortality Risk Factors
The clearest cause of mortality in famines is wasting malnutrition,
and this is certainly the case in North Korea. In 1998, the European
Union, the World Food Programme (WFP), the United Nations Children’s
Fund (UNICEF), and Save the Children, working with UNHCR, estimated
food insecurity malnutrition in North Korea. Their surveys, conducted at
the end of the famine, found moderate levels of malnutrition that would
not lead to high future mortality rates (16 percent moderately or severely
malnourished) (European Union et al., 1998). They also suggest that death
rates had not been very high until then.
According to Natsios (1999), mortality was lower among many small
farmers who cultivated secret gardens, strategically pre-harvesting some
grain crops for surreptitious grain stores to help their families survive.
The only other groups with direct availability to crops are the military,
who have become involved both in monitoring and in helping with agricultural production.
Extrapolating from similar crises in other countries, it is highly likely
that excess mortality is disproportionately higher for young children, especially girls, the elderly, those working in service professions (outside
the government and the military), and those living in remote areas and
northern provinces.
RWANDA
After years of simmering tensions between Hutu and Tutsi ethnic
groups, Rwanda erupted in the early 1990s, when civil conflict flared after
Tutsi army incursions from Uganda, leading to the displacement of
900,000 people due to the 1993 fighting. In 1994, the worst genocide in
recent times took place, followed by retribution killings of civilians, by
excess mortality in refugee camps related to poor health, and ongoing
battles with internally displaced persons inside Rwanda. The largest
share of excess mortality, however, was due to the systematic campaign
of ethnic cleansing by the ruling Hutu government prior to April 1994.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

46

APPENDIX: FIVE ILLUSTRATIONS OF UNCERTAINTY

Evidence of Mortality
Throughout Rwanda
The killings in Rwanda took place across the country all at once, but
the lines of population displacement proceeded in a wave following the
progress of the Tutsi forces, who streamed southward from Uganda. Most
of the deaths from the crisis occurred in a short span of 10 weeks in 1994,
and most resulted from one-on-one attacks by Hutu villagers against their
neighbors, most often with machetes (Prunier, 1995). ICRC and MSF
estimated during the early phases of the genocide that 200,000 were killed
in the first three to four weeks. The estimated number of deaths after six
weeks was 500,000 (Weiss, 1999). However, these estimates are highly
speculative.
In the Camps
Very high excess mortality occurred in the Rwandan refugee camps,
but only briefly and only in one area: 35,000 in approximately one week in
July 1994 in the camps based around Goma, due to cholera. During the
first month, approximately 50,000 died in North Kivu (Goma Epidemiology Group, 1995). And 40,000 deaths were reported by the gravediggers.
Later, when these same refugees were forcibly returned to Rwanda in
1996, there was another cholera outbreak affecting 10,000, with only 46
deaths (Brown et al., 1996).
The highest death rate for a defined sub-population was among refugee children who matriculated into centers of care for unaccompanied
minors (who were assumed to be mostly orphans, but were at least dislocated from their families). Their mortality was up to 80 times above
baseline (Dowell et al., 1995).
Estimates of Excess Mortality
The UN has estimated that 800,000 died. But the most recent report of
Human Rights Watch (HRW) argues that this estimate is high because it
includes non-genocide causes (Des Forges, 1999). HRW estimates range
from 500,000 to 600,000 genocide-specific mortality. Africa Rights (an
NGO) estimates that the genocide totaled 750,000 deaths in Rwanda,
based on strong evidence of mass executions, but this estimate may be
biased by the personal interest of the authors (Omaar and de Waal, 1994).
When one adds in all the collateral deaths related to the complex emergency, however, the total excess mortality for the period is around 750,000.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

47

STEVEN HANSCH

Mortality Risk Factors
Rwanda was a very complex emergency with many mortality risks.
Most of the deaths occurred in three sub-populations:
• Tutsi civilians residing in Rwanda, particularly those in the north
and public officials;
• Resident Hutus who were not part of the Interhamwe (the Hutu
militia group who massacred Tutsis) but were suspect of allegiance to the
Forces Armées Rwandaises (FAR), the former Rwandan army, in mid1994, when retribution killings occurred, and in 1995, when internally
displaced persons were subject to intolerance; and
• Refugees in North Kivu who were subject to a combination of
shigella, cholera, dehydration, and malnutrition.
SIERRA LEONE
Civil conflict began in Sierra Leone in 1991 and has been heavily
influenced by spillover from the ongoing conflict in Liberia. In general,
the war has pitted the democratic government against Revolutionary
Unity Front (RUF) rebels, backed by Charles Taylor’s militia in Liberia.
The course of recent events has been greatly determined by the military
intervention of West African peacekeeping troops (ECOMOG). However, despite a supposed peace agreement that the elected government of
Sierra Leone and rebels signed in 1999, fighting continues and the situation has not improved.
Evidence of Mortality
The conflict in Sierra Leone began in 1991. By the time of the 1992
coup d’etat, there were outbreaks of pertussis (whooping cough) and
measles, and floods destroyed food crops. By the mid-1990s, half a million persons were displaced. Approximately 700,000 of Sierra Leone’s
population of 5 million are believed to have been internally displaced,
particularly during 1998-1999, and 440,000 refugees have crossed the borders into Guinea and Liberia.
Prior to the hostilities, Sierra Leone already had the highest mortality
rates in the world. Until recently, few NGOs had a presence in Sierra
Leone, Africare being an exception. Today NGOs in Sierra Leone have
unusually good coordination, and data is well shared. So estimates of
mortality from the capital and major IDP areas (5,000-10,000 deaths) are
fairly robust. Data from the hinterland and refugee camps, however,

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

48

APPENDIX: FIVE ILLUSTRATIONS OF UNCERTAINTY

must be surmised. Estimates range from 20,000 to 50,000 additional
deaths during the 1990s.
Estimates of Excess Mortality
Much of the killing, terrorism, and mortality secondary to forced displacement is unseen and, therefore, unrecorded and underestimated. The
U.S. Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance (OFDA) has said it is impossible to make any estimates of mortality, reflecting the large gaps in information about most of the affected population. Nevertheless, its official
situation report states that fighting in the 1990s has claimed at least 20,000
lives (Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance, 1999). Because this figure is
not based on any review of the primary health care problems that followed the state collapse, forced migration, malnutrition, and economic
damage, it is probably substantially inaccurate and an underestimate.
Multiple reports indicate that in three weeks in 1999, 5,000 people
were killed in and around Freetown (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 1999b). Thousands of civilians have
been abducted in the movement of armies, and hundreds of children are
missing and presumed to be abducted. It is hard to know what to infer
from this type of disappearance data. As early as 1996, analysts believed
that the war had already led to 25,000 deaths (Reno, 1998). So the true
cumulative excess mortality rate could be at least 35,000 by now.
High rates of malnutrition have been found in northern districts, now
that international agencies have access to these populations (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 1999a). Many
of the estimates of mortality are inferential, however, based on expected
levels of childhood mortality given high rates of malnutrition and diarrhea.
Mortality Risk Factors
Most of the excess mortality is related to malnutrition, diarrhea, and
communicable diseases. Much of the country had good immunization
coverage in the past, and there was an apparent general reduction in
vaccine-preventable diseases as well as diarrheal and respiratory diseases
between the 1970s and early 1990s (Hodges and Williams, 1998).
One health risk that emerged in 1998 in Sierra Leone was limb amputation, perpetrated by rebels as a tactic of terror and retribution. Tens of
thousands of persons have had arms or hands cut off, and no studies have
yet estimated the case fatality rate from these injuries, which is likely to be
substantial.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

49

STEVEN HANSCH

The presence or absence of aid agencies also appears to play a large
role in which groups of people suffer excess mortality. Some of the largest IDP camps benefit from good public health programs by international
NGOs. Where aid agencies had access, they had success in containing a
measles epidemic (e.g., in the towns of Bo and Blama in early 1999).
As in other emergencies (i.e., Somalia and Ethiopia) the effectiveness
of international aid to mitigate excess mortality in Sierra Leone appears to
be cumulative—that is, it is better during the later stages than during the
early stages, when risk of death was highest. Only now are aid agencies
able to set up camps and access populations in need.

REFERENCES
Andersson, N., C. Palha da Sousa, and S. Paredes
1995 Social cost of land mines in four countries: Afghanistan, Bosnia, Cambodia and
Mozambique. British Medical Journal 311: 718-721.
Bennett, J.
1999 Personal communication.
Borden, A., and R. Caplan
1996 The former Yugoslavia: The war and the peace process. P. 203 in SIPRI Yearbook
1996. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Boss, L., E.W. Brink, and T. Dondero
1986 Infant mortality and childhood nutritional status among Afghan refugees in Pakistan. International Journal of Epidemiology 16(4):556-560.
Brown, V., B. Reilley, M. Ferrir, and S. Manoncourt
1996 Cholera outbreak during massive influx of Rwandan returnees in November,
1996. Lancet 349(9046):212.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
1993 Status of public health in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report 973:979-982.
Choudhry, V., I. Fazal, G. Aram, M. Choudhry, L.S. Arya, and M.S. Torpeki
1989 Pattern of preventable diseases in Afghanistan: Suggestions to reduce the morbidity and mortality at IGICH. Indian Pediatrics 26(7):654-659.
Cohen, M.
1996 Afghanistan: Abandoned to Violence, Drugs, Hunger, Disease and Death. Maryland:
Bread for the World.
Cohen, R.
1998 Hearts Grown Brutal: Sagas of Sarajevo. New York: Random House.
Coupland, R.
1991 Injuries from antipersonnel mines: The experience of the International Committee of the Red Cross. British Medical Journal 303:1509-1512.
Cuny, F.C.
1996 Refugees, displaced persons and the United Nations system. Pp. 187-211 in R.
Caynes, and R. Williamson, US Foreign Policy and the United Nations System. New
York: WW Norton.
Des Forges, A.
1999 Leave None to Tell the Story: Genocide in Rwanda. New York: Human Rights Watch.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

50

APPENDIX: FIVE ILLUSTRATIONS OF UNCERTAINTY

Dowell, S., A. Toko, C. Sita, R. Piarroux, A. Duerr, and B. Woodruff
1995 Health and nutrition in centers for unaccompanied children: Experience from the
1994 Rwandan refugee crisis. Journal of the American Medical Association 273:18021806.
European Union, World Food Programme, and United Nations Children’s Fund
1998 Nutrition Survey of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Geneva: European
Union, World Food Programme, and UNICEF.
Gessner, B.
1994 Mortality rates, causes of death, and health status among displaced and resident
populations of Kabul, Afghanistan. Journal of the American Medical Association
272:382-385.
Goma Epidemiology Group
1995 Public health impact of Rwandan refugee crisis: What happened in Goma, Zaire
in July 1994? Lancet 345:339-343.
Hodges, M., and R. Williams
1998 Registered infant and under-five deaths in Freetown, Sierra Leone from 1987-1991
and a comparison with 1969-1979. West African Journal of Medicine 17(2):95-98.
Horton, R.
1999 Croatia and Bosnia: The imprints of war. Lancet 353(9170):2139-2144.
International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
1999 World Disasters Report 1999. Geneva: International Federation of Red Cross and
Red Crescent Societies.
Ivker, R.
1990 United Nations launches aid appeal as Afghanistan faces further disaster. Lancet
351(9101):508.
Kenney, G.
1995 The Bosnian calculation. New York Times Magazine. April 23:42-43.
Khalidi, N.A.
1991 Afghanistan: demographic consequences of war, 1978-1987. Central Asian Survey
10:101-126.
Lindenberg, M.
1999 Complex emergencies and NGOs: The example of CARE. Pp. 211-246 in J. Leaning, S.M. Briggs, and L.C. Chen, eds. Humanitarian Crises: The Medical and Public
Health Response. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Maricevic, A., and M. Erceg
1997 War injuries to the extremities. Military Medicine 162(12):808-811.
McDiarmid, J.
1995 Deaths and injuries caused by landmines. Lancet 346(8983):1167.
Médecins Sans Frontières
1995 Bosnia. In Populations in Danger 1995. Paris: Médecins Sans Frontières.
Minear, L., J. Clark, R. Cohen, D. Gallagher, I. Guest, and T. Weiss
1994 Humanitarian Action in the Former Yugoslavia: The UN’s Role 1991-1993. Occasional
Paper #18. Providence, RI and Washington, DC: Humanitarianism and War
Project and the Refugee Policy Group.
Natsios, A.
1999 The Politics of Famine in North Korea. Washington, DC: U.S. Institute of Peace.
Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance
1999 Sierra Leone Complex Emergency Fact Sheet 17. Washington, DC: U.S. Agency for
International Development, Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance.
Omaar, R., and A. de Waal
1994 Rwanda: Death, Despair and Defiance. London: Africa Rights.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

STEVEN HANSCH

51

Pilsczek, F.
1996 Visiting doctor’s perspective in Afghanistan. Lancet 348(9041):1566-1568.
Pretto, E.A., M. Begovic, and M. Begovic
1994 Emergency medical services during the siege of Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina:
A preliminary report. Pre-hospital and Disaster Medicine 9(2 Suppl 1):S39-S45.
Prunier, G.
1995 The Rwanda Crisis: History of a Genocide. New York: Columbia University Press.
Reno, W.
1998 Warlord Politics and African States. Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner Publishers.
Robinson, C., M. Lee, K. Hill, and G. Burnham
1999 Mortality in North Korean migrant households: A retrospective study. Lancet
354:291-295.
Sliwinski, M.
1988 The decimation of Afghanistan. Orbis 33(Winter):39-56.
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
1999a 1999 Mid-Term Review and Revision of United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for Sierra Leone. New York: Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs.
1999b Integrated Regional Information Network for West Africa. News bulletin.
Wallensteen, P., and M. Sollenberg
1998 Armed conflicts and regional conflict complexes, 1989-97. Journal of Peace Research 35(5):621-634.
Weiss, T.
1999 Military-Civilian Interactions: Intervening in Humanitarian Crises. Lanham, MD:
Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, Inc.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

2
The Evolution of Mortality Among
Rwandan Refugees in Zaire
Between 1994 and 1997
Dominique Legros, Christophe Paquet, and Pierre Nabeth

INTRODUCTION
The civil war and the genocide that occurred in Rwanda between
April and July 1994 killed an estimated 500,000 to 800,000 people. As a
consequence, approximately 1 million Rwandans were internally displaced and 1.2 to 1.5 million fled to neighboring countries. Among the
latter, probably 1 million settled in Eastern Zaire, in camps located in the
Kivu provinces, along the border with their country of origin.
The influx of refugees in Goma, in the North Kivu province of Zaire,
between July 14 and July 18, 1994 was considerable: between 500,000 and
850,000 persons, mostly from the Hutu ethnic group, crossed the border
in a 5-day period (Millwood, 1996). During the first weeks of the emergency the mortality rates were very high, but very rapidly, by September
1994, after huge resources had been channelled to the area, the situation
stabilized and mortality rates fell dramatically.
In the following period, most of the external assistance consisted of
improving the health situation of the refugees by trying to reach international standards, particularly in terms of water supply, latrine construction, and food distribution. However, the situation remained very unsafe
as the former Rwandan army (Forces Armées Rwandaises, or FAR) and
the Interhamwe militia were active in the camps, preparing for military
action. Protesting against insecurity and the indirect support they perceived was being given to the perpetrators of the genocide, some agencies
withdrew all their personnel and assistance in November 1994.
52

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

DOMINIQUE LEGROS, CHRISTOPHE PAQUET, AND PIERRE NABETH

53

In spite of this spectacular action, the situation remained unchanged
in the camps until the emergence of the Alliance des Forces Démocratiques
de Libération du Congo-Zaire (AFDL) movement in September 1996 in
South Kivu. Laurent D. Kabila led this movement of rebellion against the
Zairean state with the support of the governments of Uganda, Rwanda,
and Burundi. The support to Kabila was a good opportunity for the
government of Rwanda to eliminate the threat at its Western border represented by the refugee camps of Kivu.
In an attempt to evacuate the camps and force the refugees back to
Rwanda, AFDL and its allies attacked the camps of Kivu between October
and November 1996. As a result, around 900,000 refugees went back to
their country of origin, while the remaining (including the ex-FAR) refugees fled into Zaire in an attempt to escape the AFDL forces which were
heading towards Kinshasa. For some of them, this second forced migration in their country of asylum would last until May 1997 and bring them
into Congo-Brazzaville after a trip of 1,500 kilometers. During their trip,
these refugees faced extremely harsh conditions of living and were continuously pursued and attacked by the AFDL forces. In a few places, like
in Tingi Tingi camp or along the Ubundu-Kisangani axis, they were able
to settle down for some weeks, and external aid was provided until the
camps were attacked. But most of the time, the access to this population
was almost non-existent and very little information on their situation was
available.
The purpose of our study was to review the several acute phases
experienced by the Rwandan refugees from the first influx in Kivu in July
1994 until the settlement in the camps in Congo-Brazzaville in May 1997,
concentrating on the ways in which mortality figures were collected. The
objectives were to examine the importance of mortality data in complex
emergency situations and to analyze the feasibility of the organization of
a basic surveillance system in the most precarious conditions. Our goal
was also to underline the limitations of the retrospective mortality surveys and the caution required in the extrapolation of their results.
MORTALITY DURING THE GOMA INFLUX
The refugees settled down initially in Goma town and later in
Kibumba and Katale camps, situated north of the town, and in Mugunga
camp to the west (Figure 2-1). During the initial emergency phase, the
occurrence of major cholera and dysentery outbreaks and the precarious
environmental conditions resulted in high mortality rates, which were
recorded by a retrospective survey and a dead body collection system.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

54

MORTALITY AMONG RWANDAN REFUGEES IN ZAIRE

Katale

Uganda

Zaire
Kibumba

Mugunga

Goma

~

Gisenyi

~

Rwanda

Lake
~ Kivu
~
~
~
FIGURE 2-1 Location of the refugee camps in North Kivu. Not drawn to scale.

Methods
Surveillance System
From the first days of the intervention of the international agencies,
emphasis was put on mortality and morbidity data collection. As the
ground where most refugees settled was hard volcanic rock, the digging
of graves was almost impossible, and dead bodies were left along the
roads and tracks or in public places. A dead body collection system was
therefore organized using trucks for burial in mass graves. It provided
records of numbers of bodies collected per day.
A mapping exercise was performed in each camp. The geographical
limits of the camps were first estimated, as a whole and by zones of
shelter density (low, medium, and high), using a geographical positioning system (GPS). This gave an estimate of the surface of the camp.
Within each zone of shelter density, squares of 25 meters by 25 meters
were selected at random. The number of persons living within these
squares was counted. This gave an estimate of the population density per
square meter by zone, which, when multiplied by the area of each zone,
gave a rough estimate of the total population of the camps.
The population figures were also estimated from the number of doses

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

DOMINIQUE LEGROS, CHRISTOPHE PAQUET, AND PIERRE NABETH

55

delivered during a mass vaccination campaign against meningitis, and
from the vaccine coverage evaluated during a subsequent vaccine coverage survey.
Retrospective Mortality Surveys
Population retrospective mortality surveys were conducted in Katale,
Kibumba, and Mugunga camps from August 4 to August 14, 1994. These
surveys were designed to estimate the average mortality rate in each
camp since the arrival of the refugees, and to evaluate the nutritional
status of children under age five.
Each survey was conducted using a two-stage cluster sampling
method. Within each camp, 30 clusters of 20 households were selected at
random. Household composition and information on mortality since arrival in Zaire were obtained by interviewing the head of the family.
Results
The populations of Katale, Kibumba, and Mugunga camps were estimated at 80,000, 180,000, and 150,000, respectively. Some refugees had
settled down in Goma town, to the north of Katale, and to the west of
Mugunga and were not counted.
The first case of cholera in Goma was diagnosed on July 20, 1994.
This led to a major cholera outbreak of 58,000 to 80,000 cases within a
month after the influx (Goma Epidemiology Group, 1995). The cholera
outbreak was still active when an outbreak of bloody diarrhea, due to
Shigella dysenteriae type 1, erupted in the first days of August and persisted in all the camps until November 1994.
These successive outbreaks contributed greatly to the unprecedented
mortality rates observed during the first weeks of the emergency. A total
of 48,347 dead bodies were buried between July 14 and August 14 (Goma
Epidemiology Group, 1995). Although this might be an underestimation
of the true figures (because of private burials), the estimate of 50,000
deaths occurring during the first month of the emergency has been generally accepted (Millwood, 1996).
The average daily crude mortality rates (CMRs) estimated by the retrospective mortality surveys were two to three times higher than the
death rates reported from previous complex emergency situations in
Ethiopia and Sudan (1985), Somalia (1992), and Iraq (1991) (Table 2-1).
According to the surveys, 85 to 90 percent of the deaths reported were
related to diarrheal diseases. In Katale, adults and children under age
five appeared equally affected by diarrhea-related deaths (Paquet and
Van Soest, 1994).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

August
August
August
August

Survey or Count

Katale survey
Kibumba survey
Mugunga survey
Body count (all areas)

Source: Goma Epidemiology Group (1995).

4
9
13
14

Survey Period
(July 14 to)
80,000180,000150,000500,000850,000-

Estimated
Population
41.3
28.1
29.4
31.2–19.5

Crude Mortality Rate
(per 10,000 per day)

8.3 [7.1–9.5]
7.3 [6.2–8.6]
9.1 [7.9–10.3]
9.7–6.0

Percentage of Population
Dying During the Period
[95 % confidence interval]

TABLE 2-1 Comparison of Crude Mortality Rate Estimates Derived from Dead Body
Count and from Population Surveys, Goma to Zaire, July - August 1994

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

56

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

DOMINIQUE LEGROS, CHRISTOPHE PAQUET, AND PIERRE NABETH

57

Deaths/10,000/day

1,000

100

10

1
7/31

8/7

8/14

8/21

8/28

Weeks ending

FIGURE 2-2 Crude daily mortality rates per week, Katale Camp, Goma, Zaire,
July-August 1994.

Surveillance and survey data were consistent. Depending on population estimates, 6 to 10 percent of the refugees who arrived in Goma between July 14 and July 18, 1994 died within a month after their arrival.
The high mortality rates recorded, and explained almost entirely by the
outbreaks of cholera and dysentery, confirm the occurrence of a public
health disaster of major proportions.
However, within some weeks, CMRs declined sharply, and by the
end of August was estimated at 3.0 per 10,000 per day in Katale, for
instance (Figure 2-2). This result can be related to the international
community’s huge response to the Goma crisis. Even if the level of performance of some agencies was poor and their impact on the crisis questionable (if not negative), it is generally accepted that, overall, the results
of the humanitarian intervention were impressive. In particular, the speed
with which enormous quantities of water of good quality were supplied
to most camps was commendable and had a key role in the control of the
outbreaks of diarrheal diseases.
MORTALITY IN TINGI TINGI
The attacks of the refugee camps in Kivu by the troops of the AFDL in
October and November 1996 marked the beginning of a period during
which the humanitarian situation of the refugees deteriorated. According
to figures from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), over 340,000 refugees remained in Zaire, hiding in the forests
of Kivu, or fleeing west ahead of the advancing front line. From October
1996 until June 1997, the refugees were victims of intimidation, ill treat-

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

58

MORTALITY AMONG RWANDAN REFUGEES IN ZAIRE

ment, and killings, and were denied adequate protection and assistance.
In mid-December 1996, groups of refugees who had been forced out of the
camps in Eastern Zaire and had since been missing, resurfaced at Tingi
Tingi, Shabunda, and Amisi camps, in Maniéma province, where they
received assistance until those camps were also attacked on February 28,
1997. Later on, and except during a short period in the south of Kisangani,
the humanitarian agencies had almost no access to these populations until they reached Congo-Brazzaville.
Methods
A surveillance system was established in Tingi Tingi, which provided
mortality data from the beginning of the intervention (Nabeth, 1997). The
number of deaths was computed on a daily basis by age group: under five
and five and over. Deaths were recorded from the hospital, the intensive
feeding center, and the cholera isolation unit. In addition, a “grave
watcher” had been hired to report the number of new graves dug per day
and the place of the death (e.g., hospital or home). A mapping of the
camp was conducted initially to estimate the population figures. Later
on, a registration system was set up for new arrivals.
Results
The population of Tingi Tingi was estimated at 80,000 persons, of
which 12,000 (15 percent) were children under five years old (Nabeth,
1997). From December 18, 1996 to February 26, 1997, a total of 1,703
deaths were recorded by the surveillance system, of which 831 (48.8 percent) occurred among children under five. Over the period, the average
crude and under-five mortality rates were 3.0 and 9.8 per 10,000 per day,
respectively. Although a phenomenon of double counting might have
occurred in some cases, because of the double sources of information, the
observed rates were well above the limits generally admitted for situations out of control (2.0 and 4.0 per 10,000 per day for the crude and
under-five mortality rates, respectively).
The trends showed a clear and constant deterioration of the health
status of the refugees over time (Figure 2-3) (Nabeth et al., 1997b). This
was primarily due to the absence of adequate food supplies. Between
December 27, 1996 (the first day of food distribution), and January 24,
1997, a daily average of 900 kilocalories per person was provided to the
refugees (UNHCR recommends a daily ration of 2,100 kilocalories per
person per day). The high mortality rates were also explained by the
development of a dysentery outbreak followed by a cholera outbreak
(Nabeth, 1997).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

59

DOMINIQUE LEGROS, CHRISTOPHE PAQUET, AND PIERRE NABETH
<5

14.0

Crude

Rate per 10,000

12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0
6

/1

12

0

3

/2

12

/3

12

6

1/

13

1/

20

1/

27

1/

3

2/

10

2/

17

2/

24

2/

Weeks starting

FIGURE 2-3 Average daily mortality rates per week among refugees in Tingi
Tingi, Maniéma, Zaire, December 1996-February 1997.

MORTALITY IN THE CAMPS ALONG THE
UBUNDU-KISANGANI RAILWAY
By the end of February 1997, the AFDL forces reached Tingi Tingi,
and most of the refugees fled to the west, in the direction of Ubundu and
Kisangani. In late March 1997, the first groups of refugees reached
Ubundu, 100 kilometers south of Kisangani. From there, they moved
north along the railway to Kisangani. AFDL did not allow them passage
through this town, and by mid-April, refugees had set up camps at several locations along the railway line from Ubundu to Kisangani.
Methods
In spite of the very difficult conditions and limited access to the refugee
populations, temporary hospitals and dispensaries were set up. They allowed
the collection of mortality data on a daily basis, by age group (under-five and
five and over). In addition, a network of community health workers was
rapidly created in Kasese. Population figures were estimated empirically.
Results
Overall, it was estimated that 80,000-85,000 refugees had settled in
multiple camps along the railway line. Overcrowding and poor sanita-

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

60

MORTALITY AMONG RWANDAN REFUGEES IN ZAIRE

tion made the living conditions in the camps particularly difficult, and, as
expected in those conditions, the estimated mortality rates were extremely
high. By mid-April, 1,581 deaths had been officially registered since the
beginning of the month (the CMR was 11.6 to 12.4 per 10,000 per day).
Access to the refugees remained very limited and logistic difficulties were
considerable. The camps were attacked during the last week of April
1997. Some refugees continued their flight to the west, some hid in the
forest and came back some days later, and many disappeared.
Groups of refugees were again located in May 1997 in Mbandaka and
Wenji, on the eastern bank of the Congo River. After a final attack on the
camps, they crossed over towards Congo-Brazzaville.
MORTALITY IN NDJOUNDOU AND LOUKOLÉLA,
CONGO-BRAZZAVILLE
By mid-May 1997, several hundred Rwandan refugees were identified in Congo-Brazzaville in a swampy area located 600 kilometers north
of Brazzaville along the Oubangui River. They had settled in camps
located in three villages: Loukoléla, Liranga, and Ndjoundou.
Methods
Surveillance System
An epidemiological surveillance system was rapidly established in all
the camps. The number of deaths was collected on a daily basis from the
hospital registers. In addition, right from the beginning, the local authorities organized a registration system of the new arrivals and assigned a
separate cemetery to the refugee population with a system to register
deaths. A census was carried out prior to a general food distribution. A
list of all the families present in the camp was therefore available.
Retrospective Mortality Survey
A retrospective mortality survey was conducted in July 1997 in
Ndjoundou with the objective of reconstituting a posteriori the group of
origin in the camps of Kivu and of documenting the sequence of events
that occurred in that population since the attacks at the end of 1996
(Nabeth et al., 1997a). A systematic random sample of 266 families was
selected from the list of families of Ndjoundou. One person per family
was interviewed. The questions were about the extended family while in
Kivu (persons living together, not necessarily under the same roof), and
included: the camp of origin in Kivu, the number of persons in the family

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

61

DOMINIQUE LEGROS, CHRISTOPHE PAQUET, AND PIERRE NABETH

while in Kivu with their age and sex, the date of departure from the camp
in Kivu, the names of the places where the family stopped for at least
several days and, for each of those places, the members of the family
present and the events explaining the absence of the other members. The
following events were documented: death (by illness, accident or murder), repatriation to Rwanda, spontaneous return to Rwanda, and disappearance. Only confirmed deaths were recorded as such; if the death was
simply assumed, the person was reported missing.
Results
At the end of June 1997, the total population of Loukoléla was estimated at 6,400 persons and that of Ndjoundou at 3,370 persons (1,650
families). At that time (that is, one and a half months after the arrival of
the first refugees), the mortality rate recorded by the surveillance system
in both camps was below 1.0 per 10,000 per day; for the last week of June
the average daily CMR was 0.2 in Loukoléla and 0.5 in Ndjoundou (Figure 2-4). The main causes of death were typical for refugee situations:
malaria and diarrhea (including cholera) in the five and above age group,
and malaria, acute respiratory infections, diarrhea and malnutrition
among the under-five age group.
A total of 266 heads of families were interviewed during the retrospective mortality survey in Ndjoundou. They represented a population
of 530 persons (15.7 percent of the total population of the camp). Men
aged 20 to 39 were clearly over-represented in the sample (Figure 2-5).

Rate per 10,000 per day

12
10
8
6
4
2

0
6/
3

6/
23

16
6/

6/
9

2
6/

5/
26

19
5/

5/
1

2

0
Week of

FIGURE 2-4 Average daily crude mortality rate per week, Ndjoundou, CongoBrazzaville, May-June 1997.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

Age (years)

62

MORTALITY AMONG RWANDAN REFUGEES IN ZAIRE

60 - 65
55 - 59
50 - 54
45 - 49
40 - 44
35 - 39
30 - 34
25 - 29
20 - 24
15 - 19
10 - 14
5-9
0-4
120

100

80

60

40

20

0

20

40

Females

60

80

100

120

Males

FIGURE 2-5 Distribution by age and sex of the population of the sample (N=530),
Ndjoundou, Congo-Brazzaville, July 1997.

But this was also the case in the entire population of Ndjoundou (Table 2-2),
and in the initial group reconstituted from the information collected during the survey (Figure 2-6). The 530 persons included in the sample in
Ndjoundou came from an estimated group of 3,121 persons in the camps
of Kivu. Of this initial group, 651 persons died (20.9 percent, with a 95
percent confidence interval of 19.5-22.3) and 1,857 disappeared (59.5 percent, with a 95 percent confidence interval of 57.8-61.2) during their trip
through Zaire. Most of the persons who died were killed (Table 2-3).

TABLE 2-2 Age and Sex Distribution in the Sample and in the Total
Population of the Camp, Ndjoundou, Congo-Brazzaville, July 1997
Population
Parameter

Sample
(n = 530)

Camp
(n = 3370)

367
163
2.25

2429
941
2.58

Sex

Male
Female
Sex Ratio (Males/Females)

Age (Years)

Median
Number (Percentage)
under Five Years of Age

24.0
32
(7.9%)

Age of Males

Median

25.0

25.0

Age of Females

Median

22.0

21.0

24.0
263
(8.5 %)

xx

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

Age (years)

DOMINIQUE LEGROS, CHRISTOPHE PAQUET, AND PIERRE NABETH

70 ≥
65 - 69
60 - 65
55 - 59
50 - 54
45 - 49
40 - 44
35 - 39
30 - 34
25 - 29
20 - 24
15 - 19
10 - 14
5-9
0-4

63

Ndjoundou sample
Reconstituted sample

350 300 250 200 150 100 50
Females

0

50 100 150 200 250 300 350
Males

FIGURE 2-6 Distribution by age and sex of the sample in Ndjoundou (N=530)
and of the reconstituted sample (N=3,121), Ndjoundou, Congo-Brazzaville, July
1997.

The trip of the refugees through Zaire was reconstituted from the
interviews. Each family had its own itinerary, but four gathering places
were clearly identified: Shanje (for the refugees coming from the Bukavu
area), Tingi Tingi, Ubundu, and Wenji.
It was also possible to find the places and the dates when refugees
were killed or disappeared. A high proportion of the population living in
the camps of Mugunga, Sake, Shanje, Ubundu-Obilo, and Wenji were
killed or disappeared during the various attacks (Table 2-4).
When considering the evolution of the size of the reconstituted group
over time, three periods showed a sudden drop in the number of refugees
remaining in the group. These periods corresponded to the months following the attacks of the camps in Kivu (November 1996), along the railway from Ubundu to Kisangani (April 1997), and in Wenji (May 1997)
(Figure 2-7). However, since these projections included the refugees who
died or disappeared, more accurate figures might be provided by considering the number of deaths only. It was possible, from the results of the
interviews, to calculate the crude and under-five mortality rates by period of time. Again, three peaks of mortality were observed corresponding to the same periods (Figure 2-8). The average daily crude and underfive mortality rate over the period were 15.5 and 18.2 per 10,000 per day,
respectively.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

64

MORTALITY AMONG RWANDAN REFUGEES IN ZAIRE

TABLE 2-3 Distribution of the Events Occurring Among Rwandan
Refugees During Their Flight from Kivu to Congo-Brazzaville,
Ndjoundou, Congo-Brazzaville, July 1997

Events

N

Event Explaining the Absence:
Disappearance

1857

59.5

57.8-61.2

615
24
12

19.7
0.8
0.4

18.3-21.1
0.5-1.1
0.2-0.7

Spontaneous Return

33

1.0

0.7-1.5

Repatriation

34

1.1

0.8-1.5

530
16

17.0
0.5

15.7-18.3
0.3-0.8

3121

100.0

N/A

Death:
Murder
Illness
Accident

Present:
Present in Ndjoundou
Present in Another Camp
Total

Percentage

95 Percent
Confidence
Interval

xx

TABLE 2-4 Proportion of the Refugee Population Killed or Disappeared
by Place, Ndjoundou, Congo-Brazzaville, July 1997
Killed

Place

Population

Mugunga
Sake
Shanje
Walikale
Tingi-Tingi
Ubundu
Obiro
Ikela
Boende
Ingende
Wenji
Unknown
Total

211
447
1597
686
1557
1336
665
397
224
209
954

N
33
55
84
38
43
17
46
4
32
0
130
133
615

Disappeared

Percent
15.6
12.3
5.3
5.5
2.8
1.3
6.9
1.0
14.3
0.0
13.6

95 Percent
Confidence
Interval
11.2–21.0
9.5–15.6
4.2–6.4
4.0–7.4
2.0–3.7
0.8–2.0
5.2–9.0
0.3–2.4
10.2–9.3
N/A
11.6–15.9

N

Percent

57
136
512
28
104
207
136
22
25
2
288
340
1857

27.0
30.4
32.1
4.1
6.7
15.5
20.5
5.5
11.2
1.0
30.2

xx

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

95 Percent
Confidence
Interval
21.3–33.3
26.3–34.8
29.8–34.4
2.8–5.8
5.5–8.0
13.6–17.5
17.5–23.6
3.6–8.1
7.5–15.8
0.2–3.1
27.3–33.2

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

65

DOMINIQUE LEGROS, CHRISTOPHE PAQUET, AND PIERRE NABETH

Attack of the camps in Kivu

Percent of the population remaining

100

80

Attack in Ubundu and Obiro
60
Attack in Wenji
40

20

1
7/

1
6/

1
5/

1
4/

3/

1

1
2/

1
1/

/1
12

/1
11

10

/1

0
1997

1996

FIGURE 2-7 Evolution of the size of the reconstituted group of refugees from
Kivu over time, Ndjoundou, Congo-Brazzaville, July 1997.

Crude
<5

150

Rate per 10,000 per day

125
100
75
50
25
0
Sep

Oct
1996

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar

April

May

1997

FIGURE 2-8 Average crude and under-five daily mortality rates per month,
Rwandan refugees, Ndjoundou, Congo-Brazzaville, July 1997.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

66

MORTALITY AMONG RWANDAN REFUGEES IN ZAIRE

DISCUSSION
Mortality rates are the most useful health indicators for assessing the
seriousness of emergency situations. Two methods are recommended for
measuring mortality in a refugee population (both were used for the
Rwandan refugees in Zaire): the retrospective mortality surveys and the
ongoing surveillance system. Either method gives estimates of the crude
and under-five mortality rates that can then be compared to the expected
crude mortality rate in developing countries (on average, 25 per 1,000 per
year, or 0.6 per 10,000 per day). A situation is considered an emergency
when the CMR exceeds 1 per 10,000 per day. Reference rates in the
under-five age group are double that found in the general population; it is
considered to be an emergency situation when the under-five mortality
rate is above 2 per 10,000 per day.
The implementation of a surveillance system and the collection of
population figures are priority actions that should be undertaken right
from the beginning of an emergency situation. Some of our examples
(Tingi Tingi, Ubundu, and the camps along the railway to Kisangani)
demonstrated that this was feasible, even in the most difficult situations.
The information can come from different sources, depending on the
places: dead body collection, grave watchers, or hospital and therapeutic
feeding center registers. Whatever the origin of the information, biases
can affect both the population figures (frequent overestimation) and the
number of deaths reported (over- or undernotification, delay in reporting, etc.). In emergency situations these biases are difficult to control,
and, therefore, the objective of surveillance in this context can only be to
monitor trends over time, and not to provide exact figures. Decisions
made and information communicated must be based on these trends
rather than on isolated results.
Retrospective mortality surveys should be conducted (and sometimes
repeated) when no surveillance data are available, such as occurred in the
camps of Kivu in August 1994, to document events which occurred during the migration, such as in Congo-Brazzaville in 1997. The latter is of
particular interest because of the historical information it can provide. On
the other hand, retrospective mortality surveys also have limitations and
caution is required in the extrapolation of their results.
The mortality rate obtained from a retrospective survey is always an
average over the recall period, and confidence intervals must always be
added around the central value. If the recall period is long, the average
rate might not represent what is actually happening at the time of the
survey and this could lead to inappropriate decisions. Long recall period
will also affect the precision of the data collected. Conversely, if recall
period is short, there is a risk of measuring a very specific event which

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

DOMINIQUE LEGROS, CHRISTOPHE PAQUET, AND PIERRE NABETH

67

might not be representative of the overall situation. Short recall period
also allows fewer events (deaths) to be recorded, and thus reduces the
precision of the estimate (or implies the need for a bigger sample size to
get the same level of precision). In any case, mortality data collected from
retrospective surveys should be used with caution for forecasting purposes, especially when figures are abnormally high. Peaks of mortality
documented during communicable disease outbreaks or nutrition emergencies, for example, often reflect what is happening in the most vulnerable groups of the population. Once these groups have been affected,
there is often a change in mortality pattern.
The sampling technique and the questionnaire are two other potential domains of weakness of retrospective mortality surveys. The sampling technique refers almost always to a two-stage cluster sampling
method. In this method, only the first sampling unit is selected at random
within the cluster, while the following units are selected on a proximity
basis. The method has only been validated for vaccine coverage surveys
and might not be suited for mortality surveys if the mortality patterns are
correlated, in any way, with the geographical location of the houses within
the cluster. This will increase the cluster effect, and therefore reduce the
precision of the estimate, everything else being equal. Furthermore, the
sampling unit in mortality surveys is the household, but inferences are
made on individuals.
The questionnaires used during retrospective mortality surveys are
much less elaborate than the ones used for verbal autopsies. Their validity has never been evaluated. They are usually built on the spot, and are
often applied by inexperienced and rapidly trained personnel.
Finally, retrospective mortality surveys can be affected by a survival bias. This bias probably occurred during the survey conducted in
Ndjoundou in Congo-Brazzaville in July 1997. In this case, and given the
proportion of the initial group who died during the trip through Zaire, it
is very likely that many families disappeared completely and were therefore not interviewed. This was partly taken into account by considering
the extended African family in Kivu instead of the nuclear family. But we
still might get a biased estimate of the true mortality rates, either by
underestimation (i.e., survival bias) or by overestimation (i.e., multiple
reporting of the deaths).
For all these reasons, the interpretation of retrospective mortality surveys must be very cautious. These surveys are conducted in difficult
conditions and, most of the time, by few and inexperienced personnel.
Recall and survival biases are both likely. The validity of the questionnaires and of the sampling techniques has never been evaluated. The
extrapolation of the results to other camps and other situations (for instance to refugees with a different history of exodus) is very hazardous.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

68

MORTALITY AMONG RWANDAN REFUGEES IN ZAIRE

To our knowledge, the retrospective mortality survey conducted in
Ndjoundou camp in Congo-Brazzaville was the first of this type in a
refugee setting. Since then, the same method has been used to document
the exodus of Kosovar refugees in Albania and Montenegro in 1999
(Brown et al., 2000; Physicians for Human Rights, 1999). The testimony
and advocacy activities, favored and reinforced by the validity of the
information collected during these surveys, will obviously not protect a
posteriori the victims of injustice, but they can have an impact on the
prevention of violence against vulnerable civil populations in the future.
Retrospective surveys of the history of migration should be multiplied
during complex emergencies. At the same time, their methodology
should be assessed and refined.
REFERENCES
Brown, V., W. Perea, G. Godain, E. Dachy, and M. Valenciano
2000 Kosovar refugees in Montenegro and Albania. Refuge 18(5):43-45.
Goma Epidemiology Group
1995 Public health impact of Rwandan refugee crisis: What happened in Goma, Zaire,
in July 1994? Lancet 345:339-344.
Millwood, D., ed.
1996 The International Response to Conflict and Genocide: Lessons from the Rwanda Experience. Humanitarian Aid and Effects. Geneva: Steering Committee of the Joint Evaluation of Emergency Assistance to Rwanda.
Nabeth, P.
1997 Compte-rendu de mission à Tingi Tingi, Zaïre. Internal report, Epicentre, Paris,
January 1997.
Nabeth, P., C. Ndayambaje, A. Croisier, and M. Pédari
1997a Histoire des réfugiés rwandais ayant fui les camps du Kivu, Zaïre, de septembre
1996 à juin 1997. Résultats d’une enquête effectuée parmi les survivants du camp
de Ndjoundou, au Congo. Internal report, Epicentre, Paris, September 1997.
Nabeth, P., B. Vasset, P. Guérin, B. Doppler, and M. Tectonidis
1997b Health situation of refugees in eastern Zaire. Lancet 349:1031-1032.
Paquet, C., and M. Van Soest
1994 Mortality and malnutrition among Rwandan refugees in Zaire. Lancet 344:823824.
Physicians for Human Rights
1999 War Crimes in Kosovo: A Population-Based Assessment of Human Rights Violations of
Kosovar Albanians by Serb Forces. Boston: Physicians for Human Rights.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

3
Famine, Mortality, and Migration:
A Study of North Korean Migrants
in China
W. Courtland Robinson, Myung Ken Lee, Kenneth Hill, and
Gilbert Burnham

This is a famine in slow motion. People cope year after year and probably a lot drop off. But the totality is very hard to gauge.
—Official, UN World Food Program (November 1998).

INTRODUCTION
It would be a profound understatement to say that accurate, up-todate information on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) is
limited. The latest census, conducted in 1993, recorded a population of
21,213,378, of whom males numbered 10,329,699 and females 10,883,679
(United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 1998). The
estimated midyear population for 1996 was 22,466,000, assuming an annual growth rate of 1.6 percent. The United Nations (UN) estimate of the
crude birth rate for 1990-1995 was 21.8 per 1,000 and the estimated crude
death rate (CDR) was 5.5 per 1,000; therefore, the crude rate of natural
increase was 16.3. Infant mortality was estimated at 24.4 deaths of children under one year old per 1,000 live births. Eberstadt and Banister
(1992), factoring in uncounted males in the military, estimated the 1996
midyear population of North Korea at 23,906,122 and the 1998 midyear
population at 24,721,312.
Given the country’s hardships in recent years, however, the question
of how many people are living—or have died—in North Korea is
shrouded in greater mystery than ever. The deterioration of the North
Korean economy since 1990, a disastrous combination of flooding in 1995
69

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

70

FAMINE, MORTALITY, AND MIGRATION: NORTH KOREAN MIGRANTS

and 1996, and drought in 1997 have brought on a severe food crisis in the
reclusive, communist nation that has placed millions of people at risk of
starvation. Infusions of international food aid since 1996 are believed to
have helped stabilize the situation, at least in certain areas and among
targeted populations, but the crisis does not seem to have passed. Efforts
to gauge the effects of this crisis, however, have been hampered by the
North Korean government’s reluctance to permit randomized surveys of
morbidity and mortality.
A nutritional assessment mission to the DPRK undertaken by the
World Food Program (WFP) in August 1997 found a 16.5 percent prevalence of wasting (<-2 Z-scores weight-for-height) and a 38.2 percent prevalence of stunting (<-2 Z-scores height-for-age) in a nonrandom sample of
3,695 children under 7 years of age in 42 selected nurseries and kindergartens from 19 counties in 5 provinces. The WFP assessment noted that “a
prevalence of wasting greater than 15 percent is considered a serious
situation and suggests that mortality rates have already increased”
(Katona-Apte and Mokdad, 1998). In September 1998, WFP collaborated
with the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the European
Union to conduct a randomized survey of 1,762 children in 3,600 households in 30 North Korean counties. This survey found 15.6 percent of
children aged 6 months to 7 years to be wasted, 62.3 percent stunted, and
60.6 percent moderately or severely underweight (European Union et al.,
1998). The authors of the 1997 WFP study concluded that
The chronic and cumulative shortage of food, the shortages of basic medicine and fuel, the damage to the infrastructure from floods, and the difficult
economic circumstances of the DPRK pose substantial challenges to improving the nutritional status of its children. On the other hand, the presence of the PDS [Public Distribution System], the evident order and discipline in DPRK society, the universal access to health care, the dedication of
the care providers and the high literacy rate augur well for the likelihood of
successful resolution of the crisis if adequate food, medication and training
can be made available (Katona-Apte and Mokdad, 1998).

Other assessments were not so sanguine. Frustrated by the DPRK’s
unwillingness to permit random sample surveys or independent interviewing of the population, some organizations began to look to the Chinese border where North Koreans had been crossing in search of food. In
July 1997, World Vision interviewed 33 individuals at the China/North
Korea border (19 of whom were North Korean and 14 of whom were from
either China or Russia) and concluded that mortality averaged 15 percent
in the northern provinces. “This famine,” said the World Vision report,
“may well be much more severe than any news reports have indicated”
(World Vision, 1997).
In June 1998, a private South Korean organization called the Korean

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

W. COURTLAND ROBINSON ET AL.

71

Buddhist Sharing Movement (KBSM) released a report on the North Korean food crisis based on interviews with North Korean migrants in China.
Summarizing results from five phases of interviews conducted between
September 1997 and May 1998, the KBSM study reported that “the [cumulative] mortality rate over the last 2 years and 9 months (August 1995April 1998) has reached 27.0 percent…The mortality rate for 1996 was at
8.86 percent [88.6 per 1,000] and for 1997, 19.60 percent [196 per 1,000].”
The survey also found that the birth rate to sample families was 0.93
percent [9.3 per 1,000] in 1996 and 0.86 percent [8.6 per 1,000] in 1997.
“We have determined,” the report stated, “that the worst famine in human history is now transpiring in North Korea” (Korean Buddhist Sharing Movement, 1998).
Concerned by these accounts but unable to assess the reliability of
their findings, a U.S. nongovernmental organization (NGO) active in
North Korean humanitarian relief, Mercy Corps International, invited the
Johns Hopkins School of Public Health to undertake its own study of
North Korean migrants in China. In the past five years, significant numbers of North Koreans have been moving across the Chinese border in
search of food for themselves and their families. It is estimated that
between 50,000 and 150,000 North Koreans are staying temporarily in
China, principally in Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture, which is
home to nearly 1 million Korean-Chinese. Bound by ties of kinship and
ethnicity, Korean-Chinese families along the border and throughout the
prefecture have tried to help their relatives with food, shelter, cash, and
clothing.
STUDY DESIGN
The Hopkins study had two specific research objectives, one substantive and the other methodological. The first was to develop a demographic profile of North Korean migrants in order to understand better
the phenomenon of migration in the context of food crisis. The second
objective was to explore the use of indirect estimation techniques in calculating mortality and other vital rates. In March 1998, we distributed a
self-administered questionnaire to approximately 200 local aid networks
in Yanbian, asking them about their assistance to North Koreans. Of the
102 networks that responded, just over half (n=57) reported that they
assisted North Korean migrants. From the list of 57 active sites, we drew
a stratified sample of 18 sites, selecting at least one site from each of the
eight counties of Yanbian Prefecture: Yanji, Hunchun, Yungjung, Tumen,
Hwaryong, Ando, Wangchung, and Donwha. The border counties of
Yanji, Hunchun, Yungjung, Tumen, and Hwaryong received multiple random picks proportional to the number of active sites in the county.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

72

FAMINE, MORTALITY, AND MIGRATION: NORTH KOREAN MIGRANTS

In May 1998, one Korean-Chinese interviewer was selected for each
site and provided with several days of individual training, including such
topics as survey methodology, techniques for good interviewing, and
questionnaire formats. We also employed three field supervisors to provide ongoing monitoring of the interviews and checking of the questionnaires. In June, each interviewer conducted at least 10 practice interviews
using a pretest form of the questionnaire. Based on feedback from the
interviewers, the questionnaire was revised and training was provided
for the new forms. Surveying began in early July and concluded at the
end of September 1998, covering a three-month period. Results from that
study were published in the July 24, 1999 issue of The Lancet (Robinson et
al., 1999).
From July to September 1999, interviews were conducted with an
additional 381 North Korean arrivals at eight sites along the border. These
sites, all of which had participated in the 1998 study, were selected based
on: their willingness to participate for another year, and the presence of at
least moderate levels of cross-border arrivals. All North Korean respondents were assured that the interview was voluntary and confidential.
We interviewed only migrants who were 18 or older and only one member of a family travelling together. No incentives were given to respondents, although interviewers received a small monthly stipend. It is estimated that between 80 and 90 percent of all arrivals at the 8 sites were
interviewed during the 3-month period with a nonresponse rate of less
than 5 percent.
Respondents were asked to provide a list of all household members
who were alive as of January 1995 (we defined a household as people who
normally live together and share the same cooking facility) and to report
births, deaths, in-migrations (>1 month), and out-migrations (>1 month)
between the beginning of 1995 and the end of 1998. Respondents were
asked about their migration experience and their household food situation in North Korea; they also were measured for Middle Upper-Arm
Circumference (MUAC). Data were entered and analyzed with SPSS 8.0.
Institutional review boards at Johns Hopkins School of Public Health and
in Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture approved the study.
STUDY RESULTS
Mortality, Fertility, and Migration Rates
Between July and September 1999, a total of 381 North Korean migrants were interviewed at 8 sites along the China/DPRK border. Overall, in the 381 households of migrant respondents interviewed in 1999,
household size averaged 4.0 persons at the beginning of 1995 and de-

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

73

W. COURTLAND ROBINSON ET AL.

clined to 3.4 persons by the end of 1998. According to 1993 census data
released by the DPRK Bureau of Statistics, North Korean households averaged 4.2 members at the end of 1993 and 4.1 in North Hamkyong province where most of our sample originated (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea Central Bureau for Statistics, 1997). The average age of people
living in the sample households was 30.1 years. The estimated mean age
of the North Korean population at the end of 1993 was 27 years. The age
structure of the sample population differed from the national population
in that 0-9 year olds comprised 19.3 percent of the national population but
only 14.6 percent of the sample population and persons aged 60 and over
comprised 9.2 percent of the national population compared to 3.7 percent
of the sample population. Roughly 57 percent of the sample population
were between the ages of 20-59, compared to 44.4 percent in the national
population.
Household Mortality
In terms of crude mortality, we observed a death rate of 37.3 per 1,000
averaged over the four-year period, 1995-1998 (see Table 3-1). Standardizing this rate on the age distribution of the 1993 census population would
raise it to 41.8 per 1,000.
Figure 3-1 shows age-specific death rates for the sample population,
using a four-year average of death rates during the period, 1995-1998. For
comparative purposes, we have included the age-specific death rates
(ASDRs) from the 1993 census of the DPRK population, which indicated a
crude mortality rate of 5.6 per 1000 in 1993. Life expectancy in North
Korea was estimated at 66 for males and 73 for females in 1991 (Savada,
1994). We have also included the ASDRs from a model life table, specifically “West” Level 4, which reflects a life expectancy of 25.3 for males and
27.5 for females (Coale and Demeny, 1983). The life expectancy of the
sample population was 27.4. Crude mortality among males was 41.1/
1000 during the four-year period, compared to 33.8/1000 for females.

TABLE 3-1

Crude Death Rates in Respondent Households (n=381)

Year

Number of Deaths

Midyear Population

Death Rate (per 1,000)

1995
1996
1997
1998
4-Year Average

033
074
068
035
210

1,496
1,429
1,363
1,296
1,407 (end 1996)

22.1
51.8
49.9
27.0
37.3

xx

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

74

FAMINE, MORTALITY, AND MIGRATION: NORTH KOREAN MIGRANTS
1993 Census

1,000.0

1999 NK Sample (4-Yr. Avg., 1995-98)

Deaths per 1,000 (Log Scale)

"West" Life Table 4

100.0

10.0

1.0

4

+
65

9

-6
60

-5
55

-5

4

9
50

-4

4
-4

45

9
40

-3

-3

4
35

9
-2

30

4
25

9

-2
20

-1
15

10

-1

4

9
5-

0-

4

0.1

Age Intervals

FIGURE 3-1 Age-specific death rates: 1993 Census of North Korea, 1999 sample and “West” Life Table Level 4. Source: Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea Central Bureau for Statistics (1997); Coale and Demeny (1983).

Overall, crude mortality rates in the 381 North Korean households
included in our sample rose from 22.1/1000 in 1995 to 51.8/1000 in 1996
and 49.9/1000 in 1997. The death rate in 1998, however, declined to 27.0/
1000. This does not show a return to baseline rates of 5.6/1000 in 1993,
but it does suggest that the situation may be improving with stronger
harvests and sustained international food aid. It is also possible that
mortality is falling because many of the more vulnerable members of the
population died off in 1996 and 1997 and the survivors are a hardier
group.
We also asked respondents to identify cause of death. Out of 208 who
listed a cause of death, 95 deaths (45.7 percent) were attributed to lack of
food/malnutrition, and 89 deaths (42.8 percent) were attributed to illness/disease. Accidents were the cause of 12 deaths (5.8 percent) and
suicide accounted for 6 deaths (2.9 percent).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

75

W. COURTLAND ROBINSON ET AL.

TABLE 3-2

Crude Birth Rates in Respondent Households (n=381)

Year

Number of Births

Midyear Population

Birth Rate (per 1,000)

1995
1996
1997
1998
4-Year Average

20
23
22
13
78

1,496
1,429
1,363
1,296
1,407 (end 1996)

13.4
16.1
16.1
10.0
13.9

xx

Household Fertility
Looking at household births during the four-year period, no clear
trends emerge except perhaps that fertility in 1998 declined significantly
from previous years and that the four-year average, 13.9/1000, is well
below the UN estimate of 21.8/1000 for 1990 to 1995 (See Table 3-2).
In- and Out-Migration
Respondents were asked to identify anyone who had moved into or
out of the household for more than one month during the four-year recall
period. While it is clear from Table 3-3 that net migration rates rose
substantially from 1995 to 1997, the data also suggest that cumulative
movements in and out of households may have declined from 1997 to
1998. While the net-migration rates for these two years are quite similar,
a total of 72 people moved into or out of these households in 1997, while
only 50 people did so in 1998.

TABLE 3-3

Net Migration Rates in Respondent Households (n=381)

Year

Number of
In-Migrants
(>1 Month)

Number of
Out-Migrants
(>1 Month)

Net
Migration

Midyear
Population

Net-Migration
Rate
(per 1,000)

1995
1996
1997
1998

04
05
17
07

010
030
055
043

006
025
038
036

1,496
1,429
1,363
1,296

04.0
17.5
27.9
27.8

138

105

1,407 (end 1996)

18.7

Total

33

xx

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

76

FAMINE, MORTALITY, AND MIGRATION: NORTH KOREAN MIGRANTS

TABLE 3-4

Province and Household Mortality
Household Mortality, 1995-1998

Province

No

Yes

Total

North Hamkyong
South Hamkyong
Ryanggang
Other

159
025
017
032

120
015
008
005

279
040
025
037

Total

233

148

381

P = 0.006

Mortality and Household Characteristics
In the following discussion, our unit of analysis is the household and
the dependent variable is dichotomous: 0=no deaths in the household,
1995-1998; 1=any deaths in the household, 1995-1998. The 210 deaths
reported during the interval occurred in 148 out of 381 households (38.8
percent) in the sample. Except where indicated, we used a chi-square test
for significance.
Provincial Address
As shown in Table 3-4, among the 1999 sample, the household address of a large majority (73.2 percent) was in North Hamkyong with
South Hamkyong (10.5 percent) a distant second, followed by Ryanggang
with 6.6 percent. Only a handful came from other, more distant provinces. Cross-tabulating province of origin with household mortality, we
found not only that the association had clear statistical significance
(p=0.006), but that the proportion of households with mortality declined
with distance of household residence from the China/North Korea border. We had expected to see something of the opposite trend, namely that
selectivity for distress as measured by household mortality would be
stronger the greater the distance traveled. It is possible, of course, that
differential household mortality in the provinces does not reflect migrant
selectivity but rather reflects different underlying mortality rates within
the provinces.
Residential Area
Just under half (48.8 percent) of respondents described their residential area as urban, while 31.2 percent came from rural/agricultural areas

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

W. COURTLAND ROBINSON ET AL.

77

and 20 percent came from mining communities. The mining industry has
suffered a virtual shutdown in the northeast, according to many reports,
and workers are no longer getting paid. In many of the bigger cities in
North and South Hamkyong, reports from migrants suggest that food is
no longer available regularly through the government rationing program
known as the Public Distribution System (PDS). As one 52-year-old man
said, “There are some places that are comparatively better than other
places. Along the seacoast, you can catch fish. The steel factories have
something to trade with other countries so those workers still are getting
paid. Pyongyang is the capital so most of those people get rice. In most
big cities, however, the situation is the worst because there is no place to
forage or to grow anything.” Contrary to expectation, household mortality among migrants coming from urban areas did not differ significantly
from that for other areas. Again, it is not possible to tell whether this
reflects a more general reality or migration selection.
Family Class Background
All families in North Korea are categorized based on their class background and/or personal characteristics. The ten categories we employed
in our study range from worst to best in terms of political standing. The
five bad categories include political prisoners and their families, those
who collaborated with the Japanese or other enemies of the state, those
whose family members went south (into the Republic of Korea), those who
have been sent into internal exile, and the families of former rich peasants.
All of these categories are grouped into the “hostile” classes in terms of
political orientation (Asia Watch and Minnesota Lawyers International
Human Rights Committee, 1988). The middle peasant and poor peasant
categories are largely neutral although poor peasant status is helpful in
obtaining membership in the Korean Workers Party. Three categories comprise the “loyal” classes: families of war victims, veterans, and revolutionary heroes. It is interesting to note that from 1995 to 1998, the political
standing among these migrant households went categorically downward
(see Table 3-5). The number of households with a “hostile” class designation increased by nearly 60 percent, from 29 to 46, during the four years.
What this suggests, among other things, is that declining political status
may provide a strong incentive to leave North Korea.
Running a cross-tabulation of household mortality by political class,
we found no significant association, which suggests either that recent
mortality is not correlated with a household’s political status or that,
among the “loyal” class categories, migration to China may be more selective for higher mortality.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

78

FAMINE, MORTALITY, AND MIGRATION: NORTH KOREAN MIGRANTS

TABLE 3-5
(n=380)

Family Class Background of North Korean Households

Category 1995

Number in
1995

Percent in
1995

Number in
1998

Percent in
1998

“Hostile” Class
“Wavering” Class
“Loyal” Class

029
285
065

007.6
075.2
017.2

046
284
050

012.1
074.7
013.2

Total

379

100.0

380

100.0

xx

Source of Food
Historically, nearly three-quarters of the North Korean population
have been entitled to purchase heavily subsidized food rations through
the government’s Public Distribution System (PDS). Under this 10-tiered
structure based on age and occupational status, a working adult was
entitled to 700 grams of food-grain per day, with children receiving 500
grams and the elderly 600 grams per day. By 1997, according to UN
estimates, PDS allocations were averaging only about 100 grams per person per day (World Food Programme, 1997). Respondents in the 1999
survey reported that their per capita daily food ration was 81 grams in
1997. As Table 3-6 indicates, while a majority of respondents (50.7 percent) relied on government rations as their household’s primary source of
food in 1995, by 1997 only 3.9 percent did so. Instead, nearly 44 percent of

TABLE 3-6 Household’s Primary Source of Food by Year, Total
Number of Respondents (Percentage of Total Number of Respondents)
Govt.
Ration

Buy

Barter

Forage

Gift

Grow

Other

Total

1995

193
(50.7%)

44
(11.5)

46
(12.1)

55
(14.4)

2
(0.5)

35
(9.2)

6
(1.6)

381
(100.0)

1996

82
(21.5)

62
(16.3)

58
(15.2)

113
(29.7)

2
(0.5)

57
(15.0)

7
(1.8)

381
(100.0)

1997

15
(3.9)

43
(11.3)

83
(21.8)

166
(43.6)

5
(1.3)

61
(16.0)

8
(2.1)

381
(100.0)

1998

30
(7.9)

40
(10.5)

72
(18.9)

167
(43.8)

4
(1.0)

58
(15.2)

10
(2.6)

381
(100.0)

Year

xx

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

79

W. COURTLAND ROBINSON ET AL.

TABLE 3-7 Primary Food Source (1998) and
Household Mortality
Household Mortality, 1995-1998
Food Source

No

Yes

Total

Govt. Ration
Buy
Barter
Forage
Gift
Grow
Other

019
028
056
079
004
040
007

011
012
016
088
000
018
003

030
040
072
167
004
058
010

Total

232

147

379

P = 0.000

households in 1997 and 1998 relied on foraging as their principal source
of food. A slight improvement in the situation might be seen in the
increased percentage of households relying on government rations in 1998
(7.9 percent) compared to 3.9 percent during the previous year.
As Table 3-7 indicates, fully 60 percent of all households reporting
mortality from 1995-1998 relied on foraging as their primary source of
food for at least two years. Of the 167 households who primarily foraged
for their food supply in 1998 (and in 1997 as well), 88 of 167 (53 percent)
reported at least one death in the household, a proportion substantially
higher than those households relying on any other food source. We are
not necessarily suggesting a direct causal relationship between foraging
and household mortality, but the association is clearly a strong one.
Mortality and Migrant Characteristics
The mean age of respondents was 33.3 and nearly 80 percent were
under the age of 40. More than 95 percent had completed at least a middleschool education and nearly 45 percent had completed at least a highschool education. Factory workers comprised the single most common
occupation (40.6 percent), followed by farmers (19.5 percent) and unemployed (9.8 percent). More than 55 percent of the 1999 survey respondents
said that their principal reason for coming to China was to get food, while
another 36 percent said they wanted to work or make money. More than 80
percent were visiting China for the first time since 1995. Of those who had
come previously, the average length of stay was 52 days, although the great
majority (60 percent) stayed less than one month. Respondents reported

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

80

FAMINE, MORTALITY, AND MIGRATION: NORTH KOREAN MIGRANTS

that they had traveled an average of 143 kilometers from their home to the
border and another 127 kilometers from the border to the site where they
were interviewed. The second figure, if accurate, reflects a significant
amount of local movement within China. It is probably not a measurement
“as the crow flies” from the border to the site. Asked if they planned to
return to North Korea, 56 percent responded yes.
Sex
Among the 1999 sample, 53 percent of respondents were male and 47
percent were female. As Table 3-8 demonstrates, 44 percent of households represented by a male migrant respondent in China had at least one
death during 1995-1998 while 33 percent of households represented by a
female migrant experienced a death in the recall period. This difference,
which is statistically significant (p=0.027), cannot be explained by the fact
that overall male mortality rates within migrant households (39.6/1000)
was higher than female mortality rates (34.9/1000). In fact, males reported only slightly higher death rates for males in their households (41.1/
1000) than female respondents reported for males in their households
(37.5/1000). The real difference was in female mortality, with male respondents reporting much higher female mortality (47.5/1000) in their
households than female respondents reported (18.1/1000) in theirs.
Marital Status
While household mortality does seem to be associated with marital
status (p=0.002), it should be noted that the difference between married
and single persons appears negligible (see Table 3-9). Divorced and widowed persons, however, have a much greater likelihood of household

TABLE 3-8
Mortality

Sex of Respondent and Household
Household Mortality, 1995-1998

Sex

No

Yes

Total

Male
Female

113
120

089
059

202
179

Total

233

148

381

P = 0.027

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

81

W. COURTLAND ROBINSON ET AL.

TABLE 3-9 Marital Status of Respondent and
Household Mortality
Household Mortality, 1995-1998
Marital Status

No

Yes

Total

Married
Single
Divorced
Widowed
Separated
Total

115
100
003
005
009
232

067
053
012
013
003
148

182
153
015
018
012
380

P = 0.002

mortality (widows were already widowed as of January 1995 and all
mortality was subsequent to that).
Disaggregating for gender of respondents, however, we find that
while household mortality did not differ between male and female married respondents, significant differences existed between male and female
single respondents. Among single male respondents, deaths were reported in 50 percent of all households (35 of 70) while among single
female respondents, deaths in the recall period were reported in only 22
percent (18 of 83) of households. Another difference we found when
disaggregating for gender of respondents is that all of the mortality in
households of divorced respondents occurred in households of male respondents; no divorced females were even present in the survey. Conversely, all of the mortality in households of widowed respondents occurred in households of female respondents; only one widowed male was
present in the survey and he reported no deaths in his household from
1995-1998.
Middle-Upper Arm Circumference (MUAC)
Respondents in the 1998 survey were measured for middle upperarm circumference as a rough measure of adult nutritional status. We
employed a cut-point of less than 200 millimeters for males and less than
190 millimeters for females as an indicator of Grade 4 malnutrition or
severe wasting and less than 230 millimeters for males and less than 220
millimeters for females as an indicator of undernourishment (Ferro-Luzzi
and James, 1996). Adjusting for rounding, we found that 5.2 percent (10/
194) of male respondents were severely wasted and 28.9 percent (56/194)
were undernourished. Among females, 3.4 percent (5/146) were severely

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

82

FAMINE, MORTALITY, AND MIGRATION: NORTH KOREAN MIGRANTS

wasted and 32.8 percent (48/146) were undernourished. Total MUAC
scores ranged from a low of 165 millimeters (female) to a high of 298
millimeters (2 males). Running a logistic regression of all MUAC scores
on household mortality, we found a slight negative correlation with no
statistical significance (p=0.134). Disaggregating for gender, however, we
found that among male migrant respondents, MUAC scores had a strong
negative correlation with household mortality (p=0.009) while among female respondents, there was no such correlation (p=0.676).
ANALYSIS AND CONCLUSIONS
The crude death rates among the North Korean households that include a migrant to China reflect a pattern of mortality that is well in
excess of normal and that climaxes in the years 1996 and 1997, when most
accounts suggest that the famine was at its peak. Although we have no
way of measuring the extent to which these rates reflect a broader reality,
we did undertake to assess death rates among households that did not
include a migrant to China. We did this by asking the migrant respondent to describe the separate household of a sibling and then asking if
anyone in that sibling household had visited China during the recall period. Out of 381 migrants interviewed, 142 provided basic demographic
information on a sibling, nonmigrant household. Within these sibling
households, mortality rates during 1995-1998 averaged 59.1/1000, with
rates peaking in 1996 and 1997 and then declining in 1998. Although we
stress that this is not an independent sample, these data suggest that
elevated mortality may affect more than those households that have sent
a migrant into China.
In addition to excess mortality, the sample of North Korean households demonstrates two other trends that are consistent with a response
to famine: declining fertility and rising levels of migration. The drop in
birth rates in 1998 would suggest that many families began to control
their fertility in 1997, allowing a nine-month lag for gestation. As noted
earlier, the migration patterns (which largely are measures of internal, not
international, migration) also support the view that more people were
moving in and out of households when the famine was at its peak in 1997.
The survey found three ways in which household food security was
associated with mortality in migrant households. First, the highest proportion of households experiencing at least one death in the recall period
was found among those that had relied on foraging as their primary
source of food for at least two years. Second, more than 45 percent of all
deaths reported by migrant respondents were attributed to malnutrition
or insufficient food. Third, among male migrant respondents at least,
middle upper arm circumference was negatively associated (p=0.009) with

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

W. COURTLAND ROBINSON ET AL.

83

household mortality. The fact that no such association existed with female respondents suggests either some physiological cause or, perhaps
more likely, that male and female migrants may differ from one another
in the extent to which food insecurity and household mortality motivate
their movements into, and back from, China.
As we have tried to suggest throughout this paper, without solid data
on recent household mortality in North Korea, it is next to impossible to
know if a correlation observed in the migrant household sample is representative of a broader trend or merely indicative of a selection factor for
migration. Looking at mortality differentials within the sample, however, it is possible to conclude that male and female migrants may be
playing somewhat different roles in terms of household coping strategies.
As noted earlier, male migrants are associated with higher proportions of
households with mortality than female migrants (44 percent compared to
33 percent, p=0.027). A higher percentage of males than females have
visited China more than once since 1995 (22 percent compared to 15.3
percent, p=0.064), and more males than females report having relatives in
China (20.1 percent compared to 11.8 percent, p=0.029). Males also have
a greater likelihood of returning to North Korea than females (65.8 percent compared to 44.9 percent, p<0.001).
One difference between male and female migrants that may help to
explain these patterns is that female migrants are more likely than males to
be single (46.6 percent compared to 34.6 percent, p=0.018) or widowed (9.5
percent to 0.5 percent, p<0.001). Although male and female migrants do
not differ significantly in age or household size, the difference in marital
status may partly explain why married and divorced males appear more
likely to respond to distress in the household by going into China and
returning with food or other assistance. Single or widowed females, on the
other hand, may be more likely to respond to distress by leaving the household, thus reducing the number of mouths left to feed. Particularly for
single North Korean females, the prospects for remaining more permanently in China are enhanced by the active “bride-trade” along the border.
When using small, selective samples to estimate the dimensions of a
possibly much larger phenomenon, the limitations are obvious. Surveys
of migrant populations cannot take the place of random sample surveys
in the population at large, especially if one is interested in estimating
national trends in mortality, fertility, or migration. Refugee and migrant
surveys, however, may be necessary in situations of political or military
crisis, natural disaster, severe government restrictions, or any combination of the above, if that is the only way of deriving needed indicators for
an otherwise inaccessible population.
In the case of North Korea, the findings from our survey have several
implications for the humanitarian community. First, our sample provides

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

84

FAMINE, MORTALITY, AND MIGRATION: NORTH KOREAN MIGRANTS

evidence of significantly elevated mortality among at least some North
Korean households, especially in North Hamkyong province. This excess
mortality, moreover, was associated with food insecurity. The age-specific death rates in our sample population indicated that excess mortality
was found not only in the youngest and oldest segments of the population—although these showed the highest absolute increases—but also
among older children and younger to middle-aged adults. The consolidated UN inter-agency appeal for the DPRK in 2000 targeted 8,044,000
beneficiaries, 75 percent of whom were children and another 5 percent of
whom were elderly (aged 60 and above) (United Nations Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, 1999). Nearly two-thirds (63 percent) of all deaths reported in our survey, however, occurred to people
between the ages of 20 and 59, suggesting that not all high-risk groups
will benefit from UN-supported feeding programs. A majority of beneficiaries, moreover, are targeted through government institutions (kindergartens, primary and secondary schools, orphanages, hospitals, factories,
and collective farms). Children who are not in school, adults who are
unemployed, and people of any age who are away from their registered
residence or place of work are unlikely to be reached either by UN or
government-sponsored food distributions.
Migrant surveys are important for their own sake, even when migrants do not represent the broader picture. First, simply because they
exist, forced migrants may be signals of crisis and distress that otherwise
might be hidden from the international community. Second, forced migrants—both international and internal—may be among the most vulnerable populations in any complex humanitarian emergency. And third,
questions and issues that emerge from these surveys may help to shape a
broader response to crisis. International refugees and migrants too often
are treated as a separate and distinct problem from the crisis they have
supposedly left behind. Migrant surveys may help us see not only that
these problems are of a piece but also how better to solve them in a more
comprehensive manner.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Support for this study came from the Center of Excellence in Disaster
Management and Humanitarian Assistance and the Andrew W. Mellon
Foundation. Fieldwork was carried out in collaboration with Mercy Corps
International.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

W. COURTLAND ROBINSON ET AL.

85

REFERENCES
Asia Watch and Minnesota Lawyers International Human Rights Committee
1988 Human Rights in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea). Minneapolis and Washington, D.C.: Asia Watch and Minnesota Lawyers International Human Rights Committee.
Coale, A.J., and P. Demeny
1983 Regional Model Life Tables and Stable Populations. New York: Academic Press.
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea Central Bureau for Statistics
1997 Population by Location and Households, December 31, 1993. World Food Programme
Mimeograph.
Eberstadt, N., and J. Banister
1992 The Population of North Korea. Berkeley: University of California, Institute of East
Asian Studies.
European Union, United Nations Children’s Fund, and World Food Programme
1998 Nutrition Survey of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. New York: UNICEF.
Ferro-Luzzi, A., and W. James
1996 Adult malnutrition: Simple assessment techniques for use in emergencies. British
Journal of Nutrition 753:10.
Katona-Apte, J., and A. Mokdad
1998 Malnutrition of children in the Democratic People’s Republic of North Korea.
Journal of Nutrition 128(8):1315-1319.
Korean Buddhist Sharing Movement
1998 The Food Crisis of North Korea Witnessed by 1,019 Food Refugees. Seoul: Korean Buddhist Sharing Movement.
Robinson, W.C., M. Lee, K. Hill, and G. Burnham
1999 Mortality in North Korean migrant households. Lancet 3542:91-95.
Savada, A.M.
1994 North Korea: A Country Study. Washington, D.C.: Federal Research Division, Library of Congress.
United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
1998 1996 Demographic Yearbook. New York: United Nations, Department of Economic
and Social Affairs.
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
1999 UN Consolidated Interagency Appeal for Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, January-December 2000. Geneva: United Nations.
World Food Programme
1997 On the Knife Edge of a Famine. Rome: World Food Programme.
World Vision
1997 North Korea Food Questionnaire. Federal Way, Washington: World Vision.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

4
Methods of Determining Mortality in
the Mass Displacement and Return of
Emergency-Affected Populations in
Kosovo, 1998-1999
Brent Burkholder, Paul Spiegel, and Peter Salama

INTRODUCTION
In early 1998, long-standing tensions between the majority ethnic Albanian and minority Serbian populations in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (FRY) province of Kosovo broke out into open hostilities. Fighting intensified throughout the year between an armed resistance
movement, the Kosovo Liberation Army (KLA), and local Serbian police
and military forces, resulting in the destruction of multiple towns and the
internal displacement of thousands of ethnic Albanians. Following the
failure of diplomatic initiatives in early 1999, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization (NATO) began an organized bombing campaign in Kosovo
on March 24, 1999. During the subsequent three months, additional ethnic violence forced almost 70 percent of the estimated 1.9 million Kosovar
Albanians to leave their homes. Approximately 500,000 remained displaced within Kosovo and another 775,000 fled as refugees, including
444,600 to Albania, 244,500 to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(FYROM), and 69,900 to the province of Montenegro (see Figure 4-1) (del
Mundo and Wilkinson, 1999). After the signing of a peace accord on June
10, 1999, the flood of refugees reversed, and within three weeks more
than 600,000 people had returned to Kosovo, one of the fastest repatriations in modern times (del Mundo and Wilkinson, 1999).
Tracking the mortality associated with the violence, movements, and
conditions of displacement suffered by the emergency-affected populations during this crisis proved extremely problematic. During the height
86

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

87

BRENT BURKHOLDER, PAUL SPIEGEL, AND PETER SALAMA

-69,700 Kosovar
-13,300 Serbian
Refugees

-444,600
Refugees
-242,300
Refugees

City
Camp
Planned Camp
Roads
Rivers
Lakes
National Boundaries

FIGURE 4-1 Map of Kosovo region, June 15, 1999. Source: United States Agency for International Development (1999).

of the violence from March to June 1999 there were no outside observers
in Kosovo. Even within Albania and FYROM, the wide dispersal of the
refugees into multiple small collective centers and host families limited
access to large portions of this population. United Nations (UN) agencies
and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) did establish emergency

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

88

EMERGENCY-AFFECTED POPULATIONS IN KOSOVO

surveillance systems in these two countries. However, logistical problems and the challenges of integrating these emergency operations into
local, ongoing surveillance systems led to difficulties in obtaining comprehensive health data.
Nevertheless, it is important to provide a record of mortality associated with this crisis and to highlight the challenges of collecting and
analyzing data that confronted epidemiologists in the field. Our best
estimates are that the absolute levels of mortality among the Kosovar
refugees were not elevated as compared to previous complex emergencies. However, in addition to providing mortality results, we will
focus on the methods required to both obtain and analyze this mortality data through surveillance systems in Albania and FYROM, as well
as through a retrospective survey in Kosovo itself. In both scenarios,
obtaining accurate population figures for denominator data or sample
frame determination proved as problematic as obtaining information
on deaths.
For information on Albania and FYROM, Burkholder collected information from a variety of sources, principally from surveillance systems
operational during the crisis. In Kosovo, Spiegel and Salama conducted a
retrospective population-based health survey between September 8 and
September 17, 1999. The survey was a collaborative effort between the
International Rescue Committee (IRC), the Kosovo Institute of Public
Health (IPH), the World Health Organization (WHO), and the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
METHODS
Albania and FYROM Surveillance Systems in
Kosovar Refugee Camps
Denominators: Obtaining Population Estimates
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) had
comparatively complete figures for the relatively small number of
Kosovar Albanians who fled into neighboring countries prior to the
NATO bombing on March 24, 1999. However, from that point until the
second week of April, refugee population estimates in both Albania and
FYROM varied widely due to the chaotic influx of large masses of refugees crossing the borders daily. UNHCR was gradually able to begin a
more systematic enumeration process in cooperation with local governments, the International Organization for Migration (IOM), and the local
Red Cross societies. By March 27 in Albania, and April 15 in FYROM,
UNHCR issued daily reports on the number of new refugees and esti-

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

BRENT BURKHOLDER, PAUL SPIEGEL, AND PETER SALAMA

89

mates of total refugees residing in the host country.1 We obtained detailed population demographic information for camp refugees in FYROM
from the IOM registration data bank (International Organization for Migration, 1999).
Mortality Surveillance
In Albania, the government’s Institute of Public Health, UN agencies,
and NGOs collaborated on the Kosovar Refugee Information System
(KRYSIS) which began collecting health data on a weekly basis beginning
on April 16 (Instituti Shendetit Publik and World Health Organization,
1999; Ministry of Health of the Republic of Albania et al., 1999). The
system attempted to incorporate reporting from local government health
clinics in all 37 districts as well as from health posts established by NGOs
in refugee camps. While timeliness and completeness varied from week
to week, over 86 percent of all health units participated (Instituti Shendetit
Publik and World Health Organization, 1999; Valenciano et al., 1999).
Because an Epicentre rapid assessment in Kukes (Perea, 1999) and other
reports early in the emergency found relatively low mortality rates, the
surveillance system purposely focused on outpatient facilities and targeted communicable diseases (Coulombier, 1999). Although KRYSIS did
report some deaths which occurred in camps or local clinics, most mortality was tracked through a hospital surveillance system which reported
directly to the Ministry of Health (Albanian Ministry of Health Statistic
Unit, 1999). Line listings of deaths were not available; however, there
does not appear to be duplication between these two sources (Coulombier,
1999). Age and cause of death were provided only for reports from the
KRYSIS. Due to the limitations listed above, refugee deaths that occurred
in Albania are most likely under-reported to a greater extent than in
FYROM.
In FYROM, we obtained information on deaths that occurred in the
camps during the early phase of the crisis through personal communication with field hospital staff (Alkan, 1999; Beckman, 1999). Later, deaths
were reported through the Macedonian Refugee Communicable Disease
Surveillance System, which began weekly standardized data collection
from NGO camp health posts and field hospitals on April 26, 1999 (World
Health Organization Regional Office for Europe et al., 1999). The Ministry of the Interior (MOI) provided an additional list of all refugee deaths
that occurred in state hospitals between mid-March and June 30, 1999
(Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Ministry of the Interior, 1999).
1 Additional population figures were obtained from daily refugee population reports
produced by UNHCR in Tirana, Albania, and Skopje, FYROM.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

90

EMERGENCY-AFFECTED POPULATIONS IN KOSOVO

Although deaths occurring in the camps were also required to have
FYROM official death certificates, a careful comparison of both camp and
MOI lists did not reveal any duplications. Additional deaths were discovered through a listing of funerals provided by a local Albanian NGO
(El Hillal, 1999).
Kosovo Retrospective Mortality Survey2
To assess mortality rates, major causes of death and the risk factors
for mortality during the civil war period of February 1998 to June 1999,
we conducted a two-stage cluster survey in the 25 predominantly Albanian municipalities of Kosovo. Assuming a doubling of the baseline mortality rate and a design effect of 4, we calculated a total sample population
of 6,440 individuals or 1,200 households.
We chose villages or city neighborhoods as our sampling unit; however, determining a proper population sampling frame proved extremely
difficult due to the lack of current demographic information. The most
recent census data from 1991 was outdated by the crisis-induced population displacement over the last year. Nevertheless, we took this census as
the best available baseline and updated the figures for each village and/
or neighborhood based upon population estimates made after July 1999
by UNHCR, the NATO intervention Kosovo force (KFOR), and food distribution lists from various NGOs. The sample was stratified to account
for rural/urban and destroyed/non-destroyed status and 50 clusters (of
24 households each) were then assigned based on probability proportional to size. Households within each cluster were selected according to
the standard method used by the Expanded Program on Immunization.
One member of each household was interviewed and asked to provide a
household census during the month of January 1998 and to recount information on the whereabouts of each individual, including any deaths that
had occurred since that time.
RESULTS
Population Estimations: Kosovar Refugees in Albania and FYROM
From 1998 through mid-March 1999, approximately 25,000 refugees
crossed into Albania fleeing the ethnic violence in Kosovo. In the two

2 Detailed information on survey methodology and results can be found in Spiegel and
Salama (2000). This survey includes deaths among all Albanian Kosovars: refugees, internally displaced, and those who never left their homes.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

91

BRENT BURKHOLDER, PAUL SPIEGEL, AND PETER SALAMA
Albania

Population (000's)

500

FYROM

400
300
200
100
0
24

3/

7

4/

21

4/

19

5

5/

5/

2

6/

16

6/

30

6/

1999

FIGURE 4-2 Number of Kosovar refugees in Albania and the Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia (FYROM), March 24-June 30, 1999.

weeks following the NATO bombing on March 24, 1999, an estimated
285,000 refugees entered the Kukes region of northern Albania. A slow,
steady stream of additional refugees followed. The refugee population in
Albania peaked in mid-June 1999 at a total of 444,500 (see Figure 4-2) (del
Mundo and Wilkinson, 1999; United States Agency for International Development, 1999). Refugees were eventually dispersed throughout the
country. Over two-thirds lived with host families, another 20 percent
were housed in 22 camps, and the remainder were accommodated in
multiple small collective centers (United States Agency for International
Development, 1999). Repatriation occurred almost as quickly as the initial influx. Between June 15 and June 30, 1999, over 287,000 refugees
returned home to Kosovo and the vast majority of those remaining returned within the next month.3
Population flows into FYROM were slightly smaller in terms of numbers, but no less dramatic. Only 16,000 refugees had crossed the border
before the NATO bombing, but in the subsequent two weeks another
101,000 Kosovar Albanians fled into FYROM. Over the next months,
further immigration varied considerably depending on the level of violence in Kosovo and the ease of border crossing. Eventually, by June 15,
1999, over 245,000 refugees would reach the FYROM (World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe et al., 1999). At that time, 43 per3 Additional population figures were obtained from daily refugee population reports
produced by UNHCR in Tirana, Albania and Skopje, FYROM.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

92

EMERGENCY-AFFECTED POPULATIONS IN KOSOVO

cent were living in 8 refugee camps and the remainder were housed with
host families, primarily in the 5 regions near the border (Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia Ministry of the Interior, 1999). Almost 202,000
returned home by the end of June.
Population fluctuations in FYROM were even more pronounced because of the UNHCR/IOM Humanitarian Evacuation Program. Between
April 5 and June 25, 1999, 90,189 refugees in the FYROM were evacuated
to third countries.4 This movement led to huge population shifts, particularly in the two camps that were the primary source of evacuees. For
example, during the last three weeks in May, 44,417 refugees left the
Macedonian camps and 46,492 arrived.
Demographic data are available only for the refugee camp population
in FYROM. According to IOM registration data on May 27, 1999, the agegender distribution of the camp population was roughly similar to that of
the Kosovar population found in the 1991 census (International Organization for Migration, 1999).
MORTALITY
Crude Mortality Rates
Table 4-1 shows reported deaths and crude mortality rates (CMRs)
from both surveillance systems in refugee camps in Albania and FYROM,
and the retrospective survey. Of the 141 refugee deaths reported in
Albania, the KRYSIS (Ministry of Health of the Republic of Albania et al.,
1999) reported 34 and the Ministry of Health (Albanian Ministry of Health
Statistic Unit, 1999) reported 107 from hospital surveillance. In FYROM,
the camp surveillance system (World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe et al., 1999) detected 28 (16 percent) refugee deaths and the
Ministry of Interior (Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Ministry of
the Interior, 1999) reported 143 (76 percent). Field hospital directors were
aware of five additional deaths in the first week of the refugee influx in
early April. The NGO funeral list (El Hillal, 1999) included 34 deaths, of
which 11 were not found in any other sources.
There was a difference in the Albanian and FYROM refugee CMRs
(0.11 versus 0.14 and 0.24 versus 0.33, respectively), based on whether the
midpoint or average population was used to calculate the denominator.
However, the difference was not statistically significant in either case (zstatistic to compare rates).

4 Again, additional population figures were obtained from daily refugee population reports produced by UNHCR in Tirana, Albania and Skopje, FYROM.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

1996
3/20/99–6/30/99
4/1/99–6/30/99
02/1/98–6/30/99
N/A
232,900
432,267
N/A
N/A

105
67

Midpoint
Population

N/A
187
141

Reported
Deaths

N/A
N/A

N/A
0.24
0.11

CMR (Deaths/
1,000/Month)

N/A
170,063
334,778
Initial Population
8,553
8,553

Average
Population

0.72
0.46

0.31
0.33
0.14

CMR (Deaths/
1,000/Month)

Sources: Ministry of Health of the Republic of Albania et al. (1999); Albanian Ministry of Health Statistic Unit (1999); World Health
Organization Regional Office for Europe et al. (1999); Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Ministry of the Interior (1999); and El
Hillal (1999). aThere was significant underreporting of Kosovo refugee deaths in Albania. bDisplaced and nondisplaced.

Kosovo Baseline
Refugees in FYROM
Refugees in Albaniaa
Kosovo Surveyb
All causes
War-related

Time Period

TABLE 4-1 Crude Mortality Rates (CMRs) in Kosovo, February 1998-June 1999, and among Kosovar
Refugees in Albania and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM), March-June 1999

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

93

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

94

EMERGENCY-AFFECTED POPULATIONS IN KOSOVO
Kosovo

4.0

FYROM
3.5

Deaths/1,000/month

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

Jan Feb

1998

Mar Apr May Jun

Jul Aug Sep Oct

Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun

Jul

Aug Sep

1999

FIGURE 4-3 Crude mortality rate in Kosovo, January 1998-September 1999, and
among Kosovar refugees in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM), March-June 1999.

The retrospective mortality survey in Kosovo that covered the complete 17-month period of the crisis found a much higher overall CMR
(0.72 per 1,000 per month). Note that the data sources for the surveillance
and the retrospective survey are not mutually exclusive. The respondents
to the survey in Kosovo included refugees who had returned from
FYROM (as well as other countries) and therefore may be reporting deaths
that were also included in the surveillance system.
Figure 4-3 shows that mortality during the Kosovo crisis peaked in
April 1999. In FYROM, the death rate in the refugee camps was highest
during April in the initial phase of the refugee exodus and then steadily
declined. Even during April, the CMR only reached 0.56 per 1,000 per
month (6.7 per 1,000 per year) in the refugee camps. The Kosovo data
show a similar pattern but with a much higher peak CMR of 3.25 per 1,000
per month (39 per 1,000 per year). This major increase in mortality and
smaller peaks throughout 1998 closely correspond to flare-ups in fighting.
As stated below, the majority of the elevated mortality was due to warrelated trauma.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

95

BRENT BURKHOLDER, PAUL SPIEGEL, AND PETER SALAMA

0-4

5-14

0-4

5%

0%

13%

5-14
2%

15-44

15-44

30%

60+

6%

44%

60+

45-59

66%

13%

45-59
21%
Kosovo

FYROM

FIGURE 4-4 Age-specific mortality of Kosovar Albanians in Kosovo, February
1, 1998-June 30, 1999 (N=105) and in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(FYROM), March 20-June 30, 1999 (N=141).

Age, Sex, and Cause-Specific Mortality
Specific information on mortality in Albania was limited (Valenciano
et al., 1999). Between April 16 and June 6, 1999, this surveillance system
reported 34 deaths; 11 in children under 5 years old and 23 among those
over 5 years old. Cause of death was clearly specified in only 17 cases.
Among children under 5 years, death was attributed to acute respiratory
infection in 3 (36 percent) cases; and among those over 5 years, 3 (13
percent) were also due to acute respiratory infection and 11 (48 percent)
deaths were labeled as “cardiac.”
Males accounted for 54 percent of the deaths in FYROM. Specific age
data was available for only 141 (75 percent) of the 187 deaths (see Figure
4-4). The majority (66 percent) of deaths were in adults 60 years and over.
Of the 19 deaths in children under 5 years, 15 occurred among neonates
and were ascribed to either “prematurity” or “aspiration.” Over 55 percent of all deaths were attributed to either “natural causes” or chronic
disease (see Figure 4-5). There were few infectious disease deaths. The
“other” category included two deaths due to hypothermia, two to gunshots, and one due to a motor vehicle accident. Seventy-one (40 percent)
deaths occurred among refugees who lived in camps and 112 (60 percent)
occurred among host-family refugees (Ministry of Health of the Republic
of Albania et al., 1999). There was no statistical significance in the CMR
based on residence status (data not shown).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

96

EMERGENCY-AFFECTED POPULATIONS IN KOSOVO
Natural
19%

War-related
Trauma
63%

Unknown
22%

Non War-related
Trauma
Chronic
37%
51%

Infectious
3%

Kosovo

Other
5%

Other
3%

Prematurity
10%
Chronic
24%

Infectious
3%

Unknown
28%
Natural
32%
FYROM

FIGURE 4-5 Proportional mortality of Kosovar Albanians in Kosovo, February
1, 1998-June 30, 1999 (N=105) and in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
(FYROM), March 20-June 30, 1999 (N=187).

In the Kosovo survey, males accounted for 67 percent of all reported
deaths, a higher proportion than in FYROM. Unlike FYROM, a smaller
percentage of deaths occurred among the 60 years and older age group
(44 percent), while a much larger proportion occurred among the 15 to 59
year olds (51 percent). A smaller percentage of deaths under 5 years (5
percent) occurred in the Kosovo survey, possibly due to methodological
problems in capturing infant deaths in a retrospective survey (see Figure
4-4). “War-related trauma,” which constituted the largest cause of death
(63 percent), was defined as any death occurring directly or as a result of
an injury sustained during the conflict (see Figure 4-5). These war-related
traumas included summary and arbitrary killings with bullets, shrapnel
or other munitions, or by the burning or collapsing of buildings, bridges,

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

BRENT BURKHOLDER, PAUL SPIEGEL, AND PETER SALAMA

97

and other structures. In data not shown here, we found that 24 (36 percent) of the 67 deaths due to war-related trauma were among the elderly
(60 years and older), and of this group, 92 percent were male. The elderly
were 5.9 times (95 percent confidence interval: 3.6-6.6) more likely to die
from this cause than any other age group. Among the non-war-related
causes of death, chronic disease and “natural” causes accounted for 70
percent of the deaths. As in FYROM, infectious diseases only accounted
for a relatively small percentage of deaths.
LIMITATIONS
Albania and FYROM Surveillance Systems in
Kosovar Refugee Camps
The relative lack of mortality data from Albania precludes making
any conclusions about the status of refugees in that country or drawing
any comparisons to those in FYROM. The wide geographic disbursement
of the refugees, their access to multiple health facilities, and the understandable focus of the surveillance system on outpatient clinics seem to
have complicated the process of tracking mortality in this setting.
Even in FYROM, where the refugees were more concentrated and
had access to only a limited number of health centers and hospitals, it is
difficult to gauge accurately the completeness of reporting. Deaths occurring during the early chaos of the influx may not have been reported.
After that period, reporting for camp refugees should have been more
complete since these refugees were either treated in camp field hospitals
or were directly transported to one of a limited number of local tertiary
care centers. However, only 28 (39 percent) of 71 camp refugee deaths
were reported by the camp surveillance system; the remainder were reported months later through routine channels. Additionally, due to
FYROM government restrictions on travel and access to health facilities,
host family refugees may have been less likely to seek care. Underreporting of deaths may be likely among this group, particularly for those
in rural areas. The local NGO funeral list was impossible to verify; however 11 of the 34 deaths they reported were not on the official MOI record.
There were similar limitations in obtaining accurate denominator
data. The rapid mass movement of the refugees at multiple border crossings, the refugees’ wide geographic dispersal, and their distribution into
multiple types of accommodations all presented challenges to obtaining
accurate estimations of the number of people involved. Refugees arriving before early April routinely made their own arrangements for housing with host families. Only refugees who arrived later were sent to
camps or, in the case of Albania, to camps or collective centers. Registra-

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

98

EMERGENCY-AFFECTED POPULATIONS IN KOSOVO

tion in the confines of camps or collective centers was difficult due to the
constant influx of new arrivals and, in FYROM, departures for third countries, but nevertheless proved easier than dealing with refugees in host
families. Enumeration was particularly delayed in FYROM where host
family refugees had to go through a multistage registration process before inclusion on the official Macedonian Red Cross list.
Kosovo Retrospective Mortality Survey
This survey has some of the same limitations that have been pointed
out in previous retrospective mortality studies (Ascherio et al., 1992). The
17-month recall period is relatively long and could potentially introduce
recall bias. Survivor bias can be present in any such surveys since households in which all members have died or remain refugees could not have
been selected. Additionally, limitations related to verbal autopsies can
make cause of death determinations problematic.
Epidemiologists in Kosovo had additional constraints, particularly in
estimating local population figures for sample determination. Inaccurate
or outdated census data and lack of current population figures can introduce selection bias in any conflict situation, but these factors may have
introduced particular challenges in this case due to the exceptionally high
percent of household displacement. Furthermore, there may be inherent
limitations to using cluster sampling for mortality surveys in general.
DISCUSSION
Albania and FYROM Surveillance Systems in
Kosovar Refugee Camps
While the validity of the data cannot be confirmed due to the possible
exclusion of Kosovar Albanians from the surveillance system, the Kosovo
Institute of Public Health reported an average CMR of 4.0 per 1,000 per
year (0.33 per 1,000 per month) for 1989-1996 (Kosovo Institute of Public
Health, 1997). Compared to this baseline, the CMR available from the
KRYSIS and Albanian MOH for refugees in Albania is exceedingly low.
These surveillance systems did not concentrate on mortality so the low
rates most likely represent underreporting.
The aggregated mortality data on refugees in FYROM appears to be
more complete; however, the CMR is still quite low by any comparison to
emergency standards. Certainly the mortality rate did not come close to
the previously accepted complex emergency threshold of greater than 1
death per 10,000 per day, or 3 per 1,000 per month (Sphere Project Steering Committee for Humanitarian Response and Interaction, 1998). The

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

BRENT BURKHOLDER, PAUL SPIEGEL, AND PETER SALAMA

99

average CMR for the three-month crisis was markedly similar to the prewar baseline and surpassed it only during the height of the crisis in April.
Even allowing for substantial underreporting, it appears that the Kosovar
Albanians were a generally healthy and relatively young population
whose health status was maintained during their refuge in the FYROM.
Kosovo Retrospective Mortality Survey
The Kosovo survey did report an average CMR between February
1998 and June 1999 that was 2.3 times higher than the preconflict baseline.
However, only during the month of April 1999 did the CMR cross the
conventional threshold for emergencies. Nevertheless, contrary to most
previous emergencies where children have been the most vulnerable
(Toole, 1996), data here suggest that the elderly may have been most at
risk for both war-related trauma and overall increased mortality.
Questions and Challenges for Collecting Mortality Data in Future
Humanitarian Emergencies
Recent crises in Kosovo, Bosnia and elsewhere outside of Africa have
led to a call to change the mortality definition of an emergency and to
recognize the altered epidemiological profile that has been demonstrated
in these circumstances (Waldman and Martone, 1999). The experience of
collecting mortality data for the Kosovo crisis provided useful information but raised questions of how to respond to this call. Furthermore, it
raises several methodological issues that need to be addressed if we are to
improve our understanding and techniques of health surveillance.
1. Should mortality still be considered the most sensitive indicator of
an emergency-affected population’s health status? The CMR in FYROM
(and probably also in Albania) did not appear to be elevated for the refugees, but few humanitarian workers would deny that they faced a public
health crisis. This issue raises the further question of whether emergency
surveillance systems should focus primarily on morbidity and detecting
epidemics in certain situations where mortality appears low.
2. Similarly, in low CMR situations, what is the appropriate threshold to define significant excess mortality? Obviously, the previous standard of 1 death per 10,000 per day is not sensitive enough to detect major
increases in mortality among populations with comparatively low preemergency rates. We need to consider whether a doubling of baseline
rates may be an appropriate definition in these circumstances.
3. How do we monitor mortality in non-camp settings? Most refugee
deaths in Albania and FYROM occurred in hospitals, not in camps where

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

100

EMERGENCY-AFFECTED POPULATIONS IN KOSOVO

emergency surveillance systems were operational. In FYROM the government required that mortality be reported through the routine surveillance system, which resulted in lengthy delays in obtaining potentially
critical health data. Separate registration and reporting systems for refugees admitted to hospitals should be instituted but may be problematic in
many situations. Agencies in charge of surveillance in emergency settings must be willing to commit additional resources to bolster routine
systems and provide expedited reporting.
4. How do we calculate denominators in situations of massive population flows, particularly when many refugees may be housed with local
populations? When populations shift over short periods of time, should
the midpoint or average population be used as a denominator in calculating CMR? Do we need to account for situations of rapid in- and outmigration where the total population remains the same, but the population turnover is high? Epidemiologists involved in emergencies have
developed some techniques for cross-sectional population estimations,
but we need to discuss with demographers how to further develop these
tools and address calculating denominators.
5. Cluster sampling, which was developed to measure immunization
coverage, has routinely been used for retrospective mortality surveys.
Can both the sampling and analysis of this methodology be refined to
reflect the non-homogenous pattern of deaths in crisis situations? Beyond
the questions inherent in estimating populations and determining clusters, does this method offer the precision needed to document relatively
rare events such as deaths? Epidemiologists, demographers, and survey
statisticians need to collaborate on answering these and other questions
to improve practical methods of mortality surveillance in emergencies.
REFERENCES
Albanian Ministry of Health Statistic Unit
1999 Number of deaths among refugees in Albanian hospitals (4/1/99 to 6/3/99).
Alkan, M.
1999 Personal communication. Israeli Military Field Hospital, Brazda camp.
Ascherio, A., R. Chase, T. Cote, G. Dehaes, E. Hoskins, J. Laaouej, M. Passey, S. Qaderi, S.
Shuqaidef, and M.C. Smith
1992 Effect of the Gulf War on infant and child mortality in Iraq. New England Journal of
Medicine 327(13):931-936.
Beckman, H.
1999 Personal communication. German Red Cross Field Hospital, Brazda camp.
Coulombier, D.
1999 Personal communication. Institut de Veille Sanitaire, November 22, 1999.
del Mundo, F., and R. Wilkinson
1999 A race against time. Refugees 3(116):4-15.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

BRENT BURKHOLDER, PAUL SPIEGEL, AND PETER SALAMA

101

El Hillal
1999 Request for funeral expenses submitted to UNHCR, June 1, 1999.
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Ministry of the Interior
1999 Line listing of refugee deaths, March-June, 1999.
Instituti Shendetit Publik and World Health Organization
1999 Surveillance system among Kosovar refugee population in Albania: Final report.
World Health Organization/European Regional Office.
International Organization for Migration
1999 IOM/UNHCR registration database accessed on May 27, 1999.
Kosovo Institute of Public Health
1997 Statistical Report, 1997.
Ministry of Health of the Republic of Albania, World Health Organization Humanitarian
Mission, Tirana, and Institut de Veille Sanitaire
1999 Kosovar Refugee Information System (KRYSIS) weekly reports from April 16June 6, 1999.
Perea W.
1999 Report on rapid needs assessment among Kosovar refugees hosted by Albanian
families, and assessment of human rights violations committed in Kosovo. Paris:
Epicentre.
Sphere Project Steering Committee for Humanitarian Response and Interaction
1998 Sphere Project Report. Geneva, 1998.
Spiegel, P.B., and P. Salama
2000 War and mortality in Kosovo, 1998-99: An epidemiological testimony. Lancet
355:2204-2209.
Toole, M.J.
1996 Vulnerability in emergency situations. Lancet 348(9031):840.
United States Agency for International Development
1999 USAID Fact Sheet #72, June 15, 1999. [Online]. Available: http://
www.info.usaid.gov [Accessed: June 17, 1999.]
Valenciano, M., A. Pinto, D. Coulombier, E. Hashorva, and M. Murthi
1999 Surveillance of communicable diseases among Kosovar refugees in Albania.
Eurosurveillance, Sept 1999. [Online]. Available:
http://www.cese.org/
eurosurv_eng.htm [Accessed: November 1, 1999].
Waldman, R., and G. Martone
1999 Public health and complex emergencies: New issues, new conditions. American
Journal of Public Health 89(10):1483-1485.
World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe, Office for Humanitarian Assistance
of the FYROM, and the Health Information Network for Advanced Planning
1999 Health Bulletins from April 26-July 2, 1999 (Nos. 5-14).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

5
The Demographic Analysis of Mortality
Crises: The Case of Cambodia,
1970-1979
Patrick Heuveline

As best as can now be estimated, over two million Cambodians died
during the 1970s because of the political events of the decade, the vast
majority of them during the mere four years of the “Khmer Rouge” regime. This number of deaths is even more staggering when related to the
size of the Cambodian population, then less than eight million. In my
estimation, about a third of the 1970 population would have survived to
the end of the decade under “normal” demographic conditions but did
not under the circumstances that prevailed. No single factor alone explains the rare intensity of the Cambodian mortality crisis. Instead, the
excess mortality pattern reflects one of the worst imaginable mixes of
conditions, including war casualties, massive population displacement,
ethnic cleansing, health system collapse, and famine.
I begin this chapter with a brief summary of the various political
events that had demographic consequences in the 1970s. I continue with
a discussion of the different sources of data and corresponding techniques
for estimating the volume of deaths during a mortality crisis. I then
discuss further the estimation of the cause-of-death, sex and age patterns
of crisis mortality. To illustrate how particular conditions and data availability constrain the choice of methods and the implementation of the
selected methods, the last section describes past estimations of mortality
patterns in Cambodia during the 1970s.

102

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

103

PATRICK HEUVELINE

CAMBODIA IN THE 1970s1
At the onset of this terrible decade in Cambodian history, the Communist Party of Kampuchea’s (CPK) armed opposition to prince Norodom
Sihanouk was gaining momentum. Those who would be remembered as
the “Khmers Rouges,” a term coined by Sihanouk himself, occupied bases
in the northeast and northwest corners of the country from which they
rendered unsafe as much as a fifth of Cambodia’s territory (Chandler,
1996). To the west, Vietnamese communist troops held bases on Cambodian soil. Up to this point, the population of Cambodia can be reasonably
well extrapolated from the demographic analysis of its 1962 census
(Migozzi, 1973; Siampos, 1970).
In March 1970, the National Assembly voted Sihanouk out of power
to the benefit of his own Prime Minister, Lon Nol. Sihanouk learned of
the coup while on holiday, out of the country. With the support of North
Vietnam, he took command of an opposition alliance whose military force
on the ground consisted mostly of his former foes of the CPK. In part
because of the North Vietnamese support to the opposition, the new Cambodian government started a strong campaign against the half million
ethnic Vietnamese then living in Cambodia and suspected of supporting
Sihanouk. The Cambodian army killed thousands of Vietnamese civilians (Chandler, 1996:205), and about 300,000 people are believed to have
fled—or to have been expelled by force—to Vietnam during the first eight
months of 1970 (Migozzi, 1973:44). But the inexperienced and ill-equipped
army failed to drive North Vietnamese forces out of the country.
Over the next four years, the Lon Nol government gradually lost
control over the Cambodian countryside. The mortality impact of the
civil war is difficult to assess, but the main controversy in this respect
concerns the impact of a massive bombardment of eastern Cambodia by
U.S. planes in early 1973—sometimes referred to as the “Kissinger war”
because of former U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger’s involvement—
meant to weaken the North Vietnamese troops. Sihanouk (1986:144) mentions a widely circulated but unsubstantiated estimate that 700,000 Cambodians were killed under the Lon Nol government. Kiernan (1989)
argues that the impact of the U.S. bombing could not be more than 150,000
deaths, and subsequent reevaluations of the demographic data situated

1 Although more emphasis is given here to deaths and refugees movements, the historical
account in this section borrows liberally from Chandler (1996), to which the reader is referred for more details about the political developments of the decade. For an unforgettable, personal account of the post-1975 period, see Ung (2000). For a discussion of the
available demographic data, see Huguet (1992), Banister and Johnson (1993), and Heuveline
(1998a).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

104

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

the death toll for the four years in the order of 300,000 or less (Banister
and Johnson, 1993:87-90; Sliwinski, 1995:48).
The Khmers Rouges took Phnom Penh in April 1975. The population
of the capital had swollen with the influx of about two million refugees that
had moved with the front. One of the first decisions of the new Democratic
Kampuchea (DK) was to empty the cities, pushing the formerly urban population on the road to rural areas with no delay or explanation. While food
shortages were looming, political purposes likely motivated the decision
(Chandler, 1996:210). Forced to walk along long roads, these “new
people”—by opposition to rural people, referred to as “base” people in the
DK revolutionary terms—began to experience what would be their lot for
the four years of the DK: exhaustion, lack of food, and executions. Due to
long days of physical labor, exposure to deadly malaria strains, and insufficient food rations, the mortality of the relocated “new people” was dramatic, in particular for the sick, the elderly, and youngest children. The
Khmers Rouges also engaged in political and ethnic purges against those
connected to the Lon Nol government and former ruling elite, the remaining ethnic Vietnamese, the Muslim Chams, and more generally all those
deemed enemies of the revolution (Kiernan, 1996). Mortality increase was
not contained to any specific sub-population, however. As early as 1976,
food was scarce for the entire civilian population as the food produced was
allocated in priority to the troops and even exported to generate revenues
to pay back arms. The sanitary conditions deteriorated as clinics lost their
trained medical staff and medicine supplies. Executions could punish any
minor violations of the Khmers Rouges’ orders as well as internal dissension within the party ranks.
From the beginning, the DK maintained a defiant attitude toward
Vietnam but the tensions escalated rapidly toward the end of 1977. After
a first successful penetration into Cambodia in December 1977, followed
by a voluntary withdrawal a few weeks later, Vietnamese troops entered
Cambodia again at the end of 1978. This time they continued toward
Phnom Penh, reaching as early as January 1979 a capital abandoned by
the Khmers Rouges for the north and northwest mountains. As the
Khmers Rouges retreated, many Cambodians returned to their original
residence or moved to search for family members from whom they had
been separated. An unfortunate consequence was that much of the crops
were left untended, which combined with a drought and the lack of food
stocks from previous years to create dramatic food shortages that impacted all the more a population already exhausted by years of bare subsistence. An international campaign was quickly launched to send relief
to Cambodia but was hampered by a destroyed infrastructure and various bureaucratic constraints. Food supply remained deficient for most of
1979 and the famine could not be completely avoided. The most dramatic

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

PATRICK HEUVELINE

105

estimates of its toll are around 500,000 deaths (Ea, 1987; Banister and
Johnson, 1993; Sliwinski, 1995) but those are again contested as much too
high (Kiernan, 1986).
As the DK was closed to foreigners and did not maintain national
statistics, for a while no quantitative estimate of mortality during the DK
was available. Some demographic data on the population of Cambodia
became available in the early 1980s. Suspicions about the quality of these
data arose because they were mere administrative counts that served
political purposes, by entering into the regional allocation scheme of international aid (Huguet, 1992). Moreover, tallying population estimates
from local registers must have been quite difficult at a time of high population mobility. Better data became available in the 1990s, starting with
the 1993 electoral lists (United Nations, 1995), the 1996 Demographic Survey, and the 1998 General Population Census (National Institute of Statistics, 1996; National Institute of Statistics, 1999).
Estimates were derived from these data by the methods discussed in
the next section but they vary tremendously, with respect to overall mortality as well as to the particular contribution of the executions (Heuveline,
1998b). The pro-Vietnamese government of the 1980s claimed that the
Khmers Rouges were accountable for three million lives. At the low end
of the range, an estimate of one million victims has widely circulated in
the Western press. While the figure is consistent with some demographic
accounts (Ea, 1981; Vickery, 1988; Banister and Johnson, 1993), most estimates now cluster around one and a half to two million deaths (Sliwinski,
1995; Kiernan, 1996; Heder, 1997; Heuveline, 1998a). There is even more
disagreement concerning the number of executions. While Ea (1981) considers they numbered at most 120,000, most analysts believe they accounted for a third to one half of excess mortality during the period, thus
500,000 to 1 million deaths (Vickery, 1988; Sliwinski, 1995; Kiernan, 1996;
Heder, 1997; Heuveline, 1998a).
Many people also fled the country, most often westward to Thailand,
and sometimes by sea. The number of those who survived the dangers of
the sea or the landmines is relatively well recorded in refugee camps
statistics. The number of refugees repatriated from Thailand by the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) on the eve of
the 1993 elections2 was nearly 400,000 (United Nations, 1995), whereas
about 200,000 more refugees emigrated abroad, foremost to Australia,
France, and the United States. The number of those who fled toward
Vietnam and stayed there is more difficult to estimate, but except for
2 This number is higher than the number of people who had emigrated from Cambodia
because of the fast population growth of the population in refugee camps (on the order of 4
percent annually).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

106

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

what was left of the ethnic Vietnamese population in 1975 (about 200,000
people), this was not the most likely destination as civilians were pushed
westward by the moving military front. (For a fuller description of migration data, see Banister and Johnson, 1993.) Finally, fertility appears to
have begun falling in the early 1970s, and from 1975 on, the decline has
been fairly drastic. The size of adjacent age groups in the 1998 census
data suggests that the annual number of births could have been reduced
to between one-half to three-fourths of antebellum levels, implying a deficit in these four years in the order of 300,000 to 600,000 births.
DATA SOURCES AND MORTALITY ESTIMATION

Vital Statistics
Continuous registration of deaths is the preferred source of data when
the recording is believed to be accurate and complete. Several methods
can be used, depending on the nature of ancillary data, to assess the
completeness of mortality registers (e.g., Chandra Sekar and Deming,
1949; Brass, 1975; Preston and Hill, 1980; for a description of these and
other techniques see Preston et al., 2001).
There are reasons to doubt the availability and quality of vital statistics during mortality crises. Registration systems are typically maintained
by civil servants. The crisis can be expected to disrupt the recording of
vital events, either because political upheavals means a change of personnel with a period of vacancy, or because the crisis is so intense that record
keeping takes a low priority. The Khmers Rouges proved to be capable of
accurate record keeping as shown by the chilling records of jail administrators (Kiernan, 1996). They apparently did not attempt to achieve complete national vital statistics, however, and the demographic data they
released reflected more their propaganda strategy than their statistical
efforts. More reliable death statistics might be available from an external
administration, such as those on refugee populations in UNHCR-administered camps. Other chapters in this volume may offer such examples.
But most often, continuous recording during mortality crises should be
expected to provide data that are too partial—in both meanings of the
term—to be reliable.
Census Data
A general census may include questions to the household heads about
the selected characteristics of any past household member deceased in the
12 months before the census. These data can occasionally provide a com-

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

107

PATRICK HEUVELINE

plete count of deaths in countries without complete vital registration but
accurate periodical censuses. In practice, this approach has not proved
most reliable. Precisely in places where death registration is not common,
respondents may not remember well the date of death and deaths can be
wrongly included in or omitted from the recall period. Since the likelihood of false inclusion and omission typically vary with the age of the
deceased, the age pattern of deaths thus reported is not reliable either.
This approach is even more problematic to use for the retrospective
evaluation of a mortality crisis. The first reason is that it may take years
after the crisis for a government to have the capacity to conduct a complete household census operation, and the longer the time elapsed since
the events, the less reliable the retrospective data are. When the crisis is
associated with military conflict, a census conducted shortly after the
events might have to exclude some zones that are still unsafe, as was the
case in Cambodia in the early 1980s (and in fact through the late 1990s).
This may introduce a selection bias since such zones might have been
disproportionately affected by the conflict during the period of interest.
Finally, the approach implicitly assumes some stability in household
membership, which may not hold when many people are displaced. The
retrospective questions may instead concern a fixed set of family members, for instance, biological parents, siblings, and children, instead of
household members but then this raises concerns about possible double
counting, especially when mortality is very high.
Sample Survey Data
Similar retrospective questions can be asked to a sample of respondents. The sample-based approach is of course much easier to implement
than the census-based one and under certain conditions the results can be
confidently extrapolated to the entire population. These conditions are
difficult to meet in post-crisis situations that typically prevent the use of
traditional sampling procedures. This might be particularly problematic
when the mortality risks and patterns vary substantially across sub-populations, as was the case in Cambodia among ethnic minorities and, among
Khmers, between the new and base people, or simply across regions differently affected by the civil war. To begin with, the distribution of the
Cambodian population by relevant characteristics such as those above
was not that well documented at the onset of the civil war. Thus, the
relative size of the different “risk groups” can be only roughly estimated.
Moreover, if the interviews take place shortly after the events, some subgroups are likely to be less accessible than others are, and the selected
sample is likely to be a sample of convenience rather than a random

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

108

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

sample with desirable statistical properties. Often, the survey takers will
be restricted to a few areas of easier access or worse, if the country is still
inaccessible, to the refugee population. If the original population is universally at risk, the refugees may constitute a selected sub-population,
since those who stay behind continue to be exposed to that risk. In other
situations, on the contrary, the refugees might have been those most at
risk and thus most likely to flee.
Another type of selection effect is that at least one of the immediate
relatives of a person must be alive at the time of the survey for that
person’s experience (death or survival) to be recorded. In other words,
the probability of inclusion in the sample is conditional on the survival of
parents, children, and siblings. This introduces a bias as long as the
survival probabilities of close family members are related, which was
clearly the case in Cambodia as probably in most such mortality crises
whichever their causes. In the event of the execution of an entire family
(both parents and all their children), for instance, the death of the children
could not be recorded by this method, while the death of the parents
could only be recorded if one of their own parents or siblings survived. In
general, those with surviving immediate relatives are more likely to have
survived themselves. This “clustering” of mortality within families might
be negligible under most normal conditions but becomes problematic
when a sizeable share of deaths are due to politically or ethnically motivated executions or bombardment of villages.
With typically small sample sizes, double counting is probably not as
important an issue as in a census-based operation. But the sample-based
approach is susceptible of the same recall errors as mentioned above for
the census questions. Concerning such dramatic events, it is less likely
that respondents would not remember what happened or when it did
since the reference recall period can be delineated by salient events. In
many emergency situations, though, it is possible that respondents would
not know what happened even to close family members. In Cambodia, it
took years for members of dispersed families to reunite. According to
Sliwinski’s 1989-1991 data, 12.5 percent of the relatives reported as presumed or known to have died in 1975-1979 were in fact still missing at
that time (Sliwinski, 1995:60).
The sample approach, with retrospective questions on immediate
family members, has a number of methodological shortcomings. It cannot be overemphasized, however, that this is often the only technique that
can be implemented by a lone investigator and a few collaborators very
shortly after the mortality crisis. It thus provides invaluable preliminary
estimates when other techniques are much harder and costlier to implement.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

109

PATRICK HEUVELINE

Two Population Estimates
When there are no registration or retrospective data on deaths, mortality can be estimated indirectly from relationships between different
demographic variables. Most of these so-called indirect estimation techniques cannot be used in the analysis of mortality crisis because the estimation of one variable from another one relies on some empirical regularity in the relationship between the two variables across populations.
These empirical regularities are embedded in demographic models that
often cannot be applied to the populations of interest here, precisely because of the exceptional nature of the situations these populations have
been exposed to.
One demographic relationship that applies to all populations no matter how exceptional the circumstances is often referred to as the balancing
equation of population change. This accounting identity basically expresses that there are only two ways to leave a population, emigration
and death, and two ways to enter it, immigration and birth. Thus the
change in population size between two dates, P(t) and P(t+n), depends on
four flows: births, B(t,t+n); deaths, D(t,t+n); immigration, I(t,t+n); and
emigration, O(t,t+n), or
P(t+n) = P(t) + B(t,t+n) − D(t,t+n) + I(t,t+n) − O(t,t+n)

(1)

If population estimates by age and sex were available just at the beginning and the end of the period of interest, this logic could be used to
study the mortality of people already born at the beginning of the period.
The most common strategy is to follow birth cohorts over their life course
(along diagonals in a Lexis diagram, see Figure 5-1). Equation (2) expresses that changes in the size of a birth cohort result only from migrations and deaths of cohort members:
nPx(t+n)

= nPx-n(t) − nDct-x(t,t+n) + nIct-x(t,t+n) − nOct-x(t,t+n)

(2)

where nPx-n(t) and nPx(t+n) are, respectively, the number of people aged xn to x at time t and aged x to x+n at time t+n, and nDct-x(t,t+n), nIct-x(t,t+n),
and nOct-x(t,t+n) are, respectively, the number of deaths, in-migrations,
and out-migrations between time t and t+n of people born between time
t-x-n and t-x. Equation (2) simply restricts the terms in Equation (1) to
certain birth cohorts, and for those cohorts that are already born at time t,
there is no fertility term in Equation (2).
If there is no migration, the remaining two terms in the right-hand
side of Equation (2) correspond to the number of survivors at time t+n
among the birth cohort survivors at time t. This is often expressed as a

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

110

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

12
P*(8,11)

Age (in years)

10
8

I-D-O
P(5,8)

6
4
2
0
0

2

4

6

8
Year

10

12

14

16

FIGURE 5-1 Illustration of the cohort-component estimation of population change.
Note: P(5,8) is the population aged 5 to 8 in year 9 and P*(8,11) is the population
aged 8 to 11 in year 12. I, D, and O are, respectively, the numbers of in-migrations,
deaths, and out-migrations between year 9 and 12, of people born between year 1
and year 4 (with reference to time and birth cohort dropped for notational simplicity.)

life-table survival ratio, as suggested by Coale and Demeny (United Nations, 1983):
nPx(t+n)

= nPx-n(t) − nDct-x(t,t+n) = nPx-n(t) * [ nLx/nLx-n (t,t+n)]

(3)

Equation (3) provides the basis of a simple method for constructing a
life table for the period.3 This approach requires that the length of the
period be equal to the width of the age group or multiples thereof. This
requirement can be waived with so-called variable-r techniques that compare the size of the same age group at two different times (nPx(t+n) and
nPx(t) with the above notations). These techniques will not be described in
details here but when the length of period is a multiple of the width of the

3 Coale and Demeny (United Nations, 1983) also suggest to work with successive open
age groups (e.g., age five and above, age ten and above, etc.) rather than with closed age
groups in order to minimize the effects of age misstatement at older ages.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

PATRICK HEUVELINE

111

age group, these techniques are exactly equivalent to those based on
changes in cohort size.4
Whether the cohort or age-group approach is chosen, these techniques
only estimate the mortality of those born at the beginning of the period,
and the corresponding life table starts at age n, where n is the length of the
crisis period. To obtain mortality estimates from birth requires data on
birth during the period. Such data are often unavailable and it is also
problematic to assess how much the mortality crisis might have affected
reproductive behavior. In Cambodia, for instance, fertility in the worst
years might have declined down to half its pre-crisis level.5
The population totals at the onset and at the end of the events of
interest, P(t) and P(t+n), are seldom directly available and need to be
estimated from population data pertaining to earlier and later dates.
When statistics are available and reliable up to the onset of the period, the
extrapolation of the population P(t) can proceed in an additive manner
from the last population size estimate and the different flows in and out
of the population between the time of that last estimate and time t as in
Equation (1). When these flows cannot be estimated directly, population
P(t) can be best estimated by a forward projection, with the cohort-component technique detailed in standard demography textbooks (e.g.,
Shryock and Siegel, 1975; Preston et al., 2001). The forward projection
does not require exact counts of births and deaths but instead indicators
of fertility and mortality levels (e.g., total fertility rate and life expectancy
at birth), together with models of fertility and mortality by age, and the
initial age structure of the population. In the pre-crisis period, several
indirect techniques can provide the required estimates of fertility and
mortality levels from incomplete vital statistics (United Nations, 1983).
Similarly, the population at the end of the crisis period must be estimated. This can be done by calculating a backward population projection
from any post-crisis population estimate. Although backward projections may be less intuitive than forward ones, the process is quite similar.
The data requirements are slightly less intensive, because the number of
births in a given period is implied by the number of people under a
certain age alive at the end of the period and by their mortality and
migration rates. Fertility rates are not needed.
If migration can be accurately estimated, these techniques can still be

4 For a description of some variable-r techniques, the reader is referred to United Nations

(1983) and Preston et al. (2001).
5 A gradual fertility reduction, reaching at its trough about 50 percent of pre-crisis fertility levels, was also observed in China (Ashton et al., 1984). For a review of demographic
responses to short-term shocks, see Lee (1997:1078-85).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

112

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

used by adjusting nPx-n(t) and nPx(t+n) before entering them in Equation
(3).6 When the mortality crisis is associated with a massive displacement of
people, uncertainty about population movements can make this method
useless. Note, however, that only the difference between immigration and
emigration during the period, in other terms the net total of migrants during the period, affects the left-hand side estimate in Equation (2).
The logic of indirect estimation using the balancing equation of population change is similar to assembling a jigsaw puzzle with a single missing piece, whose size and shape can be revealed by fitting together the
remaining pieces. But most often, the other pieces can only be estimated
more or less precisely, and the size and shape of the missing piece only
appears fuzzy. The quality of the estimation thus depends on the precision of the other pieces of demographic information. Direct estimation
with survey data is sensitive to the estimated mid-period population size
that is required to translate the estimated proportion of deaths among the
sample’s relatives into a total number of deaths in the population. Indirect techniques with two population estimates are sensitive to the underestimation or overestimation of population size at the beginning of the
period relative to population size at the end of the period, and to migration, the other cause of changes in cohort size.7
NATURAL AND CRISIS MORTALITY PATTERNS
In this section, I discuss likely changes in mortality patterns during
mortality crises. A mortality crisis is not defined exactly but it refers to a
situation where mortality increases suddenly. Pre-crisis mortality trends
will be referred to as “normal” mortality and the difference between the
prevailing crisis mortality and the mortality extrapolated to the crisis
period from normal mortality trends will be referred to as “excess” mortality. When the level of mortality increases sharply, mortality patterns
can often be expected to change as well, that is, the distribution of death
(by sex, by age, by cause, by region, by ethnic group, etc.) is also likely to
be modified. Demographers and actuaries have long documented the

6 A common population projection strategy consists of adding half of the net number of
migrants aged x to x+n in the period t to t+n to the population aged x to x+n at time t and
the other half to the population aged x to x+n at time t+n. This arithmetic approximation is
not entirely consistent with the projection framework based on rates but the numerical
implications of this slight inconsistency are usually not important.
7 Note that an underestimation of, say, mortality both before and after the crisis period
would lead to underestimate population size at the beginning of the period (in the forward
projection from census date 1) and to overestimate population size at the end of the period
(in the backward projection from census date 2).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

113

PATRICK HEUVELINE

typical sex, age, and cause-of-death patterns of normal mortality and I
concentrate here on changes in these patterns during mortality crises.
(For a discussion of the ethnic and regional mortality patterns during the
Cambodian crisis, see Kiernan, 1996.)
Age Patterns
The time-honored tradition of studying mortality at different ages
established that in most human populations mortality follows a “J-pattern,” namely that it decreases from birth to a minimum before sexual
maturity and then increases with age. Demographers have thus attempted
to capture this empirical regularity in mathematical functions (mortality
law) or tabular representations with few parameters that account for interpopulation variations associated with their specific environments (e.g.,
diet or exposure to infectious agents). In one of the most commonly used
examples, Coale and Demeny (1983) system of model life tables, these
variations are represented by four different “regional” patterns. Each
model pattern consists of a set of life tables, with each table providing
mortality rates corresponding to a given level of mortality (i.e., a summary indicator of mortality such as life expectancy at birth).
These life tables have become central to the direct and indirect techniques of mortality estimation. Because age reporting is deficient in many
populations, demographers usually prefer to assume that the age pattern
is one of the existing model built from reliable sources and to concentrate
on the estimation of the level of mortality. For instance, registered or
reported data on deaths by age can be “smoothed” with a model age
pattern of mortality (United Nations, 1983). When using the techniques
based on two population estimates, it is also suggested to select a model
pattern and record the level implied by each cohort or age group. To
select the model life table whose level best matches those recorded across
cohorts or age groups is often thought more reliable than to put together
the mortality rates obtained from each cohort or each age group.
These empirical similarities in mortality age patterns reflect human
populations’ common experience of so-called “natural” causes of death
and are expected as long as such natural mortality dominates. Mortality
also comprises “accidental” mortality—labeled as such by opposition to
natural mortality—that typically includes suicide, homicide, and unintentional injuries. These causes of death—thereafter referred to as “violent” mortality—do not necessarily follow the overall J-pattern of mortality but they typically account for a small fraction of all-age deaths and do
not affect the overall age pattern. In mortality crises such that the vulnerability of the population to natural mortality increases dramatically with
little change in the proportion of deaths due to violent mortality, model

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

114

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

Females

Males
Ten-year probability

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

+
70

-6
9

-5
9

-5
4

-4
9

-4
4

-3
9

-6
4

65

60

55

50

45

40

-2
9

-3
4

35

30

-1
9

-1
4

-2
4

25

20

15

5- 5
9 -9

10

0- 0
4 -4

0.0

Age group in 1970

FIGURE 5-2 Sex and age pattern of mortality in Cambodia, ten-year probability
of dying, 1970-1979. Source: Heuveline (1998a).

age patterns of mortality and the methods built thereon should still be
applicable. Model life tables based on data from medium-to-low mortality populations do not seem to provide a very good extrapolation of mortality patterns under higher mortality conditions (Bhat, 1987), however,
and the analyst should preferably turn to model age patterns specifically
designed for high-mortality populations (Preston et al., 1993).
On the contrary, when violent mortality becomes an important part of
overall mortality, the mortality pattern may have little in common with the
nearly universal J-pattern and model age patterns cannot be used. Figure 52, for instance, presents the age pattern of excess mortality estimated for
Cambodian males and females during the 1970s. These age patterns of
mortality, especially the male one, bear no resemblance with any model age
pattern. This finding is not particularly surprising since wartime life tables
are typically excluded from the empirical basis on which the model age
patterns are constructed (e.g., Coale and Demeny, 1983). The reason is
precisely that the age pattern of war-related deaths differs from that of
natural mortality and reflects idiosyncratic conditions at a particular time
and place that should not be generalized to other populations.
Decomposition by Cause
Existing model age patterns of mortality can not be used to assess and
improve the quality of such an unusual age pattern of mortality as shown
in Figure 5-2. But the unusual aspect of this age pattern is also useful
because the departure from the original pattern is caused by the rise of a
few formerly rare causes of death, typically associated with the mortality

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

PATRICK HEUVELINE

115

crisis. Mortality age patterns thus reflect the prevalence of different causes
of death in the population (Preston, 1976) and below I discuss an approximate breakdown between mortality from natural causes from violent
causes. A simpler decomposition between normal and excess mortality is
presented first.
The idea of both decompositions is to return to Equation (2) but to
further decompose the number of deaths, D(t,t+n), as the sum of a first
component that one can estimate, D*(t,t+n), and a residual component
that one tries to estimate, E(t,t+n). In the case of a mortality crisis, for
instance, we could estimate the number of excess deaths from change in
population size and other flows during the period, including the number
of deaths due to normal mortality, as shown in Equation (4):
E(t,t+n)=P(t) – P(t+n) + B(t,t+n) – D*(t,t+n) + I(t,t+n) – O(t,t+n)

(4)

where E(t,t+n) is now the number of excess deaths and D*(t,t+n) the expected
number of deaths under normal mortality conditions in the period t to t+n.
Just as Equation (3) restricts Equation (2) to certain birth cohorts,
Equation (4) can be applied separately to different birth cohorts, an approach developed originally to estimate international migration (Shryock
and Siegel, 1975:595-6):
n∆x(t+n)

= nPx(t+n) − nPx-n(t) * [ nLx/nLx-n (t,t+n)]

(5a)

where n∆x(t+n) is the residual difference at time t+n among people aged x
to x+n, that is, a residual term in the forward projection of nPx-n(t) to time
t+n. The residual term is not exactly the number of people who died from
excess mortality or migrated during the period. It is more exactly the
number of people missing (in case of excess mortality or predominantly
out-migration) at the end of the period. In a growing population, the
residual term at the end of the period overestimates the additional deaths or
migrations because the number of people added to (or subtracted from) the
population during the period contributed to (or would have contributed to)
the growth of the population till the end of the period. A numerically satisfactory solution suggested by Shryock and Siegel is to also compute:
n∆x(t)

= nPx(t) - nPx+n(t+n) * [ nLx/nLx+n (t,t+n)]

(5b)

and to take the average of n∆x(t) and n∆x(t+n) as the net number of excess
deaths or migrations of people aged x to x+n in the period.
As in the case of total mortality estimation, the assessment of excess
mortality can be implemented by age groups rather than by cohorts. This
approach was introduced, again in the context of international migration,

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

116

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

by Hill (1987), who also discusses the advantages and disadvantages of
the two approaches. For either approach to be applied to a decomposition of mortality, the beginning and the end populations must be adjusted
for international migrations using ancillary data.8 Then, survival ratios
must be selected to represent either normal or natural mortality. The
selection of normal mortality survival ratios can be based on a simple
extrapolation of pre-crisis mortality trends. The residual number of deaths
is readily interpreted as excess mortality.
A second decomposition, based on the same logic, is perhaps less
compelling, but it considers two main types of death during the mortality
crisis. The first type corresponds to the stark increase in natural mortality
and includes all biological causes of death that became more prevalent
because of a combination of harder environment (e.g., in Cambodia, malaria, sanitation in general), a weakened population (e.g., physical labor,
food deficiency), and a near absence of medical remedies. The second one
corresponds to violent mortality, which in Cambodia included war casualties such as combat deaths, bombardment or mines victims, and executions. To the extent that the pattern of the first type of mortality bears
some similarity with age patterns of normal mortality embodied in the
existing model age patterns while the pattern of the second type of mortality does not, a decomposition might be attempted based on the age
structure of overall mortality.
The idea of this decomposition is thus to simulate the increase of
natural mortality by selecting the model age pattern of mortality with the
highest mortality level (e.g., lowest survival ratios) consistent with the
pre- and post-crisis population data. This natural mortality pattern replaces normal mortality in Equations (5a) and (5b), and the new residual
difference now corresponds to violent deaths only, instead of all excess
deaths. The highest possible level is obtained when all deaths are accounted for in a given cohort (a higher mortality level would then predict
too few people at the second date among that cohort). In other age groups,
residual numbers of deaths remains positive and refer to deaths that could
not be explained by an increase in natural causes of death. On the one
hand, some natural deaths are likely to remain in the residual component
because the actual pattern of natural mortality may have deviated from
the model pattern. On the other hand, it is unlikely that any age group

8 Just like the mortality estimation techniques, the decompositions are sensitive to the
relative underestimation of population size at one time relative to its size at the other time.
Hill (1987) suggests a technique to separate the relative underestimation from international
migration. This technique can be applied to excess mortality but would work better the
more the age pattern of excess mortality differs from the expected age pattern of relative
underestimation.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

PATRICK HEUVELINE

117

experienced no violent mortality at all and the decomposition pushes
natural mortality to its lowest possible level. Even though these two
possible biases would partially compensate one another, the decomposition is only indicative of the relative share of the two mortality types.
It is not entirely clear a priori whether deaths from famine should be
considered part of natural mortality in this decomposition. On one hand,
they could be considered separately because it is a category of death
virtually absent under normal conditions that in Cambodia, for instance,
rose to 35.4 percent of all reported deaths according to survey data
(Sliwinski, 1995). On the other hand, famine may be considered as the
extreme form of malnutrition, which intertwines with natural causes-ofdeath (e.g., Martorell and Ho, 1984). Since the decomposition is based on
the difference in age patterns, the answer depends mostly on whether the
age pattern of famine mortality is similar to that of natural mortality.
Famine mortality has been observed to most affect the youngest (after
weaning) and the oldest persons, during European famines (e.g., Lebrun,
1971) as well as during more recent ones in Asia (Ashton et al., 1984;
Maharatna, 1996). The observation is sustained by data collected by
Sliwinski (1995) from Cambodian survivors about their relatives that died,
with death reported in one of five categories: natural causes, famine, execution, war-related injuries, and missing (or unknown cause). As expected, the pattern of natural mortality follows the usual J-pattern even in
these exceptional circumstances (Figure 5-3). The last three categories
correspond to violent mortality (people still “missing” at the time of the
survey ten years later had likely been executed without the knowledge of
their immediate relatives, an assumption supported by the similar age
patterns of the two categories). Among those, executions constitute the
most frequent category, with 37.5 percent of all reported deaths, and they
exhibit an age pattern quite distinct from that of natural mortality by
peaking during adulthood (war-related injuries, a lesser category not
shown on Figure 5-3, do so at even younger adult ages). Mortality due to
natural causes and mortality due to famine mortality also have similar
patterns, except that famine mortality continues to decrease into adulthood. This translation of the mortality minimum between natural causes
and famine might be due to a particular feature of the social organization of
the DK, namely that food rations were allocated based on the perceived
value of the individual to the society. Soldiers were a priority and productive adults in general received more appropriate food than children did.
ESTIMATIONS OF EXCESS MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA
Vital registration statistics in Cambodia were already incomplete before the 1970s but they were interrupted during the DK. As for direct

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

118

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

35
Execution
Famine

Mortality rate (per hundred)

30

Natural

25
20
15
10
5

+
60

0
-6
51

0
-5
41

0
-4
31

0
-3
21

0
-2
11

0-

10

0

Age

FIGURE 5-3 Age pattern of mortality from natural causes, famine, and execution in Cambodia, mortality rate, 1975-1979. Source: Adapted from Sliwinski
(1995: 52, 82).

census data on excess mortality, questions were included in an early 1980s
administrative census. They resulted in an estimate of 3.3 million deaths,
a tally inflated by multiple counts, the number of which could never be
fully accounted for, as the records were not computerized and name
matching almost impossible. Moreover, parts of the country not under
governmental control could not be included, and those typically included
sparsely populated but high mortality zones.
Estimation from Survey Data
Direct estimation has been mostly based on small sample survey data.
As early as 1979, Ben Kiernan interviewed about 100 Cambodian immigrants in France and followed with about 400 interviews in Cambodia in
1980. Similarly, Stephen Heder conducted interviews in parts of Cambodia and at the Thai border in 1980 and 1981, obtaining separate estimates
of relative loss for Khmer and ethnic Chinese “new” people (33 percent
and 50 percent, respectively), and for Khmer “base” people (25 percent).
Operating shortly after the fall of the DK, when many parts of the country

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

PATRICK HEUVELINE

119

were still unsafe, the authors must have limited themselves geographically. In spite of their efforts to stratify their estimates by reaching different segments of the population, the representativeness of their sample is
difficult to assess. Even a decade later (1989-1991) when Marek Sliwinski
undertook a more thorough and methodologically sophisticated study of
the dead relatives of Cambodian survivors in France, in Thai border
camps, and in Cambodia, safety and logistical considerations constrained
his Cambodian sample to a 100-mile radius from the capital city.
In spite of the methodological shortcomings of the approach described
in a section above, it is quite remarkable that both Kiernan and Heder first
came up with an estimate of around one and a half million excess deaths
with rudimentary techniques and what may appear to the statistically
inclined reader as “cavalier” adjustments. Yet, more extensive data collected a decade or more later and with greater methodological care (19891991 interviews analyzed by Sliwinski; 1992-1993 electoral data analyzed
by Heuveline) provided slightly higher but roughly comparable estimates.
The reason is probably that a deep understanding of the local situation
guided the intuition of the first authors and allowed them judicial adjustments regardless of how little justified they may appear to be on paper.
Estimation from Two Population Estimates
Several analysts have used this method to estimate excess mortality
during the peak mortality period, the four years of the DK, 1975-1979 (Ea,
1981; Vickery, 1988; Banister and Johnson, 1993). All used the 1962 census
to reach a population estimate for 1975 and some population data in the
early 1980s (different across authors) to derive the 1979 estimate. While
the authors seem to agree about a figure of excess deaths around one
million, they faced several difficulties. The first one is the unreliability of
the 1975 estimate thus obtained. While the population can be reasonably
extrapolated from the 1962 census to 1970, the events of the early 1970s
render perilous the estimation of the 1975 population that would be required to study excess mortality during the DK.
The second one relates to concerns about the reliability of the early
1980s data used by these authors. This is best illustrated by the different
mid-1980 population size estimates that, in the early 1990s, still ranged
from 5.7 million (U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1991:A-5) to 7.0 million (Banister and Johnson, 1993:91-3). The controversial extent of the 1979 famine
poses an additional problem to the retroprojection of the population at
the fall of the DK in January 1979 from population estimates in the early
1980s.
The third difficulty concerns the estimation of births in the 1975-1979
period. Even with the most recent census data (unavailable to the above

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

120

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

authors at the time), the extent of the fertility decline can only be assessed
with a fairly high level of uncertainty because the mortality conditions the
1975-1979 birth cohorts faced until the 1998 census date are not precisely
known either. This uncertainty about the exact number of births (in the
order of 300,000) is not at all negligible in the reconstruction since the
number of deaths estimated by these authors is about one million.
As was the case with the direct methods, we must bear in mind that in
spite of these limitations, the first attempts to use indirect techniques of
analysis provided invaluable information on the Cambodian mortality
crisis. Contrary to the situation with direct methods, though, the early
estimates thus obtained disagree substantially with more recent estimates.
While the early direct estimates clustered around one and a half million
excess deaths, the early indirect estimates centered around one million
victims. Later data led Sliwinski (1995) to a direct estimate of 1.9 million,
and a reconstruction using the 1993 data yielded a central estimate of
more than two million excess deaths (Heuveline, 1998a). While in any of
those numerical attempts, the uncertainty is such that other estimates
cannot be entirely ruled out, the estimates of one and a half million and
above now appear more likely (Heuveline, 1998b).
In contrast with these previous studies also based on two population
estimates, I based my analysis of Cambodian excess mortality on a 1970
population estimate and a 1980 population estimate, and I used this approach to assess excess deaths for the entire decade of the 1970s. I believe
it is as accurate and more transparent to work from that estimate and
subtract ancillary estimates of the death toll of the civil war and of the
famine in order to obtain a tally for the DK years only. In addition, I
reconstructed post-1980 trends from the electoral data gathered by the
United Nations in the process of organizing the 1993 general elections
(United Nations, 1995). Data of this nature are not among the typical
sources of demographic analysis but those appeared to be the first national data after 1980 to be of reasonable quality and available by single
year of age. In general, using data for a later date imposes to carry the
backward projection on a longer time interval, which increases the uncertainty of the projected outcome. But in this particular case, it was balanced by the fact that it was easier to estimate net international migration
between 1979 and 1993 than it was up to the mid-1980s, when refugee
movements were still taking place.
Since the interval was ten years and the age groups five years wide,
the cohort and age groups approaches were equivalent. The decomposition of normal and excess mortality is easier to conduct using the cohort
approach than the age-group one because the former has been incorporated in population projection software. Since many estimates were not
estimated with precision, this flexibility proved useful as it allowed for

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

PATRICK HEUVELINE

121

many different projections with different demographic parameters, whose
outcomes mapped the range of possible estimates of excess deaths. The
possibility to obtain not only a central or best estimate in the analyst’s
judgment, but also a sense of the uncertainty involved in the reconstruction, is a comparative advantage of the indirect approach. My specific
assumptions are described below.
As in earlier studies, I began with an assessment of the 1962 census
data to obtain an adjusted population sex and age structure and indirect
estimates of fertility and mortality at the time (Migozzi, 1973; Siampos,
1970; Heuveline, 1998a). From 1962 to 1970, demographic trends can be
assumed to be smooth: a slight decline of mortality over the period, constant fertility, and no international migration. The population by sex and
five-year age groups can then be projected forward five years at a time.
This yields the 1967 and 1972 populations by sex and five-year age groups,
from which the January 1, 1970, population by sex and five-year age
groups can be interpolated. The results, shown in Table 5-1, suggest that
the population size had grown fast, from 5.7 million in 1962 to 7.7 million
in 1970. For the backward projection, the population by sex and five-year
age group in 1993 can also be projected backward five years at a time. An
interpolation between the 1978 and 1983 estimates yields the January 1,
1980, estimates.9 Mortality data after 1980 were poor and I simply assumed that mortality returned to its normal level quickly after the 1979
famine and resumed its pre-crisis declining trend thereafter, apparently a
common feature in post-crisis situations (Murray and Chen, 1994:18).10
Important migrations to and from Vietnam were also poorly documented. The impact of these undocumented immigrants on the population reconstruction is limited because the 1993 electoral law barred most
of the new migrants from Vietnam from registering; therefore, those who
were able to register were mostly returning migrants. The timing of those
movements back and forth during the period 1980-1993 may affect the
population size at a given date within the period, but as mentioned earlier, the 1980 population size estimated backward from 1993 data depends only on the net number of migrants between 1980 and 1993. The
same applies to the impact of the refugees to and back from Thailand,

9 Only the population above age 18 was registered in the electoral data. The 1993 population is thus limited to age 20 and above. The 1978 and 1983 population estimates are
limited to age five and above and ten and above, respectively. The interpolated 1980 population is thus also limited to age ten and above. This is sufficient to assess the survival of
the 1970 population.
10 In particular, this seems to have been the case in Vietnam (Banister, 1993; Barbieri et al.,
1995). The situation of Vietnam is of further interest because of the similar public infrastructure in the two countries since 1980.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

715.7
582.0
490.2
411.8
313.5
244.9
214.0
191.6
166.6
135.9
111.5
91.0
69.1
48.6
52.5

3838.8

0-4
5-9
10-4
15-9
20-4
25-9
30-4
35-9
40-4
45-9
50-4
55-9
60-4
65-9
70+

Total

3823.6

691.2
564.0
479.2
404.6
311.8
249.8
223.5
199.3
169.2
138.6
114.5
94.3
72.3
51.7
59.5

Females

2971.1

455.9
564.5
435.0
325.4
241.4
194.1
157.4
130.6
111.9
96.8
81.0
62.7
48.3
29.6
36.3

Males

3466.1

450.6
548.5
461.6
396.0
338.6
284.8
228.1
182.0
150.6
125.2
98.2
72.0
51.7
35.5
42.7

Females

1980 Population

1454.9

225.4
221.3
216.4
187.3
131.1
93.3
81.8
73.6
63.1
49.9
38.1
34.2
22.8
11.8
5.0

Males

955.7

178.4
134.5
110.3
91.6
60.0
47.4
53.3
54.7
51.9
47.3
42.3
36.0
26.2
14.5
7.3

Females

Forward Projection
Residual

1592.9

233.8
227.2
224.5
196.3
138.1
98.6
87.4
80.1
70.6
58.3
47.7
47.5
37.0
24.2
21.6

Males

1040.1

182.6
134.9
110.9
92.6
60.6
48.0
55.1
57.8
56.1
53.0
49.9
46.0
38.2
26.4
28.0

Females

Backward
Projection Residual

Source: Author’s estimates. See Heuveline (1998a) for further details about projection parameters.

Males

1970

Age in

1970 Population

1523.9

229.6
224.3
220.4
191.8
134.6
95.9
84.6
76.8
66.9
54.1
42.9
40.8
29.9
18.0
13.3

Males

997.9

180.5
134.7
110.6
92.1
60.3
47.7
54.2
56.3
54.0
50.1
46.1
41.0
32.2
20.5
17.7

Females

Excess deaths

TABLE 5-1 Population, 1970 and 1980 and Residual Population Deficit in the 1970-80
Interval, by Age and Sex (in Thousands)

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

122

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

PATRICK HEUVELINE

123

even though those would be easier to estimate yearly. Finally, the emigration of people who did not return to Cambodia by 1993 is mostly
captured in the immigration statistics of receiving countries (about 250,000
after 1980). Data on the sex and age distribution of these migrants were
too sketchy to use. Model age patterns of migration (Rogers and Castro,
1981) represent migration movements driven by single adults in the labor
force and are not applicable when most moves are by entire families.
Consistent with limited data from the refugee camp (Lynch cited in Banister and Johnson, 1993:112), the age- and sex-structure of the migrants
was assumed to be that of the total population.
Even though demographic data was partly deficient to assess the
post-1980 trends at the time of my analysis, more appropriate data from
the 1996 Demographic Survey supported the outcomes of the backward
projection. Huguet (1997) reconstructed post-1980 population dynamics
with the advantage of these better data and estimated a mid-1980 population size that was 1.7 percent higher than my population size estimated
for January 1, 1980 (Table 5-1).
That a population that had grown from 5.7 million to 7.7 million in
less than eight years (from April 1962 to January 1970) was down to 6.4
million ten years later (in January 1980) clearly establishes the dramatic
demographic impact of the 1970s. To more precisely estimate the number
of excess deaths by 1970 age groups, each five-year cohort is projected
forward from 1970 to 1980 and compared with its estimated size in 1980.
The projection is based on normal mortality, simply extrapolated from
the pre-1970 mortality trends, with about 200,000 emigrants to Vietnam
between 1970 and 1975, and another 150,000 between 1975 and 1980. The
residual of 2.41 million people, as shown in Table 5-1, can now be attributed to the number of excess deaths among people born in 1970. These
numbers can then be averaged with similar numbers obtained by
retroprojecting the 1980 population back to 1970 by cohorts (above age
ten). The result is slightly higher in this case (2.63 million) and the average of the two provides our estimate of excess deaths as 2.52 million for
the decade.11 Each parameter can be varied from its minimum to its
maximum plausible value, yielding a range of 1.17 million to 3.42 million
excess deaths for the decade.
To obtain the number of excess deaths corresponding strictly to the
DK years requires ancillary estimates. As mentioned in a section above,
300,000 might be a reasonable estimate of the mortality impact of the
11 As noted earlier, in a population that is growing, the residual based on the backward
projection to the earlier population underestimates the actual number during the period,
while the forward projection to the later population overestimates it. The contrary is happening here because population actually decreased between 1970 and 1980.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

124

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

1970-1975 civil war, while a similar number might also be reasonable for
the impact of the famine, although the range of estimates for the latter is
quite wide. Finally, the excess mortality of those born after 1970 (not
included in Table 5-1) is quite difficult to estimate because of the uncertainty about fertility. Its meaning is perhaps not intuitive either, since
excess deaths have been defined as the difference between the actual
number of deaths and the number of deaths predicted under normal
demographic conditions. Thus, if fertility was halved and child mortality
doubled, the number of excess deaths among these birth cohorts might be
zero. In my best judgment, a rough approximation of the number of
excess deaths for the 1970-1979 births might also be 300,000.12 Combining
a central estimate of 2.5 million for the decade, and approximations of
300,000 each for the mortality impact of the civil war, the death toll of the
1979 famine, and mortality of the 1970-1978 cohorts yields an estimate of
2.2 million excess deaths for the four years of the DK.
A Decomposition by Cause
The decomposition between natural and violent mortality was reached
by modeling natural mortality using the high-mortality pattern in Preston
et al. (1993) life tables corresponding to life expectancies at birth for both
males and females to 12 years.13 The corresponding pattern is shown in
12 Table 5-1 shows about 400,000 excess deaths in the youngest five-year age groups and

Figure 5-1 shows that the excess mortality rate is going up for males and down for females
at the youngest ages. We may thus assume that under the same fertility and mortality
conditions, the number of excess deaths among the next cohorts would also be in the order
of 400,000 for each five-year birth cohort. But the 1970-1975 birth cohorts might have been
about 20 percent smaller because of reduced fertility in the period, and by 1975 their cohort
size relative to earlier cohorts might have been reduced further because of the 1970-1975
mortality increase that affected the youngest ages most. Thus among the 1970-1975 birth
cohorts, the total number of deaths between 1975 and 1979 was reduced by perhaps 25
percent or more, and excess deaths, as defined here, probably fell below 300,000 for those
cohorts. A similar reasoning suggests that the number of excess deaths should not be very
large among the 1975-1978 birth cohorts. First, the initial size of these cohorts might have
been reduced by as much as 50 percent. Then, normal mortality is also higher among these
cohorts than among earlier cohorts whose members were older in the period (because normal mortality declines from birth to late childhood).
13 This estimate of life expectancy at birth accounts only for natural mortality causes
(including famine) and refers to the 1975-1979 period only. An estimate of life expectancy
including all causes of death can be derived by age-specific growth rates method (Preston
and Bennett, 1983) for the 1972-1979 period, the shortest period for which reasonable estimates of starting and ending populations can be obtained by age and sex. The corresponding life expectancies at age five are 14.4 years for males and 22.0 years for females. Maximum estimates of life expectancy at birth during the DK period can be obtained for each sex
by combining the 1972-1979 expectancy at age five with the 0-5 mortality corresponding to

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

PATRICK HEUVELINE

125

Figure 5-4, together with the pattern of residual mortality. The decomposition yields plausible results, including a residual number of violent deaths
of 1.1 million deaths for the 1975-1979 period. This estimate is one half of
the total number of excess deaths during the DK estimated above, a proportion consistent with direct reports about causes of death (Heder, 1997;
Sliwinski, 1995). The residual age pattern is also plausible overall. Male
violent mortality exceeds female violent mortality in adulthood, especially
for younger adults. The male age pattern clearly exhibits a peak for men in
their teens in 1970 (seven years older, on average, during the DK). More
surprising is the female violent mortality peak in older adulthood, matching male mortality. As the elite of the former government was initially the
prime target of the Khmers Rouges, a mortality peak in those ages is plausible even though executions became less and less confined to that group.
A second surprising finding is the violent mortality rate of children. It is
possible that these high rates indeed reflect the residual mortality of the
children of adult victims, especially their youngest children. A less sinister
explanation would be the relative underestimation of the natural mortality
of children (under age 15) compared to that of young adults. Our model
age pattern of natural mortality is lowest for the 10- to 14-year olds, but as
discussed above their mortality might actually be higher than that of young
adults under famine conditions.14
In closing, I must apologize for spending so much more space on my
own efforts to assess what happened in Cambodia during the 1970s. This
bias reflects no belief that these efforts were more successful than others
were. As argued elsewhere (Heuveline, 1998b), the uncertainty surrounding any single attempt is too large to attach much confidence to any single

a life expectancy at birth of 12 years in the Preston et al. (1993) life tables. The resulting
estimates, 6.6 years for males and 10.9 years for females, likely overestimate life expectancy
at birth during the DK. First, they do not account for violent mortality from birth to age
five, and second, beyond age five they are based on averages for the 1972-1979 period while
mortality was most intense between 1975 and 1978.
14 Of course, the possibility of bad data always provides alternative explanations. Too
many excess deaths would be produced by overestimating the size of the cohort in 1970
and underestimating its size in 1980. For the cohorts under age 10 in 1970, a large underestimation in 1980 is unlikely. The reasons are first that these people were aged 23 to 33
during the 1993 electoral registration, ages that are believed to have been comparatively
well registered. Second, the normal mortality of young adults is low and thus the results of
the backward projection from 1993 to 1980 show little sensitivity to the mortality assumptions made for the period. An overestimation of the size of these cohorts in 1970 might be
produced by overestimating fertility and underestimating mortality between 1962 and 1970.
In my estimation, the lowest plausible fertility and highest plausible mortality assumption
would reduce the number of excess deaths among 1960-1970 birth cohorts by a third, still
more than 500,000. For a fuller discussion of results elasticity to the different parameters of
the demographic reconstruction, see Heuveline (1998a).

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

126

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

0.9

Violent, Males

0.8

Natural, Males

Violent, Females

Natural, Females

Ten-year probability

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

9

4

-6
65

9

-6
60

4

-5
55

9

-5
50

-4
45

4

9

-4
40

4

-3
35

9

-3
30

4

-2
25

9

-2
20

-1
15

-1

4

9
10

5-

0-

4

0

Age group in 1970

FIGURE 5-4 Sex-, age-, and cause-specific pattern of mortality in Cambodia, tenyear probability of dying, 1970-1979. Source: Adapted from Heuveline (1998a)
and Preston et al. (1993).

estimate. In the end, it is rather from the limited convergence of some of
these independent attempts that a sense of confidence might be gained.
The disproportionate emphasis resulted from wanting to describe the
different considerations and difficult decisions that the analyst must face
to customize existing techniques to the available data and the expected
pattern of mortality crisis, while being of course most familiar with those
involved in my own work.
How can the available estimates and techniques be improved? New
data can always be collected. The 1998 General Census of Cambodia will
contribute to refine the estimation of the post-1980 trends. As the country
becomes more accessible a small team of dedicated investigators may
collect better survey data before survivors’ memory begin to decline (see
for instance, a related study in Vietnam by Hirschman et al., 1995). Perhaps mortality models that have proved so useful to estimate “normal”
mortality in populations with poor data could also be developed for mortality crises. The example of Cambodia suggests that a general pattern
would not be applicable to all situations, but models could probably be
developed to fit a typology of such crises as one might emerge from this

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

127

PATRICK HEUVELINE

volume. Preston et al. (1993) already developed a model of high mortality
that may apply to crises characterized primarily by a rise in infectious
diseases,15 as may affect refugees or urban populations when basic services have collapsed. As mentioned above, data on famine mortality
appears to show a consistent pattern, close to the former one, except
perhaps for young adults. A third distinct pattern is that of war casualties, which predominantly affects young adult males. This pattern will be
more manifest the more those casualties are confined to combatants. In
the case of Cambodia, military and political violence affected civilians as
well through bombardments, landmines, and widespread executions.
This fourth set of causes of death was probably less distinctly age patterned and made the characterization of the Cambodian mortality pattern
of the 1970s even more difficult.
REFERENCES
Ashton, B., K. Hill, A. Piazza, and R. Zeitz
1984 Famine in China, 1958-61. Population and Development Review 10(4):613-645.
Banister, J.
1993 Vietnam: Population Dynamics and Prospects, Indonesia Research Monograph 6. Berkeley: Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California at Berkeley.
Banister, J., and E. Paige Johnson
1993 After the Nightmare: The Population of Cambodia. Pp. 65-140 in Benedict
Kiernan, ed., Genocide and Democracy in Cambodia: The Khmer Rouge, the United
Nations and the International Community. New Haven: Southeast Asia Studies,
Yale University.
Barbieri, M., J. Allman, B.S. Pham, and M.T. Nguyen
1995 La situation demographique du Viet Nam. Population 50(3):621-652.
Bhat, M.P.N.
1987 Mortality in India: Levels, Trends, and Patterns. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of Pennsylvania.
Brass, W.
1975 Methods for Estimating Fertility and Mortality from Limited and Defective Data. Chapel
Hill, NC: Carolina Population Center, Laboratories for Population Studies.
Chandler, D.P.
1996 A History of Cambodia. 2nd ed., updated ed. Boulder, Colorado and Oxford, U.K.:
Westview Press.
Chandra Sekar, C., and W.E. Deming
1949 On a method of estimating birth and death rates and the extent of registration.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 44(1):101-115.
Coale, A.J., and P. Demeny
1983 Regional Model Life Tables and Stable Populations. 2nd ed. with Barbara Vaughan.
New York: Academic Press.

15 These models are based on the mortality experience of American immigrants to Liberia
in the 19th century. The cause of death most responsible for their extremely high mortality
was malaria infection.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

128

DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS OF MORTALITY IN CAMBODIA

Ea, M.T.
1981 Kampuchea: A country adrift. Population and Development Review 7(2):209-228.
1987 Recent Population Trends in Kampuchea. Pp. 3-15 in David A. Ablin and
Marlowe Hood, eds., The Cambodian Agony. Armonk, New York: M. E. Sharpe.
Heder, S.
1997 [Personal communication].
Heuveline, P.
1998a “Between one and three million”: Towards the demographic reconstruction of a
decade of Cambodian history (1970-79). Population Studies 52(1):49-65.
1998b L’insoutenable incertitude du nombre: Estimation des décès de la période Khmer
Rouge. Population 53(6):1103-1118.
Hill, K.
1987 New approaches to the estimation of migration flows from census and administrative data sources. International Migration Review 21(4):1279-1303.
Hirschman, C., S. Preston, and M.L. Vu
1995 Vietnamese casualties during the American War: A new estimate. Population and
Development Review 21(4):783-812.
Huguet, J.
1992 The demographic situation in Cambodia. Asia-Pacific Population Journal 6(4):7991.
1997 The Population of Cambodia, 1980-1996, and Projected to 2000. Phnom Penh, Cambodia: United Nations Population Fund for the National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning.
Kiernan, B.
1986 Review essay: William Shawcross, declining Cambodia. Bulletin of Concerned
Asian Scholars 18(1):56-63.
1989 The American bombardment of Kampuchea, 1969-1973. Vietnam Generation
1(1):4-42.
1996 The Pol Pot Regime. New Haven and London: Yale University Press.
Lebrun, F.
1971 Les hommes et la mort en Anjou aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siècle: Essai de démographie
et de psychologie historiques. In Civilisations et Societés 25. Paris and La Haye:
Mouton.
Lee, R.D.
1997 Population Dynamics: Equilibrium, Disequilibrium, and Consequences of Fluctuations. In Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark, eds., Handbook of Population
and Family Economics, vol. 1B. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V.
Maharatna, A.
1996 The Demography of Famines: An Indian Historical Perspective. Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Martorell, R., and T.J. Ho
1984 Malnutrition, Morbidity, and Mortality. In W. Henry Mosley, and Lincoln C.
Chen, eds., Child Survival: Strategies for Research. Population and Development Review 10(Supp.):49-68.
Migozzi, J.
1973 Cambodge: Faits et problèmes de population. Paris: Editions du Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique.
Murray, C.J.L., and L.C. Chen
1994 Dynamics and patterns of mortality change. Pp. 3-23 in Lincoln C. Chen, Arthur
Kleinman, and Norma C. Ware, eds., Health and Social Change in International
Perspective, Harvard Series on Population and International Health. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

PATRICK HEUVELINE

129

National Institute of Statistics
1996 Demographic Survey of Cambodia: General Report. Phnom Penh, Cambodia: United
Nations Population Fund for the National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning.
1999 General Population Census of Cambodia 1998: Final Census Results. Phnom Penh,
Cambodia: United Nations Population Fund for the National Institute of Statistics, Ministry of Planning.
Preston, S.H.
1976 Causes of Death and Age Patterns of Mortality. Pp. 89-119 in Samuel H. Preston,
Mortality Patterns in National Populations, With Special Reference to Recorded Causes
of Death. New York, San Francisco, London: Academic Press.
Preston, S.H., and N.G. Bennett
1983 A census-based method for estimating adult mortality. Population Studies 37(1):91104.
Preston, S.H., P. Heuveline, and M. Guillot
2001
Demography: Measuring and Modeling Population Processes. Oxford, England:
Blackwell Publishers.
Preston, S.H., and K. Hill
1980 Estimating the completeness of registration data. Population Studies 34(2):349-366.
Preston, S.H., A. McDaniel, and C. Grushka
1993 New model life tables for high-mortality populations. Historical Methods 26(4):149159.
Rogers, A., and L.J. Castro
1981 Model Migration Schedules. Laxenburg, Austria: International Institute for Applied
Systems Analysis.
Shryock, H.S., and J.S. Siegel
1975 The Methods and Materials of Demography. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government
Printing Office.
Siampos, G.S.
1970 The population of Cambodia, 1945-1980. Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly 48:317360.
Sihanouk, N.
1986 Prisonnier des Khmers Rouges. Paris: Hachette.
Sliwinski, M.
1995 Le génocide Khmer Rouge: Une analyse démographique. Paris: L’Harmattan.
Ung, L.
2000 First They Killed My Father: A Daughter of Cambodia Remembers. New York:
HarperCollins.
United Nations
1983 Manual X: Indirect Techniques for Demographic Estimation. New York: United Nations.
1995 United Nations in Cambodia. New York: United Nations.
U.S. Bureau of the Census
1991 World Population Profile, 1991. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Vickery, M.
1988 How many died in Pol Pot’s Kampuchea? Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars
20(1):70-73.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

6
Reflections
Manuel Carballo

So-called “excess” mortality is typically the most dramatic outcome
of complex emergencies and natural disasters, and humanitarian and disaster relief operations have traditionally and rightly been tasked with
reducing or averting it to the extent possible. As a result of the attention
that has been given to this over the course of the last two decades, major
inroads have been made with respect to understanding the dynamics of
excess mortality in crisis situations and in identifying the interventions
best suited to those situations. Thus, although averting excess mortality
continues to be a constant challenge for relief workers, the knowledge
that has been acquired is making the problem all the more amenable to
intervention.
Over the years, mortality data have also become valuable indicators
of the impact of focused health interventions such as emergency vaccination and feeding as well as the impact of more general operations such as
organized evacuation. The donor and the relief community have thus
seen fit to refer to mortality statistics in determining the “natural history”
of emergencies and in identifying the type, scope, and duration of the
assistance required. In much the same way, changing patterns of mortality have been increasingly used as descriptors of impending natural disasters such as famine, and man-made ones such as conflict and ethnic
cleansing.
Using mortality data as indicators of past, existing, or forthcoming
disasters, and by extension, of the need for relief interventions, nevertheless presents a number of conceptual and methodological challenges.
130

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

MANUEL CARBALLO

131

Some of these have become more evident as a result of recent crises in
different parts of the world, and the papers in this volume are particularly
valuable in drawing our attention to the issues involved.
Any discussion on the use of health statistics, for example, must consider the perennial question of denominator data and the difficulties that
are almost inevitably encountered in obtaining these in the context of
complex emergencies and natural disasters. Knowing what the risks are
and who is really “at risk” are questions that have long plagued the
assessment of complex emergencies and natural disasters and their health
impact.
There are no easy solutions to this, especially where national health
and other statistics prior to and certainly during crises have been poorly
kept, tampered with, or damaged, or are simply not accessible. The papers
discussed here reflect these difficulties and rightly raise them as limiting
factors in any discussion of mortality in the context of emergencies and
disasters. More attention clearly needs to be given to accessing denominator data from countries where the perceived likelihood of complex
emergencies and natural disasters is high. It is also important that more
attention is given to defining the risk factors and events that are likely to
be of concern in crisis situations so that planning for data needs can occur
early on. Burkholder et al., for example, refers to “war-related deaths”
and highlights the question of what are war-related deaths. Are they the
deaths that result from war injuries? Are deaths associated with “unintentional” injuries and exposure that occur during flight from persecution
and accidents en route to safe havens to be included? And what about
deaths that occur as a result of lack of access to health care services and
medication? Shall we include the deaths among the elderly and others
who “give up” the will to live in these situations? And what of the
suicides that so often occur but also go unmeasured? If the latter are to be
included, and surely the case must be made for this, then the concept of
war-related deaths takes on a whole new scope and importance.
In the same way, it is important that we try to distinguish between
mortality in the location of the crisis (e.g., primarily intentional and unintentional injuries and homicide), mortality during uprooting and forced
movement (e.g., primarily “natural” causes, unintentional and intentional
injuries), and mortality during resettlement (e.g., primarily “natural”
causes and unintentional injuries).
Robinson et al.’s data suggest that in the case of North Korea the
movement of people was not associated with mortality either as a prompting event or as an associated impact. In the case of Kosovo, on the other
hand, at least two and possibly three very different pictures emerged.
Mortality, or the fear of it, was a major prompting event, as it often is in
situations of ethnic cleansing. There is also evidence that mortality peaked

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

132

REFLECTIONS

around the time the international community took retaliatory measures,
and here a confusing image of intentional and unintentional injuries, homicide and genocide will no doubt prove difficult to unravel for a variety
of reasons, some of which are discussed below.
The International Centre for Migration and Health (ICMH) also found
considerable anecdotal information to the effect that deaths en route to
Albania and Macedonia were relatively high among the elderly and newborn infants in the context of complicated pregnancies and deliveries in
hostile physical environments where there was little qualified care. By
contrast, mortality in refugee camps in Albania and Macedonia was relatively low, pointing not only to the adequacy of the relief operations by
national receiving governments and external organizations, but also to
the fact that most refugees were probably relatively healthy at the time
the exodus began.
Here we are reminded of how each emergency or natural disaster deserves to be approached as a unique event. For while there may be many
shared characteristics and processes, it is in the uniqueness of each event
that the challenge of planning and implementing relief lies. Unfortunately,
some of the relief organizations responding to the Kosovo crisis built operations on experiences gained in other parts of the world where mortality
related to malnutrition, infectious diseases, waterborne infections, and unhealthy environmental conditions has traditionally been the problem. In
the case of refugees in Albania and Macedonia, however, the problem
quickly became more one of chronic diseases whose management called for
a different category of support and medical supplies, a fact which, just as
during the war in Bosnia, often caught relief organizations unprepared.
There is also a need to highlight the importance of disaggregating
mortality, or indeed any health-related data, by at least age, sex, and
family status. Not to do so puts into question the usefulness of mortality
(and other health) data from the perspective of understanding both the
epidemiology of mortality itself and its implications for surviving populations. For especially (but not only) in emergency and disaster situations
the death of any individual has the potential to implicate and threaten the
health and well being of others in many and profound ways. The precocious rupture of symbiotic relationships between people, particularly
within families, can have an immediate impact on the welfare of survivors, be they children, women, the elderly, or indeed men. It is noteworthy, for example, that Robinson et al. found that widows were more
vulnerable. And when Burkholder et al. refer to the high mortality rate
among the elderly, this was probably due not only to natural attrition in
the harsh conditions of forced uprooting and movement, but also to the
fact that many were “unaccompanied” and possibly without the help of
relatives and close family.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

MANUEL CARBALLO

133

From a more methodological perspective the papers also highlight
the realities and shortcomings encountered in enumerating anything, including health events in complex emergencies and natural disasters. For
even when events are readily discernible and measurable in principle, the
fact remains that from a logistical perspective they often occur in situations from which it is difficult (and at times dangerous) to gather reliable
information. The papers also remind us of the fact that while mortality
data may be important to relief organizations from the point of view of
knowing when, how, and with what to intervene from an international
perspective, they are sometimes not seen in the same light from a national
point of view.
There are a number of reasons why national partners may view these
data differently. In countries where ethnic hostilities and political strife
are the cause of excess mortality, information can be politically sensitive
and, at best, susceptible to under- or over-reporting. Because they can be
indicative of things that are going wrong, mortality data are often
defended by countries and interested parties as highly private and confidential. When they are, they also tend to be hidden, tampered with, or
purposely skewed. In this regard, Robinson et al. highlight the importance of using creative techniques for generating mortality data while at
the same time reminding us of the difficulties involved in developing
sensitive and specific methods for doing so. The papers in this volume
are an important reminder of how easily mortality data (and mortality
itself) can be hidden unless innovative and creative techniques are used to
extract and put together relevant images of excess mortality.
Burkholder et al. refer to the difficulties that many external relief
groups had in accessing data that had been gathered by national health
services in Albania and Macedonia. While this limited access can be
criticized, the other reality is that the relationship between external groups
and national governments receiving refugees is often so ill defined that
governments are not clear as to why health data (or other information) are
being requested and how they will be used. In Albania and Macedonia,
the lack of a good working relationship between relief organizations and
national and local government was already evident in the first week of
April 1999. It did not improve significantly for a variety of reasons, some
of which were probably preventable. In the case of Macedonia, where
large numbers of refugees had been accommodated from the very beginning of the crisis in local communities, the government felt that it was
being unduly recognized for what it had done to assist. External groups
were arriving and setting up relief operations, often bypassing national
and local governments. The authorities were also concerned about the
impact refugees would have on local health services and the capacity of
those services to respond to both refugees and national populations.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

134

REFLECTIONS

ICMH studies of this phenomenon in other parts of the world have
pointed to the relatively cavalier way in which local health systems and
authorities are often neglected by relief organizations in both planning
and implementing relief operations. Yet no matter how comprehensive
relief interventions are, referral of complicated cases always depends on
the capacity of local health services to accommodate them. The additional “load” this represents is rarely reflected in the support they get
from relief organizations.
In the case of Albania, where the health care system has been underfunded and over-stretched for the past five or so years, local authorities
were concerned about their capacity to respond appropriately (although,
just as in Macedonia, they did respond well). They were also critical of
how little they were invited to participate in some of the relief planning
operations that would ultimately have an impact on local services as well.
Making access to health-related data difficult to external groups under
such circumstances may often be a reaction to how they feel they are
being treated.
In the context of the Kosovo crisis, poor coordination and communication between different relief agencies also stood out as a major problem
that while not unique to that situation, nevertheless had serious implications for data generation and planning in general. The proliferation of
relief agencies and groups often became a challenge as well as a contribution. Some came with different mandates, interests, and degrees of experience and technical sophistication. Their interest in and capacity for
gathering health-related data in general and mortality data in particular
varied considerably. More importantly, their commitment to sharing data
(or even understanding why health data should be pooled) also varied
and different methods of data collection were often used and the possibilities of using standardized techniques were typically neglected.
The fact that health-related data are useful in generating support from
donors and in reporting back to them on the impact of relief operations
also, no doubt, tended to make pooling of information even more of a
challenge. Traditionally this has often thrown into question the reliability
of data generated by relief groups because of fears that it would be imprecise and either over- or underestimated.
The lack of coordination and pooling of health data also had its implications for the interventions formulated by different groups, and there is
no doubt that duplication, contradictions in approaches, over-focusing on
some issues and neglecting others occurred as a result. Coordination, or
the lack of it, thus stood out as one of the most difficult issues in general,
and especially so in the collection of mortality and other health statistics.
Finally, although mortality statistics are of paramount importance in
understanding the severity of crisis situations, we must not lose sight of

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

MANUEL CARBALLO

135

the fact that they provide only a restricted image of those crises. However, because they do reflect such a visible part of the problem, there is a
danger that at times the collection of mortality statistics and activities
designed to reduce excess mortality will eclipse other equally salient but
less evident concerns. Thus, for example, the issue of psychosocial morbidity, and I would even dare to say, mortality, has been neglected as an
issue even though from the point of view of long-term disability and
limitations to social reconstruction and recovery, this may be of equally
significant importance as physical mortality.

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

Index

A

Alliance des Forces Démocratiques de
Libération du Congo-Zaire
(AFDL), 53, 57, 59
Angola, 5, 10, 25
Asia, see Afghanistan; Cambodia; China;
Iran; Iraq; North Korea; Pakistan;
Soviet Union, dissolution of;
Thailand; Vietnam

Accidental injuries, 131, 132
Cambodians, 113
Kosovars, 92
North Koreans, 74
Afghanistan, 38-41
Africa, 6
ECOMOG, 47
see also Angola; Burundi; Eritrea;
Ethiopia; Liberia; Mozambique;
Rwanda; Sierra Leone; Somalia;
Sudan; Uganda; Zaire
Age factors, 2, 12, 14-20, 30, 34, 132
Afghans, 40
Bosnia, 14
Cambodians, 17, 18, 19, 20, 102, 109-111,
112-115, 116-117, 118, 121-126, 127
camp populations, general, 14, 15-17
crude mortality rates, 30, 39, 63
gender factors and, 16, 17-20, 30, 45, 62,
63, 114, 121-123, 124-126, 127, 132
Kosovars, 89, 95-97, 99
North Koreans, 18, 73, 74, 79, 84
Rwandans, 15-16, 55, 61, 62, 63
see also Children; Elderly persons;
Life expectancy
Aid, see Humanitarian interventions
Albania, Kosovars in, see Kosovo

B
Balkans, 22, 25
see also Bosnia; Kosovo; Macedonia
Bangladesh, 5, 9, 13
Baseline mortality
defined, 4
Kosovars, 90, 99
Birth rate, see Fertility
Bosnia, 10, 24, 25, 26, 39, 41-43
age factors, 14
crude mortality rates, 41
executions, 41
forensics, 41-42
gender factors, 41
mass graves, 41-42
medical interventions, 42-43
urban areas, 41, 42-43
Burundi, 53

137

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

138

INDEX

C
Cambodia, x, 5, 11, 25, 33, 34, 102-129
age and gender factors, 17, 18, 19, 20,
102, 109-111, 112-115, 116-117,
118, 121-126, 127
camp populations, 106, 119
children, 104, 117, 122, 124-125
elderly persons, 104
executions, 104, 105, 108, 116, 117,
118, 125, 127
families and households, 106-108,
123, 125
famine, 104, 117, 118, 119, 124
fertility, 106, 109, 111, 119-120, 121, 124
gender factors, 17, 18, 19, 20, 102,
109-111, 112-115, 116-117, 118,
121-126, 127
geographic factors, 112, 119
landmines, 116, 127
medical interventions, 104, 116
retrospective mortality surveys, 107,
108, 109
sampling, 107-108
sanitation, 104
surveillance systems, 105; see also
“retrospective mortality surveys”
supra
transportation and travel factors, 104
urban areas, 104
vital statistics, 106, 111, 117-118
war, 102, 103-106, 107, 116, 123-124,
127
Camp populations, 4, 8-9, 31-32, 54
Afghans, 38-39, 40
age factors, 14, 15-17
Cambodians, 106, 119
Kosovars, 90, 91-92, 97-98, 132
Rwandans, 46, 52-68
Sierra Leone, 47-48, 49
stages of crisis, 11
Case studies, x, 2, 33-34
Afghans, 38-41
Albanians Kosovars, 33-34
Bosnians, 39, 41-43
Cambodians, 34, 102-129
Kosovars, 33, 86-101
North Koreans in China, 34, 43-45,
69-85
Rwandans in Zaire, 33, 39, 45-47, 52-68
Sierra Leone, 39, 47-49
Census data, Cambodian crisis, 106-107

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
crude death rate, 7
Kosovo, 88
Children, 4, 14, 15, 16, 30
Afghan, 39, 40, 41
Cambodian, 104, 117, 122, 124-125
crude death rate, 7-8(n.3)
crude mortality rate, 7-8(n.3), 14, 39, 63
gender factors, 17
Kosovar, 95
North Korean, 45, 69, 70, 84
Rwandan, 46, 55, 58, 61, 62, 63, 65, 66
Sierra Leone, 48
see also Fertility
China
North Korean refugees, x, 18, 34, 39,
43-45, 69-85, 131
Cholera, 47, 55, 57, 58, 61
Coale-Demeny life tables, 15-20, 74
Complex humanitarian emergency,
defined, 1, 3-5
Congo, see Zaire, Rwandans in
Cost factors, 26, 108
see also Funding
Crude death rate (CDR), definitional
issues, 4, 7-8
Crude mortality rate (CMR), 2, 9-10
Afghans, 38, 39
age factors, 30, 39, 63
Bosnians, 41
children, 7-8(n.3), 14, 39, 63
definitional issues, 4, 7-8
gender factors, 30
Kosovars, 92-95, 98-99, 100
malnutrition, 13
North Koreans, 44, 73-74
Rwandans, 55-59 (passim), 61, 63, 65, 66
stages of crisis, 11-12, 30
Cultural factors, 2
recall and, 32
see also Genocide and ethnic
cleansing; Political factors;
Psychological factors

D
Death penalty, see Executions
Definitional issues, 3-5
complex humanitarian emergency, 1,
3-5
crude mortality/death rates, 4, 7-8

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

139

INDEX
forced migration, x
war-related deaths, 131
Diarrhea, 39, 41, 48, 55, 57, 58
see also Cholera
Disasters, see Earthquakes; Famine;
Floods; Natural disasters; War
and armed conflicts
Diseases and disorders, 13-14
Afghans, 38, 40-41
Bosnians, 40-42, 132
Cambodians, 117, 127
cholera, 47, 55, 57, 58, 61
chronic, general, 7(n.3), 24, 25, 42, 95,
96, 97, 132
combatant mortality from disease, 5
communicable, general, 4, 5, 13-14,
24, 38, 40-41, 42, 47, 55, 67, 89, 95,
96, 97, 127, 132
dehydration, 47
diarrhea, 39, 41, 48, 55, 57, 58
disabilities, 24
Kosovars, 89, 95, 132
malaria, 13, 20-21, 41, 61
malnutrition, 4, 7(n.3), 13, 14, 24, 41,
42, 44, 45, 47, 48, 61, 74, 81-83, 117,
132; see also Famine
measles, 13, 20, 39, 47
meningitis, 55
mental health trauma, 5, 24, 27-28, 34,
35, 131; see also Psychological
factors
North Koreans, 74, 81-83
pertussis, 47
respiratory infections, 39, 47, 48, 61, 95
Rwandans, 47, 54-55, 57, 58, 61, 67
shigella, 47, 55
Sierra Leone, 48
typhoid, 41
see also Medical interventions;
Vaccinations
Drought, 70
see also Famine

E
Earthquakes, 5, 41
Eastern Europe, 6
see also Bosnia; Kosovo; Macedonia

Economic factors, 3, 13, 14, 23, 26
North Korea, 69-70, 76-77, 79
see also Cost factors; Funding;
Humanitarian interventions
Education, see Professional training
Educational attainment
literacy, 4, 70
North Koreans, 70, 79
see also Literacy
Elderly persons, 14, 15, 16, 131, 132
Cambodians, 104
Kosovars, 92, 99
North Koreans, 45, 73
Equations, see Mathematical models
Eritrea, age factors, camps populations, 14
Ethiopia, 9, 12, 13, 49
age factors, camps populations, 14
Ethnic cleansing, see Genocide and ethnic
cleansing
Europe
political factors, 22
see also Balkans; Bosnia; Kosovo;
Macedonia; Soviet Union,
dissolution of
Excess mortality, 20-21, 28, 30, 38, 130
Afghans, 40, 41
Bosnians, 42
Cambodians, 34, 112, 117-127
North Koreans, 44-45, 82
Rwandans, 46, 55
Sierra Leone, 48
Executions
Bosnians, 41
Cambodians, 104, 105, 108, 116, 117,
118, 125, 127
Rwandans, 46

F
Families and households, 2, 132
Afghans, 38
Cambodians, 106-108, 123, 125
food entitlements and reports of
deaths by, 31
host families, 91-92, 97-98
Kosovo, 90, 91-92, 97, 98
marital status, 80-81, 83
North Koreans, 34, 71-84
Rwandans, 55, 60-61, 67

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

140

INDEX

Famine, x, 12, 130
Cambodians, 104, 117, 118, 119, 124
North Koreans, 43-45, 70, 77, 81-83
see also Food and nutrition;
Malnutrition
Females, see Gender factors
Fertility, 2, 35
Cambodians, 106, 109, 111, 119-120,
121, 124
North Koreans, 71, 75, 82, 83
see also Reproductive health
Floods, 47, 69-70
Food and nutrition, 8-9, 13, 20
aid, 31, 43, 58, 70, 77, 78, 79, 84
Cambodians, 104, 117, 118, 119, 124
family reports of deaths and aid
entitlements, 31
feeding center registers, 66
gender factors, 81-83
insecurity, 2, 31, 38, 40, 45, 82; see
“malnutrition” infra
Kosovars, 132
malnutrition, 4, 7(n.3), 13, 14, 24, 41,
42, 44, 45, 47, 48, 61, 74, 81-83, 117,
132; see also Famine
North Koreans, 34, 43, 44, 45, 70, 72,
74, 77, 78-79, 81-84
Rwandans, 58, 66
see also Famine; World Food Program
Forced migration, definitional issues, x, 1,
3-5
Forces Armées Rwandaises, 47
Forensics, Bosnia, 41-42
Funding, 7, 27
FYROM, see Macedonia

G
Gender factors, 2, 12, 30, 34, 132
Afghanistan, 40
age factors and, 16, 17-20, 30, 45, 62,
63, 114, 121-123, 124-126, 127, 132
Bosnia, 41
Cambodians, 17, 18, 19, 20, 102, 109111, 112-115, 116-117, 118, 121126, 127
children, 17
crude mortality rates, 30
Kosovo, 95-97
life expectancy, 18, 73

marital status, 80-81, 83
North Koreans, 45, 69, 73, 80-83
nutritional status, 81-83
rape, 24
reproductive health, 27-28, 34, 35; see
also Fertility
Rwandans, 62, 63
Genocide and ethnic cleansing, 1, 5, 26,
130, 131, 133
Cambodians, 104
see also Bosnia; Kosovo; Rwanda
Geographic factors
Cambodians, 112, 119
country boundaries, adjustment, 7
Kosovo, 87, 97
North Koreans, 44, 45, 76-77
Rwandans, 47, 54
see also Internally displaced persons;
Rural areas; Transportation and
travel; Urban areas
Government role, 83, 131, 134
complex humanitarian emergency
defined, 1
destructive policies, x, 1
Kosovars, 89, 100, 133
North Korea, 44, 69, 70, 77, 78, 79
refugee/internally displaced persons,
counted as, 6
Rwandans in Zaire, 60
see also War and armed conflicts
Guinea, 47

H
Health care, see Medical interventions
Households, see Families and households
Humanitarian interventions, 2, 3, 9, 20-21,
130, 133, 134
evaluation techniques, general, 34
food aid, 31, 43, 58, 70, 77, 78, 79, 84
internally displaced persons, 9, 23,
24, 49
international organizations, aid
levels, 7
military targeting of workers, 26, 52
morbidity as guide to, 24-25
North Koreans, 70, 71
Sierra Leone, 49
stages of crisis and, 10, 12
standards, 27, 34, 52

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

141

INDEX
typologies of complex emergencies, 4
U.S. bilateral aid levels, 7
see also Camp populations;
International organizations;
Logistics; Nongovernmental
organizations; specific organizations

I
ICRC, see Red Cross
Immunizations, see Vaccinations
Indirect estimation techniques, 3, 34, 7172, 119-124
Information systems, 27-33
see also Statistical methodology;
Surveillance systems
Insects, 21
see also Malaria
Internally displaced persons (IDPs), 2, 4,
26, 35
Bosnia, 41
crude mortality/death rates, 10
geopolitical factors, 23
international organizations, aid, 9, 23,
24, 49
nongovernmental organizations, 23,
49
Rwanda, 52
Sierra Leone, 47, 49
trends, 5-6
United Nations, 24
International organizations, 9, 21, 26, 132,
133, 134
budgets for relief, 7
internally displaced persons, 9, 23,
24, 49
North Koreans, 84
refugee/internally displaced persons,
counted as, 6
Rwandans, 57
standards for assistance, 27, 34, 52
see also Nongovernmental
organizations; specific organizations
Interventions, see Camp populations;
Humanitarian interventions;
Medical interventions; Sanitation;
Vaccinations
Iran, 9, 39
Iraq, 25

K
Kampuchea, see Cambodia
Korea, North, see North Korea
Kosovo, x, 24, 33, 86-101, 131, 132, 133, 134
age factors, 89, 95-97, 99
camp populations, 90, 91-92, 97-98,
132
children, 95
crude mortality rates, 92-95, 98-99,
100
elderly persons, 92, 99
families and households, 90, 91-92,
97, 98
gender factors, 95-97
geographic factors, 87, 97
government role, 89, 100, 133
medical interventions, 89, 97, 99-100
nongovernmental organizations, 8788, 89, 90
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), 86, 90, 91
retrospective mortality surveys, 68,
88, 90, 92, 98, 99, 100
sampling, 88, 90, 100
sanitation, 132
surveillance systems, 87-90, 97-100;
see also “retrospective mortality
surveys” supra
transportation and travel factors, 86,
132
United Nations, 87-89, 90
vaccinations, 90, 100

L
Landmines, 5, 13
Afghanistan war, 40
Cambodians, 116, 127
Liberia, 10, 47
Life expectancy, 8(n.3), 14-15
Cambodians, 124-125(n.13)
gender factors, 18, 73
North Koreans, 73
Literacy, 4
North Koreans, 70
Logistics, 21, 25-26, 133
Kosovo, 88
Rwandans, 60
stages of crises, 10

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

142

INDEX

M
Macedonia (FYROM), Kosovars in, 33, 86,
88, 89-100, 132, 133
Malaria, 13, 20-21, 41
Rwandans, 61
Males, see Gender factors
Malnutrition, 4, 7(n.3), 13, 14, 24, 41, 42,
44, 45, 47, 48, 61, 74, 81-83, 117, 132
see also Famine
Marital status
North Koreans, 80-81, 83
Mass graves
Bosnia, 41-42
Rwandans, 46, 54
Mass media, Afghans, 40
Mathematical models, ix, 109-112, 115, 116
Measles, 13, 20, 39, 47
Medical interventions, x, 14, 20, 21, 28-29,
130
Afghanistan, 38
Bosnia, 42-43
Cambodians, 104, 116
Kosovo, 89, 97, 99-100
Médicins Sans Frontières (MSF), 39,
41, 46
morbidity and, 24-25
Physicians for Human Rights, 42
reproductive health, 27-28, 34, 35; see
also Fertility
Rwandans, 52, 59
see also Diseases and disorders;
Surveillance systems; Vaccinations
Médicins Sans Frontières (MSF), 39, 41, 46
Men, see Gender factors
Meningitis, 55
Mental health trauma, 5, 24, 27-28, 34, 35,
131
see also Psychological factors
Methodology, see Case studies;
Definitional issues; Indirect
estimation techniques;
Logistics; Mathematical models;
Recall; Sampling; Statistical
methodology; Surveillance
systems
Middle East, 6
Mines, see Landmines

Mortality, see Baseline mortality; Crude
death rate; Crude mortality rate;
Excess mortality; Retrospective
mortality surveys
Mozambique, 8
MSF, see Médicins Sans Frontières (MSF)

N
NATO, see North Atlantic Treaty
Organization
Natural disasters, x, 5, 83, 130, 131
Afghanistan, 40, 41
defined, 3-4
drought, 70
earthquakes, 5, 41
floods, 47, 69-70
see also Famine
Nongovernmental organizations, 23, 25, 26
Afghanistan war, 40
Bosnia, 41
Kosovo, 87-88, 89, 90
North Korea, 71
Sierra Leone, 47, 49
Sphere Project, 27
standards for assistance, 27, 34
see also International organizations;
specific organizations
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
(NATO), Kosovo crisis, 86, 90, 91
North Korea, x, 34, 39, 43-45, 69-85, 131
age factors, 18, 73, 74, 79, 84
children, 45, 69, 70, 84
crude mortality rates, 44, 73-74
economic collapse, 69-70, 76-77, 79
educational attainment, 70, 79
elderly persons, 45, 73
families and households, 34, 71-84
famine, 43-45, 70, 77, 81-83
fertility, 71, 75, 82, 83
food and nutrition, 34, 43, 44, 45, 70,
72, 74, 77, 78-79, 81-84
gender factors, 45, 69, 73, 80-83
geographic factors, 44, 45, 76-77
government role, 44, 69, 70, 77, 78, 79
sampling, 44, 71
transportation and travel factors, 76,
79-80

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

143

INDEX
United Nations, 45, 69, 70, 75, 84
urban areas, 76-77
World Food Program, 43, 70
World Vision, 44-45, 70
Nutrition, see Food and nutrition

P
Pakistan, Afghans in, 38
Pertussis, 47
Pests, see Insects
Political factors, 6, 12, 21(n.7), 22-24, 83,
133
Cambodia, 102-129
North Koreans, 77
stages of crisis, 12
see also Genocide and ethnic
cleansing; Government role; War
and armed conflicts
Professional training, surveillance
systems, 21
Protein energy malnutrition, 13
Psychological factors, 2, 27-28, 34, 131
dignity issues, 25
family reports of deaths, 31
recall, 32-33, 66-67
see also Cultural factors; Mental
health trauma

Q
Quality control, see Standards

Reproductive health, 27-28, 34, 35
see also Fertility
Respiratory infections, 39, 47, 48, 61, 95
Retrospective mortality surveys
Cambodians, 107, 108, 109
Kosovars, 68, 88, 90, 92, 98, 99, 100
Rwandans, 33, 53, 55, 60-61, 66-68
Rural areas
famine, 4-5
North Koreans, 76-77
Rwanda, x, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 26, 29, 33, 39,
45-47, 52-68
age factors, 15-16, 55, 61, 62, 63
camp populations, 46, 52-68
children, 46, 55, 58, 61, 62, 63, 65, 66
crude mortality rates, 55-59 (passim),
61, 63, 65, 66
disease, 47, 54-55, 57, 58, 61, 67
executions, 46
families and households, 55, 60-61, 67
food and nutrition, 58, 66
gender factors, 62, 63
geographic factors, 47, 54
mass graves, 46, 54
medical interventions, 52, 59
retrospective mortality surveys, 33,
53, 55, 60-61, 66-68
sampling, 60, 61-62, 67
sanitation, 52, 57, 59-60
surveillance systems, 33, 53, 54-55,
57, 58, 60, 66; see also “retrospective
mortality surveys” supra
urban areas, 52, 53-57
vaccinations, 54-55
water supply, 47, 52, 57

R
Rape, 24
Recall, 32-33
North Koreans, 71-75, 82
Rwandans, 66-67
Red Cross (ICRC), 23
Afghans, 41
Bosnians, 41
Kosovars, 98
Rwandans, 46
standards for assistance, 27
Refugees, see Forced migration; individual
countries
Repatriation, 23, 64

S
Sampling, 31-32
Cambodians, 107-108
Kosovars, 88, 90, 100
North Koreans, 44, 71
Rwandans, 60, 61-62, 67
Sanitation, 9, 20
Cambodians, 104
Kodovars, 132
Rwandans, 52, 57, 59-60
see also Water supply
Sex differences, see Gender factors

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

144

INDEX

Shigella, 47, 55
Sierra Leone, 24, 39, 47-49
Somalia, 10, 12, 13, 14, 25, 49
Southeast Asia, see Cambodia; North
Korea; Thailand; Vietnam
Soviet Union, dissolution of, 22
Afghanistan war, 38-39, 40
North Korea and, 43
Sphere Project, 27
Standards
aid provision, 27, 34, 52
data collection protocols, 28-29
reporting procedures, 31
Statistical methodology, ix, 28-33, 34, 130135
baseline mortality, 4, 90, 99
camp populations, 31-32, 54
data collection protocols, 28-29
indirect estimation techniques, 3, 34,
71-72, 119-124
vital statistics, ix, 106, 111, 117-118
see also Crude death rate; Crude
mortality rate; Mathematical
models; Retrospective mortality
surveys; Sampling; Surveillance
systems
Sudan, 5, 10, 13
Suicide, 74, 113
Surveillance systems, 21, 28-33
Cambodians, 105
Kosovo, 87-90, 97-100
professional training, 21
Rwandans in Zaire, 33, 53, 54-55, 57,
58, 60, 66
see also Information systems;
Retrospective mortality surveys

T
Thailand, Cambodian refugees in, 11, 17,
18, 19, 20, 105, 119, 121, 123
Time factors
Cambodians, 109-112
duration of crisis, 2, 13, 130
recall, 32-33, 66-67, 71-75, 82
Rwandans, 65, 66-67
stages of crisis, 10-12, 30, 65, 94

Training, see Professional training
Transportation and travel, 20, 131
Kosovars, 86, 132
Cambodians, 104
North Koreans, 76, 79-80
stages of crisis, 10-12
Typhoid, 41

U
Uganda, 53
United Nations, 23, 24, 25, 26
Bosnia, 42
Cambodians, 106
Kosovo, 87-89, 90
North Koreans, 45, 69, 70, 75, 84
Rwandans, 57
Urban areas, 5
Afghans, 38, 39
Bosnians, 41, 42-43
Cambodians, 104
North Koreans, 76-77
Rwandans in Zaire, 52, 53-57
Sierra Leone, 47, 48

V
Vaccinations, 4, 8(n.3), 13, 14, 20, 30
Kosovars, 90, 100
Rwandans, 54-55
Vietnam, Cambodian crisis, 103, 104, 105106, 121, 126
Violence, 14, 20, 30, 113-114, 124-125, 126
rape, 24
suicide, 74, 113
see also Executions; War and armed
conflicts
Vital statistics, ix, 106, 111, 117-118

W
War and armed conflicts, x, 5, 12-13, 24,
25, 130, 131
Afghans, 38-39, 40
aid workers, military targeting of, 26,
52

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

Forced Migration and Mortality
http://www.nap.edu/catalog/10086.html

145

INDEX
Cambodians, 102, 103-106, 107, 116,
123-124, 127
combatant mortality, 5, 116, 127
complex humanitarian emergency
defined, 1
exclusion zones, 43
field hospitals, 43
genocide and ethnic cleansing, 1, 5,
26, 104, 130, 131, 133; see also
Bosnia; Kosovo; Rwanda
rape as a weapon, 24
Sierra Leone, 24, 39, 47-49
see also Balkans; Bosnia; Kosovo;
Landmines; Rwanda
Water supply
Bosnians, 43
Kosovars, 132
Rwandans, 47, 52, 57
see also Sanitation

Weather
drought, 70
floods, 47, 69-70
Whooping cough, see Pertussis
Women, see Gender factors
World Food Program, 7
North Koreans, 43, 70
World Vision, North Koreans, 44-45, 70

Y
Yugoslavia, see Bosnia; Kosovo;
Macedonia

Z
Zaire, Rwandan refugees in, 9, 11, 12, 13,
15-16, 17, 26, 29, 33, 46, 52-68

Copyright © National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.

