GALILEO, University System of Georgia

GALILEO Open Learning Materials
Psychology, Sociology, Anthropology, and Social
Work Open Textbooks

Psychology, Sociology, Anthropology, and Social
Work

Spring 2015

General Psychology: An Introduction
Tori Kearns
East Georgia State College, tkearns@ega.edu

Deborah Lee
East Georgia State College, dlee@ega.edu

Follow this and additional works at: https://oer.galileo.usg.edu/psychology-textbooks
Part of the Psychology Commons
Recommended Citation
Kearns, Tori and Lee, Deborah, "General Psychology: An Introduction" (2015). Psychology, Sociology, Anthropology, and Social Work
Open Textbooks. 1.
https://oer.galileo.usg.edu/psychology-textbooks/1

This Open Textbook is brought to you for free and open access by the Psychology, Sociology, Anthropology, and Social Work at GALILEO Open
Learning Materials. It has been accepted for inclusion in Psychology, Sociology, Anthropology, and Social Work Open Textbooks by an authorized
administrator of GALILEO Open Learning Materials. For more information, please contact affordablelearninggeorgia@usg.edu.

General Psychology: An
Introduction
Tori Kearns

NOBA

Copyright
R. Biswas-Diener & E. Diener (Eds), Noba Textbook Series: Psychology. Champaign, IL: DEF
Publishers. DOI: nobaproject.com

Copyright © 2016 by Diener Education Fund. This material is licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License. To view a copy
of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/deed.en_US.

The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion
of a Website does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or the Diener Education Fund,
and the Diener Education Fund does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented
at these sites.

Contact Information:

Noba Project
2100 SE Lake Rd., Suite 5
Milwaukie, OR 97222
www.nobaproject.com
info@nobaproject.com

Contents

About Noba & Acknowledgements

4

Chapter 1: The Origins of Psychology5
1

History of Psychology

6

David B. Baker & Heather Sperry
Chapter 2: The Methods of Psychology22
2

Research Designs

23

Christie Napa Scollon
Chapter 3: Biological Psychology39
3

The Brain and Nervous System

40

Robert Biswas-Diener
4

Hormones & Behavior

55

Randy J. Nelson
Chapter 4: Sensation & Perception79
5

Sensation and Perception

80

Adam John Privitera
Chapter 5: Learning & Behavior105
6

Conditioning and Learning

106

Mark E. Bouton
Chapter 6: States of Consciousness132
7

States of Consciousness

133

Robert Biswas-Diener & Jake Teeny
Chapter 7: Memory153
8

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

154

Kathleen B. McDermott & Henry L. Roediger
9

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases
Cara Laney & Elizabeth F. Loftus

177

10 Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

190

Daniel Simons
Chapter 8: Motivation202
11 Functions of Emotions

203

Hyisung Hwang & David Matsumoto
12 Motives and Goals

217

Ayelet Fishbach & Maferima Touré-Tillery
Chapter 9: Stress & Health234
13 The Healthy Life

235

Emily Hooker & Sarah Pressman
Chapter 10: Cognition: Thinking, Language, and Intelligence255
14 Intelligence

256

Robert Biswas-Diener
15 Judgment and Decision Making

270

Max H. Bazerman
16 Language and Language Use

284

Yoshihisa Kashima
Chapter 11: Human Development299
17 Attachment Through the Life Course

300

R. Chris Fraley
18 Cognitive Development in Childhood

315

Robert Siegler
19 Adolescent Development

330

Jennifer Lansford
Chapter 12: Personality344
20 Personality Traits

345

Edward Diener & Richard E. Lucas
21 The Psychodynamic Perspective
Robert Bornstein

362

Chapter 13: Psychological Disorders380
22 Anxiety and Related Disorders
David H. Barlow & Kristen K. Ellard

381

23 Mood Disorders
Anda Gershon & Renee Thompson

401

24 Dissociative Disorders
Dalena van Heugten - van der Kloet

423

25 Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders
Deanna M. Barch

444

Chapter 14: Therapy466
26 Therapeutic Orientations
Hannah Boettcher, Stefan G. Hofmann & Q. Jade Wu

467

27 Psychopharmacology
Susan Barron

486

Chapter 15: Social Psychology500
28 Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping
Susan T. Fiske

501

29 Persuasion: So Easily Fooled
Robert V. Levine

517

30 Conformity and Obedience
Jerry M. Burger

537

Index

550

About Noba
The Diener Education Fund (DEF) is a non-profit organization founded with the mission of reinventing higher education to serve the changing needs of students and professors. The initial
focus of the DEF is on making information, especially of the type found in textbooks, widely
available to people of all backgrounds. This mission is embodied in the Noba project.

Noba is an open and free online platform that provides high-quality, flexibly structured
textbooks and educational materials. The goals of Noba are three-fold:

•
•

To reduce financial burden on students by providing access to free educational content
To provide instructors with a platform to customize educational content to better suit their
curriculum

•

To present material written by a collection of experts and authorities in the field

The Diener Education Fund is co-founded by Drs. Ed and Carol Diener. Ed is the Joseph Smiley
Distinguished Professor of Psychology (Emeritus) at the University of Illinois. Carol Diener is
the former director of the Mental Health Worker and the Juvenile Justice Programs at the
University of Illinois. Both Ed and Carol are award- winning university teachers.

Acknowledgements
The Diener Education Fund would like to acknowledge the following individuals and companies
for their contribution to the Noba Project: The staff of Positive Acorn, including Robert BiswasDiener as managing editor and Peter Lindberg as Project Manager; The Other Firm for user
experience design and web development; Sockeye Creative for their work on brand and
identity development; Arthur Mount for illustrations; Chad Hurst for photography; EEI
Communications for manuscript proofreading; Marissa Diener, Shigehiro Oishi, Daniel
Simons, Robert Levine, Lorin Lachs and Thomas Sander for their feedback and suggestions
in the early stages of the project.

Chapter 1: The Origins of Psychology

1
History of Psychology
David B. Baker & Heather Sperry

This module provides an introduction and overview of the historical development of the
science and practice of psychology in America. Ever-increasing specialization within the field
often makes it difficult to discern the common roots from which the field of psychology has
evolved. By exploring this shared past, students will be better able to understand how
psychology has developed into the discipline we know today.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•
•

Describe the precursors to the establishment of the science of psychology.
Identify key individuals and events in the history of American psychology.
Describe the rise of professional psychology in America.
Develop a basic understanding
Recognize the role of women

of the processes of scientific development and change.
and people of color in the history of American psychology.

Introduction
It is always a difficult question to ask, where to begin to tell the story of the history of
psychology. Some would start with ancient Greece; others would look to a demarcation in the
late 19th century when the science of psychology was formally proposed and instituted. These
two perspectives, and all that is in between, are appropriate for describing a history of
psychology. The interested student will have no trouble finding an abundance of resources
on all of these time frames and perspectives (Goodwin, 2011; Leahey, 2012; Schultz & Schultz,

6

History of Psychology

2007). For the purposes of this module, we will examine
the development of psychology in America and use the
mid-19th century as our starting point. For the sake of
convenience, we refer to this as a history of modern
psychology.
Psychology is an exciting field and the history of
psychology offers the opportunity to make sense of how
it has grown and developed. The history of psychology
also provides perspective. Rather than a dry collection
of names and dates, the history of psychology tells us
about the important intersection of time and place that
defines who we are. Consider what happens when you
meet someone for the first time. The conversation
The earliest records of a psychological

usually begins with a series of questions such as, “Where

experiment go all the way back to the Pharaoh

did you grow up?” “How long have you lived here?”

Psamtik I of Egypt in the 7th Century B.C.

“Where did you go to school?” The importance of history

[Image: Neithsabes]

in defining who we are cannot be understated. Whether
you are seeing a physician, talking with a counselor, or

applying for a job, everything begins with a history. The same is true for studying the history
of psychology; getting a history of the field helps to make sense of where we are and how we
got here.

A Prehistory of Psychology
Precursors to American psychology can be found in philosophy and physiology. Philosophers
such as John Locke (1632–1704) and Thomas Reid (1710–1796) promoted empiricism, the
idea that all knowledge comes from experience. The work of Locke, Reid, and others
emphasized the role of the human observer and the primacy of the senses in defining how
the mind comes to acquire knowledge. In American colleges and universities in the early
1800s, these principles were taught as courses on mental and moral philosophy. Most often
these courses taught about the mind based on the faculties of intellect, will, and the senses
(Fuchs, 2000).

Physiology and Psychophysics
Philosophical questions about the nature of mind and knowledge were matched in the 19th
century by physiological investigations of the sensory systems of the human observer. German

History of Psychology

7

physiologist Hermann von Helmholtz (1821–1894) measured the speed of the neural impulse
and explored the physiology of hearing and vision. His work indicated that our senses can
deceive us and are not a mirror of the external world. Such work showed that even though
the human senses were fallible, the mind could be measured using the methods of science.
In all, it suggested that a science of psychology was feasible.
An important implication of Helmholtz’s work was that there is a psychological reality and a
physical reality and that the two are not identical. This was not a new idea; philosophers like
John Locke had written extensively on the topic, and in the 19th century, philosophical
speculation about the nature of mind became subject to the rigors of science.
The question of the relationship between the mental (experiences of the senses) and the
material (external reality) was investigated by a number of German researchers including
Ernst Weber and Gustav Fechner. Their work was called psychophysics, and it introduced
methods for measuring the relationship between physical stimuli and human perception that
would serve as the basis for the new science of psychology (Fancher & Rutherford, 2011).
The formal development of modern psychology is usually credited to the work of German
physician, physiologist, and philosopher Wilhelm Wundt (1832–1920). Wundt helped to
establish the field of experimental psychology by serving as a strong promoter of the idea
that psychology could be an experimental field and by providing classes, textbooks, and a
laboratory for training students. In 1875, he joined the faculty at the University of Leipzig and
quickly began to make plans for the creation of a program of experimental psychology. In
1879, he complemented his lectures on experimental psychology with a laboratory
experience: an event that has served as the popular date for the establishment of the science
of psychology.
The response to the new science was immediate and global. Wundt attracted students from
around the world to study the new experimental psychology and work in his lab. Students
were trained to offer detailed self-reports of their reactions to various stimuli, a procedure
known as introspection. The goal was to identify the elements of consciousness. In addition
to the study of sensation and perception, research was done on mental chronometry, more
commonly known as reaction time. The work of Wundt and his students demonstrated that
the mind could be measured and the nature of consciousness could be revealed through
scientific means. It was an exciting proposition, and one that found great interest in America.
After the opening of Wundt’s lab in 1879, it took just four years for the first psychology
laboratory to open in the United States (Benjamin, 2007).

Scientific Psychology Comes to the United States

8

History of Psychology

Wundt’s version of psychology arrived in America most visibly through the work of Edward
Bradford Titchener (1867–1927). A student of Wundt’s, Titchener brought to America a brand
of experimental psychology referred to as “structuralism.” Structuralists were interested in
the contents of the mind—what the mind is. For Titchener, the general adult mind was the
proper focus for the new psychology, and he excluded from study those with mental
deficiencies, children, and animals (Evans, 1972; Titchener, 1909).
Experimental psychology spread rather rapidly throughout North America. By 1900, there
were more than 40 laboratories in the United States and Canada (Benjamin, 2000). Psychology
in America also organized early with the establishment of the American Psychological
Association (APA) in 1892. Titchener felt that this new organization did not adequately
represent the interests of experimental psychology, so, in 1904, he organized a group of
colleagues to create what is now known as the Society of Experimental Psychologists (Goodwin,
1985). The group met annually to discuss research in experimental psychology. Reflecting the
times, women researchers were not invited (or welcome). It is interesting to note that
Titchener’s first doctoral student was a woman, Margaret Floy Washburn (1871–1939). Despite
many barriers, in 1894, Washburn became the first woman in America to earn a Ph.D. in
psychology and, in 1921, only the second woman to be elected president of the American
Psychological Association (Scarborough & Furumoto, 1987).
Striking a balance between the science and practice of psychology continues to this day. In
1988, the American Psychological Society (now known as the Association for Psychological
Science) was founded with the central mission of advancing psychological science.

Toward a Functional Psychology
While Titchener and his followers adhered to a structural psychology, others in America were
pursuing different approaches. William James, G. Stanley Hall, and James McKeen Cattell were
among a group that became identified with “functionalism.” Influenced by Darwin’s
evolutionary theory, functionalists were interested in the activities of the mind—what the
mind does. An interest in functionalism opened the way for the study of a wide range of
approaches, including animal and comparative psychology (Benjamin, 2007).
William James (1842–1910) is regarded as writing perhaps the most influential and important
book in the field of psychology, Principles of Psychology, published in 1890. Opposed to the
reductionist ideas of Titchener, James proposed that consciousness is ongoing and
continuous; it cannot be isolated and reduced to elements. For James, consciousness helped
us adapt to our environment in such ways as allowing us to make choices and have personal

9

History of Psychology

responsibility over those choices.
At Harvard, James occupied a position of authority and respect in psychology and philosophy.
Through his teaching and writing, he influenced psychology for generations. One of his
students, Mary Whiton Calkins (1863–1930), faced many of the challenges that confronted
Margaret Floy Washburn and other women interested in pursuing graduate education in
psychology. With much persistence, Calkins was able to study with James at Harvard. She
eventually completed all the requirements for the doctoral degree, but Harvard refused to
grant her a diploma because she was a woman. Despite these challenges, Calkins went on to
become an accomplished researcher and the first woman elected president of the American
Psychological Association in 1905 (Scarborough & Furumoto, 1987).
G. Stanley Hall (1844–1924) made substantial and lasting contributions to the establishment
of psychology in the United States. At Johns Hopkins University, he founded the first
psychological laboratory in America in 1883. In 1887, he created the first journal of psychology
in America, American Journal of Psychology. In 1892, he founded the American Psychological
Association (APA); in 1909, he invited and hosted Freud at Clark University (the only time Freud
visited America). Influenced by evolutionary theory, Hall was interested in the process of
adaptation and human development. Using surveys and questionnaires to study children,
Hall wrote extensively on child development and education. While graduate education in
psychology was restricted for women in Hall’s time, it was all but non-existent for African
Americans. In another first, Hall mentored Francis Cecil Sumner (1895–1954) who, in 1920,
became the first African American to earn a Ph.D. in psychology in America (Guthrie, 2003).
James McKeen Cattell (1860–1944) received his Ph.D. with Wundt but quickly turned his
interests to the assessment of individual differences. Influenced by the work of Darwin’s
cousin, Frances Galton, Cattell believed that mental abilities such as intelligence were inherited
and could be measured using mental tests. Like Galton, he believed society was better served
by identifying those with superior intelligence and supported efforts to encourage them to
reproduce. Such beliefs were associated with eugenics (the promotion of selective breeding)
and fueled early debates about the contributions of heredity and environment in defining
who we are. At Columbia University, Cattell developed a department of psychology that
became world famous also promoting psychological science through advocacy and as a
publisher of scientific journals and reference works (Fancher, 1987; Sokal, 1980).

The Growth of Psychology
Throughout the first half of the 20th century, psychology continued to grow and flourish in

History of Psychology

10

America. It was large enough to accommodate varying points of view on the nature of mind
and behavior. Gestalt psychology is a good example. The Gestalt movement began in
Germany with the work of Max Wertheimer (1880–1943). Opposed to the reductionist
approach of Wundt’s laboratory psychology, Wertheimer and his colleagues Kurt Koffka (1886–
1941), Wolfgang Kohler (1887–1967), and Kurt Lewin (1890–1947) believed that studying the
whole of any experience was richer than studying individual aspects of that experience. The
saying “the whole is greater than the sum of its parts” is a Gestalt perspective. Consider that
a melody is an additional element beyond the collection of notes that comprise it. The Gestalt
psychologists proposed that the mind often processes information simultaneously rather
than sequentially. For instance, when you look at a photograph, you see a whole image, not
just a collection of pixels of color. Using Gestalt principles, Wertheimer and his colleagues
also explored the nature of learning and thinking. Most of the German Gestalt psychologists
were Jewish and were forced to flee the Nazi regime due to the threats posed on both academic
and personal freedoms. In America, they were able to introduce a new audience to the Gestalt
perspective, demonstrating how it could be applied to perception and learning (Wertheimer,
1938). In many ways, the work of the Gestalt psychologists served as a precursor to the rise
of cognitive psychology in America (Benjamin, 2007).
Behaviorism emerged early in the 20th century and became a major force in American
psychology. Championed by psychologists such as John B. Watson (1878–1958) and B. F.
Skinner (1904–1990), behaviorism rejected any reference to mind and viewed overt and
observable behavior as the proper subject matter of psychology. Through the scientific study
of behavior, it was hoped that laws of learning could be derived that would promote the
prediction and control of behavior. Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov (1849–1936) influenced
early behaviorism in America. His work on conditioned learning, popularly referred to as
classical conditioning, provided support for the notion that learning and behavior were
controlled by events in the environment and could be explained with no reference to mind
or consciousness (Fancher, 1987).
For decades, behaviorism dominated American psychology. By the 1960s, psychologists began
to recognize that behaviorism was unable to fully explain human behavior because it neglected
mental processes. The turn toward a cognitive psychology was not new. In the 1930s, British
psychologist Frederic C. Bartlett (1886–1969) explored the idea of the constructive mind,
recognizing that people use their past experiences to construct frameworks in which to
understand new experiences. Some of the major pioneers in American cognitive psychology
include Jerome Bruner (1915–), Roger Brown (1925–1997), and George Miller (1920–2012). In
the 1950s, Bruner conducted pioneering studies on cognitive aspects of sensation and
perception. Brown conducted original research on language and memory, coined the term
“flashbulb memory,” and figured out how to study the tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon

11

History of Psychology

(Benjamin, 2007). Miller’s research on working memory is legendary. His 1956 paper “The
Magic Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two: Some Limits on Our Capacity for Processing
Information”is one of the most highly cited papers in psychology. A popular interpretation of
Miller’s research was that the number of bits of information an average human can hold in
working memory is 7 ± 2. Around the same time, the study of computer science was growing
and was used as an analogy to explore and understand how the mind works. The work of
Miller and others in the 1950s and 1960s has inspired tremendous interest in cognition and
neuroscience, both of which dominate much of contemporary American psychology.

Applied Psychology in America
In America, there has always been an interest in the application of psychology to everyday
life. Mental testing is an important example. Modern intelligence tests were developed by the
French psychologist Alfred Binet (1857–1911). His goal was to develop a test that would identify
schoolchildren in need of educational support. His test, which included tasks of reasoning
and problem solving, was introduced in the United States by Henry Goddard (1866–1957) and
later standardized by Lewis Terman (1877–1956) at Stanford University. The assessment and
meaning of intelligence has fueled debates in American psychology and society for nearly 100
years. Much of this is captured in the nature-nurture debate that raises questions about the
relative contributions of heredity and environment in determining intelligence (Fancher, 1987).
Applied psychology was not limited to mental testing. What psychologists were learning in
their laboratories was applied in many settings including the military, business, industry, and
education. The early 20th century was witness to rapid advances in applied psychology. Hugo
Munsterberg (1863–1916) of Harvard University made contributions to such areas as
employee selection, eyewitness testimony, and psychotherapy. Walter D. Scott (1869–1955)
and Harry Hollingworth (1880–1956) produced original work on the psychology of advertising
and marketing. Lillian Gilbreth (1878–1972) was a pioneer in industrial psychology and
engineering psychology. Working with her husband, Frank, they promoted the use of time
and motion studies to improve efficiency in industry. Lillian also brought the efficiency
movement to the home, designing kitchens and appliances including the pop-up trashcan
and refrigerator door shelving. Their psychology of efficiency also found plenty of applications
at home with their 12 children. The experience served as the inspiration for the movie Cheaper
by the Dozen (Benjamin, 2007).
Clinical psychology was also an early application of experimental psychology in America.
Lightner Witmer (1867–1956) received his Ph.D. in experimental psychology with Wilhelm
Wundt and returned to the University of Pennsylvania, where he opened a psychological clinic

12

History of Psychology

in 1896. Witmer believed that because psychology dealt with the study of sensation and
perception, it should be of value in treating children with learning and behavioral problems.
He is credited as the founder of both clinical and school psychology (Benjamin & Baker, 2004).

Psychology as a Profession
As the roles of psychologists and the needs of the public continued to change, it was necessary
for psychology to begin to define itself as a profession. Without standards for training and
practice, anyone could use the title psychologist and offer services to the public. As early as
1917, applied psychologists organized to create standards for education, training, and
licensure. By the 1930s, these efforts led to the creation of the American Association for
Applied Psychology (AAAP). While the American Psychological Association (APA) represented
the interests of academic psychologists, AAAP served those in education, industry, consulting,
and clinical work.
The advent of WWII changed everything. The psychiatric casualties of war were staggering,
and there were simply not enough mental health professionals to meet the need. Recognizing
the shortage, the federal government urged the AAAP and APA to work together to meet the
mental health needs of the nation. The result was the merging of the AAAP and the APA and
a focus on the training of professional psychologists. Through the provisions of National
Mental Health Act of 1946, funding was made available that allowed the APA, the Veterans
Administration, and the Public Health Service to work together to develop training programs
that would produce clinical psychologists. These efforts led to the convening of the Boulder
Conference on Graduate Education in Clinical Psychology in 1949 in Boulder, Colorado. The
meeting launched doctoral training in psychology and gave us the scientist-practitioner
model of training. Similar meetings also helped launch doctoral training programs in
counseling and school psychology. Throughout the second half of the 20th century,
alternatives to Boulder have been debated. In 1973, the Vail Conference on Professional
Training in Psychology proposed the scholar-practitioner model and the Psy.D. degree
(Doctor of Psychology). It is a training model that emphasizes clinical training and practice
that has become more common (Cautin & Baker, in press).

Psychology and Society
Given that psychology deals with the human condition, it is not surprising that psychologists
would involve themselves in social issues. For more than a century, psychology and
psychologists have been agents of social action and change. Using the methods and tools of
science, psychologists have challenged assumptions, stereotypes, and stigma. Founded in

13

History of Psychology

1936, the Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues (SPSSI) has supported research
and action on a wide range of social issues. Individually, there have been many psychologists
whose efforts have promoted social change. Helen Thompson Woolley (1874–1947) and Leta
S. Hollingworth (1886–1939) were pioneers in research on the psychology of sex differences.
Working in the early 20th century, when women’s rights were marginalized, Thompson
examined the assumption that women were overemotional compared to men and found that
emotion did not influence women’s decisions any more than it did men’s. Hollingworth found
that menstruation did not negatively impact women’s cognitive or motor abilities. Such work
combatted harmful stereotypes and showed that psychological research could contribute to
social change (Scarborough & Furumoto, 1987).
Among the first generation of African American psychologists, Mamie Phipps Clark (1917–
1983) and her husband Kenneth Clark (1914–2005) studied the psychology of race and
demonstrated the ways in which school segregation negatively impacted the self-esteem of
African American children. Their research was influential in the 1954 Supreme Court ruling in
the case of Brown v. Board of Education, which ended school segregation (Guthrie, 2003). In
psychology, greater advocacy for issues impacting the African American community were
advanced by the creation of the Association of Black Psychologists (ABPsi) in 1968.
In 1957, psychologist Evelyn Hooker (1907–1996) published the paper “The Adjustment of the
Male Overt Homosexual,” reporting on her research that showed no significant differences in
psychological adjustment between homosexual and heterosexual men. Her research helped
to de-pathologize homosexuality and contributed to the decision by the American Psychiatric
Association to remove homosexuality from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders in 1973 (Garnets & Kimmel, 2003).

Conclusion
Growth and expansion have been a constant in American psychology. In the latter part of the
20th century, areas such as social, developmental, and personality psychology made major
contributions to our understanding of what it means to be human. Today neuroscience is
enjoying tremendous interest and growth.
As mentioned at the beginning of the module, it is a challenge to cover all the history of
psychology in such a short space. Errors of omission and commission are likely in such a
selective review. The history of psychology helps to set a stage upon which the story of
psychology can be told. This brief summary provides some glimpse into the depth and rich
content offered by the history of psychology. The modules in this e-book are all elaborations

14

History of Psychology

on the foundation created by our shared past. It is hoped that you will be able to see these
connections and have a greater understanding and appreciation for both the unity and
diversity of the field of psychology.

Timeline
1600s – Rise of empiricism emphasizing centrality of human observer in acquiring knowledge
1850s - Helmholz measures neural impulse / Psychophysics studied by Weber & Fechner
1859 - Publication of Darwin's Origin of Species
1879 - Wundt opens lab for experimental psychology
1883 - First psychology lab opens in the United States
1887 – First American psychology journal is published: American Journal of Psychology
1890 – James publishes Principles of Psychology
1892 – APA established
1894 – Margaret Floy Washburn is first U.S. woman to earn Ph.D. in psychology
1904 - Founding of Titchener's experimentalists
1905 - Mary Whiton Calkins is first woman president of APA
1909 – Freud’s only visit to the United States
1913 - John Watson calls for a psychology of behavior
1920 – Francis Cecil Sumner is first African American to earn Ph.D. in psychology
1921 – Margaret Floy Washburn is second woman president of APA
1930s – Creation and growth of the American Association for Applied Psychology (AAAP)
/ Gestalt psychology comes to America

History of Psychology

15

1936- Founding of The Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues
1940s – Behaviorism dominates American psychology
1946 – National Mental Health Act
1949 – Boulder Conference on Graduate Education in Clinical Psychology
1950s – Cognitive psychology gains popularity
1954 – Brown v. Board of Education
1957 – Evelyn Hooker publishes The Adjustment of the Male Overt Homosexual
1968 – Founding of the Association of Black Psychologists
1973 – Psy.D. proposed at the Vail Conference on Professional Training in Psychology
1988 – Founding of the American Psychological Society (now known as the Association for
Psychological Science)

16

History of Psychology

Outside Resources
Podcast: History of Psychology Podcast Series
http://www.yorku.ca/christo/podcasts/
Web: Advances in the History of Psychology
http://ahp.apps01.yorku.ca/
Web: Center for the History of Psychology
http://www.uakron.edu/chp
Web: Classics in the History of Psychology
http://psychclassics.yorku.ca/
Web: Psychology’s Feminist Voices
http://www.feministvoices.com/
Web: This Week in the History of Psychology
http://www.yorku.ca/christo/podcasts/

Discussion Questions
1. Why was psychophysics important to the development of psychology as a science?
2. How have psychologists participated in the advancement of social issues?
3. Name some ways in which psychology began to be applied to the general public and
everyday problems.
4. Describe functionalism and structuralism and their influences on behaviorism and
cognitive psychology.

17

History of Psychology

Vocabulary
Behaviorism
The study of behavior.
Cognitive psychology
The study of mental processes.
Consciousness
Awareness of ourselves and our environment.
Empiricism
The belief that knowledge comes from experience.
Eugenics
The practice of selective breeding to promote desired traits.
Flashbulb memory
A highly detailed and vivid memory of an emotionally significant event.
Functionalism
A school of American psychology that focused on the utility of consciousness.
Gestalt psychology
An attempt to study the unity of experience.
Individual differences
Ways in which people differ in terms of their behavior, emotion, cognition, and development.
Introspection
A method of focusing on internal processes.
Neural impulse
An electro-chemical signal that enables neurons to communicate.
Practitioner-Scholar Model
A model of training of professional psychologists that emphasizes clinical practice.

History of Psychology

18

Psychophysics
Study of the relationships between physical stimuli and the perception of those stimuli.
Realism
A point of view that emphasizes the importance of the senses in providing knowledge of the
external world.
Scientist-practitioner model
A model of training of professional psychologists that emphasizes the development of both
research and clinical skills.
Structuralism
A school of American psychology that sought to describe the elements of conscious
experience.
Tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon
The inability to pull a word from memory even though there is the sensation that that word
is available.

19

History of Psychology

References
Benjamin, L. T. (2007). A brief history of modern psychology. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Benjamin, L. T. (2000). The psychology laboratory at the turn of the 20th century. American
Psychologist, 55, 318–321.
Benjamin, L. T., & Baker, D. B. (2004). From séance to science: A history of the profession of
psychology in America. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
Cautin, R., & Baker, D. B. (in press). A history of education and training in professional
psychology. In B. Johnson & N. Kaslow (Eds.), Oxford handbook of education and training in
professional psychology. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Evans, R. B. (1972). E. B. Titchener and his lost system. Journal of the History of the Behavioral
Sciences, 8, 168–180.
Fancher, R. E. (1987). The intelligence men: Makers of the IQ controversy. New York, NY: W.W.
Norton & Company.
Fancher, R. E., & Rutherford, A. (2011). Pioneers of psychology: A history (4th ed.). New York, NY:
W.W. Norton & Company.
Fuchs, A. H. (2000). Contributions of American mental philosophers to psychology in the United
States. History of Psychology, 3, 3–19.
Garnets, L., & Kimmel, D. C. (2003). What a light it shed: The life of Evelyn Hooker. In L. Garnets
& D. C. Kimmel (Eds.), Psychological perspectives on gay, lesbian, and bisexual experiences (2nd
ed., pp. 31–49). New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Goodwin, C. J. (2011). A history of modern psychology (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Goodwin, C. J. (1985). On the origins of Titchener’s experimentalists. Journal of the History of
the Behavioral Sciences, 21, 383–389.
Guthrie, R. V. (2003). Even the rat was white: A historical view of psychology (2nd ed.). Boston,
MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Leahey, T. H. (2012). A history of psychology: From antiquity to modernity (7th ed.). Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Education.
Scarborough, E. & Furumoto, L. (1987). The untold lives: The first generation of American women
psychologists. New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Shultz, D. P., & Schultz, S. E. (2007). A history of modern psychology (9th ed.). Stanford, CT:
Cengage Learning.
Sokal, M. M. (1980). Science and James McKeen Cattell. Science, 209, 43–52.

History of Psychology

20

Titchener, E. B. (1909). A text-book of psychology. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Wertheimer, M. (1938). Gestalt theory. In W. D. Ellis (Ed.), A source book of Gestalt psychology
(1-11). New York, NY: Harcourt.

Chapter 2: The Methods of Psychology

2
Research Designs
Christie Napa Scollon

Psychologists test research questions using a variety of methods. Most research relies on
either correlations or experiments. With correlations, researchers measure variables as they
naturally occur in people and compute the degree to which two variables go together. With
experiments, researchers actively make changes in one variable and watch for changes in
another variable. Experiments allow researchers to make causal inferences. Other types of
methods include longitudinal and quasi-experimental designs. Many factors, including
practical constraints, determine the type of methods researchers use. Often researchers
survey people even though it would be better, but more expensive and time consuming, to
track them longitudinally.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•
•
•

Understand the difference between correlational and experimental designs.
Understand how to interpret correlations.
Understand how experiments help us to infer causality.
Understand how surveys relate to correlational and experimental research.
Understand what a longitudinal study is.
Understand the strengths and weaknesses of different research designs.

Research Designs

23

Research Designs

In the early 1970’s, a man named Uri Geller tricked the world: he convinced hundreds of
thousands of people that he could bend spoons and slow watches using only the power of
his mind. In fact, if you were in the audience, you would have likely believed he had psychic
powers. Everything looked authentic—this man had to have paranormal abilities! So, why
have you probably never heard of him before? Because when Uri was asked to perform his
miracles in line with scientific experimentation, he was no longer able to do them. That is,
even though it seemed like he was doing the impossible, when he was tested by science, he
proved to be nothing more than a clever magician.
When we look at dinosaur bones to make educated guesses about extinct life, or systematically
chart the heavens to learn about the relationships between stars and planets, or study
magicians to figure out how they perform their tricks, we are forming observations—the
foundation of science. Although we are all familiar with the saying “seeing is believing,”
conducting science is more than just what your eyes perceive. Science is the result of
systematic and intentional study of the natural world. And psychology is no different. In the
movie Jerry Maguire, Cuba Gooding, Jr. became famous for using the phrase, “Show me the
money!” In psychology, as in all sciences, we might say, “Show me the data!”
One of the important steps in scientific inquiry is to test our research questions, otherwise
known as hypotheses. However, there are many ways to test hypotheses in psychological
research. Which method you choose will depend on the type of questions you are asking, as
well as what resources are available to you. All methods have limitations, which is why the
best research uses a variety of methods.
Most psychological research can be divided into two types: experimental and correlational
research.

Experimental Research
If somebody gave you $20 that absolutely had to be spent today, how would you choose to
spend it? Would you spend it on an item you’ve been eyeing for weeks, or would you donate
the money to charity? Which option do you think would bring you the most happiness? If
you’re like most people, you’d choose to spend the money on yourself (duh, right?). Our
intuition is that we’d be happier if we spent the money on ourselves.
Knowing that our intuition can sometimes be wrong, Professor Elizabeth Dunn (2008) at the
University of British Columbia set out to conduct an experiment on spending and happiness.
She gave each of the participants in her experiment $20 and then told them they had to spend

24

Research Designs

the money by the end of the day.
Some of the participants were told
they must spend the money on
themselves, and some were told they
must spend the money on others
(either charity or a gift for someone).
At the end of the day she measured
participants’ levels of happiness
using a self-report questionnaire.
(But wait, how do you measure
something like happiness when you
At the Corner Perk Cafe customers routinely pay for the drinks of
strangers. Is this the way to get the most happiness out of a cup of coffee?
Elizabeth Dunn's research shows that spending money on others may
affect our happiness differently than spending money on ourselves.

can’t really see it? Psychologists
measure many abstract concepts,
such as happiness and intelligence,
by

beginning

with

operational

definitions of the concepts. See the Noba modules on Intelligence [http://noba.to/acxb2thy] and
Happiness [http://noba.to/qnw7g32t], respectively, for more information on specific
measurement strategies.)
In an experiment, researchers manipulate, or cause changes, in the independent variable,
and observe or measure any impact of those changes in the dependent variable. The
independent variable is the one under the experimenter’s control, or the variable that is
intentionally altered between groups. In the case of Dunn’s experiment, the independent
variable was whether participants spent the money on themselves or on others. The
dependent variable is the variable that is not manipulated at all, or the one where the effect
happens. One way to help remember this is that the dependent variable “depends” on what
happens to the independent variable. In our example, the participants’ happiness (the
dependent variable in this experiment) depends on how the participants spend their money
(the independent variable). Thus, any observed changes or group differences in happiness
can be attributed to whom the money was spent on. What Dunn and her colleagues found
was that, after all the spending had been done, the people who had spent the money on
others were happier than those who had spent the money on themselves. In other words,
spending on others causes us to be happier than spending on ourselves. Do you find this
surprising?
But wait! Doesn’t happiness depend on a lot of different factors—for instance, a person’s
upbringing or life circumstances? What if some people had happy childhoods and that’s why
they’re happier? Or what if some people dropped their toast that morning and it fell jam-side
down and ruined their whole day? It is correct to recognize that these factors and many more

25

Research Designs

can easily affect a person’s level of happiness. So how can we accurately conclude that
spending money on others causes happiness, as in the case of Dunn’s experiment?
The most important thing about experiments is random assignment. Participants don’t get
to pick which condition they are in (e.g., participants didn’t choose whether they were
supposed to spend the money on themselves versus others). The experimenter assigns them
to a particular condition based on the flip of a coin or the roll of a die or any other random
method. Why do researchers do this? With Dunn’s study, there is the obvious reason: you can
imagine which condition most people would choose to be in, if given the choice. But another
equally important reason is that random assignment makes it so the groups, on average, are
similar on all characteristics except what the experimenter manipulates.
By randomly assigning people to conditions (self-spending versus other-spending), some
people with happy childhoods should end up in each condition. Likewise, some people who
had dropped their toast that morning (or experienced some other disappointment) should
end up in each condition. As a result, the distribution of all these factors will generally be
consistent across the two groups, and this means that on average the two groups will be
relatively equivalent on all these factors. Random assignment is critical to experimentation
because if the only difference between the two groups is the independent variable, we can
infer that the independent variable is the cause of any observable difference (e.g., in the
amount of happiness they feel at the end of the day).
Here’s another example of the importance of random assignment: Let’s say your class is going
to form two basketball teams, and you get to be the captain of one team. The class is to be
divided evenly between the two teams. If you get to pick the players for your team first, whom
will you pick? You’ll probably pick the tallest members of the class or the most athletic. You
probably won’t pick the short, uncoordinated people, unless there are no other options. As a
result, your team will be taller and more athletic than the other team. But what if we want the
teams to be fair? How can we do this when we have people of varying height and ability? All
we have to do is randomly assign players to the two teams. Most likely, some tall and some
short people will end up on your team, and some tall and some short people will end up on
the other team. The average height of the teams will be approximately the same. That is the
power of random assignment!

Other considerations
In addition to using random assignment, you should avoid introducing confounds into your
experiments. Confounds are things that could undermine your ability to draw causal

26

Research Designs

inferences. For example, if you wanted to test if a new happy pill will make people happier,
you could randomly assign participants to take the happy pill or not (the independent variable)
and compare these two groups on their self-reported happiness (the dependent variable).
However, if some participants know they are getting the happy pill, they might develop
expectations that influence their self-reported happiness. This is sometimes known as a
placebo effect. Sometimes a person just knowing that he or she is receiving special treatment
or something new is enough to actually cause changes in behavior or perception: In other
words, even if the participants in the happy pill condition were to report being happier, we
wouldn’t know if the pill was actually making them happier or if it was the placebo effect—an
example of a confound. A related idea is participant demand. This occurs when participants
try to behave in a way they think the experimenter wants them to behave. Placebo effects
and participant demand often occur unintentionally. Even experimenter expectations can
influence the outcome of a study. For example, if the experimenter knows who took the happy
pill and who did not, and the dependent variable is the experimenter’s observations of people’s
happiness, then the experimenter might perceive improvements in the happy pill group that
are not really there.
One way to prevent these confounds from affecting the results of a study is to use a doubleblind procedure. In a double-blind procedure, neither the participant nor the experimenter
knows which condition the participant is in. For example, when participants are given the
happy pill or the fake pill, they don’t know which one they are receiving. This way the
participants shouldn’t experience the placebo effect, and will be unable to behave as the
researcher expects (participant demand). Likewise, the researcher doesn’t know which pill
each participant is taking (at least in the beginning—later, the researcher will get the results
for data-analysis purposes), which means the researcher’s expectations can’t influence his or
her observations. Therefore, because both parties are “blind” to the condition, neither will be
able to behave in a way that introduces a confound. At the end of the day, the only difference
between groups will be which pills the participants received, allowing the researcher to
determine if the happy pill actually caused people to be happier.

Correlational Designs
When scientists passively observe and measure phenomena it is called correlational research.
Here, we do not intervene and change behavior, as we do in experiments. In correlational
research, we identify patterns of relationships, but we usually cannot infer what causes what.
Importantly, with correlational research, you can examine only two variables at a time, no
more and no less.

27

Research Designs

So, what if you wanted to test whether spending on others is related to happiness, but you
don’t have $20 to give to each participant? You could use a correlational design—which is
exactly what Professor Dunn did, too. She asked people how much of their income they spent
on others or donated to charity, and later she asked them how happy they were. Do you think
these two variables were related? Yes, they were! The more money people reported spending
on others, the happier they were.

More details about the correlation
To find out how well two variables correspond, we can plot the relation between the two
scores on what is known as a scatterplot (Figure 1). In the scatterplot, each dot represents a
data point. (In this case it’s individuals, but it could be some other unit.) Importantly, each dot
provides us with two pieces of information—in this case, information about how good the
person rated the past month (x-axis) and how happy the person felt in the past month (yaxis). Which variable is plotted on which axis does not matter.
The association between two variables
can be summarized statistically using the
correlation coefficient (abbreviated as r).
A correlation coefficient provides information
about the direction and strength of the
association between two variables. For
the example above, the direction of the
association is positive. This means that
people who perceived the past month as
being good reported feeling more happy,
whereas people who perceived the
month as being bad reported feeling less
happy.
With a positive correlation, the two
Figure 1. Scatterplot of the association between happiness and

variables go up or down together. In a

ratings of the past month, a positive correlation (r = .81). Each dot

scatterplot, the dots form a pattern that

represents an individual.

extends from the bottom left to the upper
right (just as they do in Figure 1). The r

value for a positive correlation is indicated by a positive number (although, the positive sign
is usually omitted). Here, the r value is .81.

28

Research Designs

A negative correlation is one in which the two variables move in opposite directions. That is,
as one variable goes up, the other goes down. Figure 2 shows the association between the
average height of males in a country (y-axis) and the pathogen prevalence (or commonness
of disease; x-axis) of that country. In this scatterplot, each dot represents a country. Notice
how the dots extend from the top left to the bottom right. What does this mean in real-world
terms? It means that people are shorter in parts of the world where there is more disease.
The r value for a negative correlation is indicated by a negative number—that is, it has a minus
(–) sign in front of it. Here, it is –.83.
The strength of a correlation has to
do with how well the two variables
align. Recall that in Professor Dunn’s
correlational study, spending on
others positively correlated with
happiness: The more money people
reported spending on others, the
happier they reported to be. At this
point you may be thinking to
yourself, I know a very generous
person who gave away lots of
money to other people but is
miserable! Or maybe you know of a
very stingy person who is happy as
can

be.

Yes,

there

might

be

exceptions. If an association has
many exceptions, it is considered a

Figure 2. Scatterplot showing the association between average male
height and pathogen prevalence, a negative correlation (r = –.83). Each
dot represents a country. (Chiao, 2009)

weak correlation. If an association
has few or no exceptions, it is considered a strong correlation. A strong correlation is one in
which the two variables always, or almost always, go together. In the example of happiness
and how good the month has been, the association is strong. The stronger a correlation is,
the tighter the dots in the scatterplot will be arranged along a sloped line.
The r value of a strong correlation will have a high absolute value. In other words, you disregard
whether there is a negative sign in front of the r value, and just consider the size of the
numerical value itself. If the absolute value is large, it is a strong correlation. A weak correlation
is one in which the two variables correspond some of the time, but not most of the time.
Figure 3 shows the relation between valuing happiness and grade point average (GPA). People
who valued happiness more tended to earn slightly lower grades, but there were lots of
exceptions to this. The r value for a weak correlation will have a low absolute value. If two

29

Research Designs

variables are so weakly related as to be unrelated, we say they are uncorrelated, and the r
value will be zero or very close to zero. In the previous example, is the correlation between
height and pathogen prevalence strong? Compared to Figure 3, the dots in Figure 2 are tighter
and less dispersed. The absolute value of –.83 is large. Therefore, it is a strong negative
correlation.
Can you guess the strength and
direction of the correlation between
age and year of birth? If you said this is
a strong negative correlation, you are
correct! Older people always have
lower years of birth than younger
people (e.g., 1950 vs. 1995), but at the
same time, the older people will have
a higher age (e.g., 65 vs. 20). In fact, this
is a perfect correlation because there
are no exceptions to this pattern. I
challenge you to find a 10-year-old
born before 2003! You can’t.
Figure 3. Scatterplot showing the association between valuing
happiness and GPA, a weak negative correlation (r = –.32). Each dot

Problems with the correlation

represents an individual.

If

generosity

and

happiness

are

positively correlated, should we conclude that being generous causes happiness? Similarly, if
height and pathogen prevalence are negatively correlated, should we conclude that disease
causes shortness? From a correlation alone, we can’t be certain. For example, in the first case
it may be that happiness causes generosity, or that generosity causes happiness. Or, a third
variable might cause both happiness and generosity, creating the illusion of a direct link
between the two. For example, wealth could be the third variable that causes both greater
happiness and greater generosity. This is why correlation does not mean causation—an often
repeated phrase among psychologists.

Qualitative Designs
Just as correlational research allows us to study topics we can’t experimentally manipulate (e.
g., whether you have a large or small income), there are other types of research designs that
allow us to investigate these harder-to-study topics. Qualitative designs, including participant
observation, case studies, and narrative analysis are examples of such methodologies.

30

Research Designs

Although something as simple as “observation” may seem like it would be a part of all research
methods, participant observation is a distinct methodology that involves the researcher
embedding him- or herself into a group in order to study its dynamics. For example, Festinger,
Riecken, and Shacter (1956) were very interested in the psychology of a particular cult.
However, this cult was very secretive and wouldn’t grant interviews to outside members. So,
in order to study these people, Festinger and his colleagues pretended to be cult members,
allowing them access to the behavior and psychology of the cult. Despite this example, it
should be noted that the people being observed in a participant observation study usually
know that the researcher is there to study them.
Another qualitative method for research is the case study, which involves an intensive
examination of specific individuals or specific contexts. Sigmund Freud, the father of
psychoanalysis, was famous for using this type of methodology; however, more current
examples of case studies usually involve brain injuries. For instance, imagine that researchers
want to know how a very specific brain injury affects people’s experience of happiness.
Obviously, the researchers can’t conduct experimental research that involves inflicting this
type of injury on people. At the same time, there are too few people who have this type of
injury to conduct correlational research. In such an instance, the researcher may examine
only one person with this brain injury, but in doing so, the researcher will put the participant
through a very extensive round of tests. Hopefully what is learned from this one person can
be applied to others; however, even with thorough tests, there is the chance that something
unique about this individual (other than the brain injury) will affect his or her happiness. But
with such a limited number of possible participants, a case study is really the only type of
methodology suitable for researching this brain injury.
The final qualitative method to be discussed in this section is narrative analysis. Narrative
analysis centers around the study of stories and personal accounts of people, groups, or
cultures. In this methodology, rather than engaging with participants directly, or quantifying
their responses or behaviors, researchers will analyze the themes, structure, and dialogue of
each person’s narrative. That is, a researcher will examine people’s personal testimonies in
order to learn more about the psychology of those individuals or groups. These stories may
be written, audio-recorded, or video-recorded, and allow the researcher not only to study
what the participant says but how he or she says it. Every person has a unique perspective on
the world, and studying the way he or she conveys a story can provide insight into that
perspective.

Quasi-Experimental Designs

31

Research Designs

What if you want to study the effects of marriage on a variable? For example, does marriage
make people happier? Can you randomly assign some people to get married and others to
remain single? Of course not. So how can you study these important variables? You can use
a quasi-experimental design.
A quasi-experimental design is similar
to experimental research, except that
random assignment to conditions is
not used. Instead, we rely on existing
group memberships (e.g., married vs.
single).

We

treat

these

as

the

independent variables, even though we
don’t assign people to the conditions
and don’t manipulate the variables. As
a

result,

with

quasi-experimental

designs causal inference is more
difficult. For example, married people
might differ on a variety of characteristics

What is a reasonable way to study the effects of marriage on

from unmarried people. If we find that

happiness? (Photo: Nina Matthews Photography)

married participants are happier than
single participants, it will be hard to say that marriage causes happiness, because the people
who got married might have already been happier than the people who have remained single.
Because experimental and quasi-experimental designs can seem pretty similar, let’s take
another example to distinguish them. Imagine you want to know who is a better professor:
Dr. Smith or Dr. Khan. To judge their ability, you’re going to look at their students’ final grades.
Here, the independent variable is the professor (Dr. Smith vs. Dr. Khan) and the dependent
variable is the students’ grades. In an experimental design, you would randomly assign
students to one of the two professors and then compare the students’ final grades. However,
in real life, researchers can’t randomly force students to take one professor over the other;
instead, the researchers would just have to use the preexisting classes and study them as-is
(quasi-experimental design). Again, the key difference is random assignment to the conditions
of the independent variable. Although the quasi-experimental design (where the students
choose which professor they want) may seem random, it’s most likely not. For example, maybe
students heard Dr. Smith sets low expectations, so slackers prefer this class, whereas Dr. Khan
sets higher expectations, so smarter students prefer that one. This now introduces a
confounding variable (student intelligence) that will almost certainly have an effect on
students’ final grades, regardless of how skilled the professor is. So, even though a quasiexperimental design is similar to an experimental design (i.e., it has a manipulated

32

Research Designs

independent variable), because there’s no random assignment, you can’t reasonably draw the
same conclusions that you would with an experimental design.

Longitudinal Studies
Another powerful research design is the longitudinal study. Longitudinal studies track the
same people over time. Some longitudinal studies last a few weeks, some a few months, some
a year or more. Some studies that have contributed a lot to psychology followed the same
people over decades. For example, one study followed more than 20,000 Germans for two
decades. From these longitudinal data, psychologist Rich Lucas (2003) was able to determine
that people who end up getting married indeed start off a bit happier than their peers who
never marry. Longitudinal studies like this provide valuable evidence for testing many theories
in psychology, but they can be quite costly to conduct, especially if they follow many people
for many years.

Surveys
A survey is a way of gathering
information, using old-fashioned
questionnaires or the Internet.
Compared to a study conducted
in

a

psychology

laboratory,

surveys can reach a larger
number of participants at a
much

lower

cost.

Although

surveys are typically used for
correlational research, this is not
Surveys provide researchers with some significant advantages in gathering

always the case. An experiment

data. They make it possible to reach large numbers of people while keeping

can be carried out using surveys

costs to the researchers and the time commitments of participants relatively

as well. For example, King and

low.

Napa (1998) presented participants
with different types of stimuli on

paper: either a survey completed by a happy person or a survey completed by an unhappy
person. They wanted to see whether happy people were judged as more likely to get into
heaven compared to unhappy people. Can you figure out the independent and dependent
variables in this study? Can you guess what the results were? Happy people (vs. unhappy
people; the independent variable) were judged as more likely to go to heaven (the dependent
variable) compared to unhappy people!

33

Research Designs

Likewise, correlational research can be conducted without the use of surveys. For instance,
psychologists LeeAnn Harker and Dacher Keltner (2001) examined the smile intensity of
women’s college yearbook photos. Smiling in the photos was correlated with being married
10 years later!

Tradeoffs in Research
Even though there are serious limitations to correlational and quasi-experimental research,
they are not poor cousins to experiments and longitudinal designs. In addition to selecting a
method that is appropriate to the question, many practical concerns may influence the
decision to use one method over another. One of these factors is simply resource availability
—how much time and money do you have to invest in the research? (Tip: If you’re doing a
senior honor’s thesis, do not embark on a lengthy longitudinal study unless you are prepared
to delay graduation!) Often, we survey people even though it would be more precise—but
much more difficult—to track them longitudinally. Especially in the case of exploratory
research, it may make sense to opt for a cheaper and faster method first. Then, if results from
the initial study are promising, the researcher can follow up with a more intensive method.
Beyond these practical concerns, another consideration in selecting a research design is the
ethics of the study. For example, in cases of brain injury or other neurological abnormalities,
it would be unethical for researchers to inflict these impairments on healthy participants.
Nonetheless, studying people with these injuries can provide great insight into human
psychology (e.g., if we learn that damage to a particular region of the brain interferes with
emotions, we may be able to develop treatments for emotional irregularities). In addition to
brain injuries, there are numerous other areas of research that could be useful in
understanding the human mind but which pose challenges to a true experimental design—
such as the experiences of war, long-term isolation, abusive parenting, or prolonged drug
use. However, none of these are conditions we could ethically experimentally manipulate and
randomly assign people to. Therefore, ethical considerations are another crucial factor in
determining an appropriate research design.

Research Methods: Why You Need Them
Just look at any major news outlet and you’ll find research routinely being reported. Sometimes
the journalist understands the research methodology, sometimes not (e.g., correlational
evidence is often incorrectly represented as causal evidence). Often, the media are quick to
draw a conclusion for you. After reading this module, you should recognize that the strength
of a scientific finding lies in the strength of its methodology. Therefore, in order to be a savvy

Research Designs

34

consumer of research, you need to understand the pros and cons of different methods and
the distinctions among them. Plus, understanding how psychologists systematically go about
answering research questions will help you to solve problems in other domains, both personal
and professional, not just in psychology.

35

Research Designs

Outside Resources
Article: Harker and Keltner study of yearbook photographs and marriage
http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/psp/80/1/112/
Article: Spending money on others promotes happiness. Elizabeth Dunn’s research
https://www.sciencemag.org/content/319/5870/1687.abstract
Article: What makes a life good?
http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/psp/75/1/156/
Artilce: Rich Lucas’s longitudinal study on the effects of marriage on happiness
http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/psp/84/3/527/

Discussion Questions
1. What are some key differences between experimental and correlational research?
2. Why might researchers sometimes use methods other than experiments?
3. How do surveys related to correlational and experimental designs?

36

Research Designs

Vocabulary
Confounds
Factors that undermine the ability to draw causal inferences from an experiment.
Correlation
Measures the association between two variables, or how they go together.
Dependent variable
The variable the researcher measures but does not manipulate in an experiment.
Experimenter expectations
When the experimenter’s expectations influence the outcome of a study.
Independent variable
The variable the researcher manipulates and controls in an experiment.
Longitudinal study
A study that follows the same group of individuals over time.
Operational definitions
How researchers specifically measure a concept.
Participant demand
When participants behave in a way that they think the experimenter wants them to behave.
Placebo effect
When receiving special treatment or something new affects human behavior.
Quasi-experimental design
An experiment that does not require random assignment to conditions.
Random assignment
Assigning participants to receive different conditions of an experiment by chance.

37

Research Designs

References
Chiao, J. (2009). Culture–gene coevolution of individualism – collectivism and the serotonin
transporter gene. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 277, 529-537. doi: 10.1098/
rspb.2009.1650
Dunn, E. W., Aknin, L. B., & Norton, M. I. (2008). Spending money on others promotes happiness.
Science, 319(5870), 1687–1688. doi:10.1126/science.1150952
Festinger, L., Riecken, H.W., & Schachter, S. (1956). When prophecy fails. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Harker, L. A., & Keltner, D. (2001). Expressions of positive emotion in women\'s college
yearbook pictures and their relationship to personality and life outcomes across adulthood.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 112–124.
King, L. A., & Napa, C. K. (1998). What makes a life good? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 75, 156–165.
Lucas, R. E., Clark, A. E., Georgellis, Y., & Diener, E. (2003). Re-examining adaptation and the
setpoint model of happiness: Reactions to changes in marital status. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 84, 527–539.

Chapter 3: Biological Psychology

3
The Brain and Nervous System
Robert Biswas-Diener

The brain is the most complex part of the human body. It is the center of consciousness and
also controls all voluntary and involuntary movement and bodily functions. It communicates
with each part of the body through the nervous system, a network of channels that carry
electrochemical signals.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•
•

Name the various parts of the nervous system and their respective functions
Explain how neurons communicate with each other
Identify the location and function of the limbic system
Articulate how the “motor strip” is an example of brain region specialization
Name at least three neuroimaging techniques and describe how they work

In the 1800s a German scientist by the name of Ernst Weber conducted several experiments
meant to investigate how people perceive the world via their own bodies. It is obvious that
we use our sensory organs—our eyes, and ears, and nose—to take in and understand the
world around us. Weber was particularly interested in the sense of touch. Using a drafting
compass he placed the two points far apart and set them on the skin of a volunteer. When
the points were far apart the research participants could easily distinguish between them. As
Weber repeated the process with ever closer points, however, most people lost the ability to
tell the difference between them. Weber discovered that the ability to recognize these “just
noticeable differences” depended on where on the body the compass was positioned. Your

40

The Brain and Nervous System

back, for example, is far less sensitive to touch than is the skin on your face. Similarly, the tip
of your tongue is extremely sensitive! In this way, Weber began to shed light on the way that
nerves, the nervous system, and the brain form the biological foundation of psychological
processes.
In this module we will explore the
biological side of psychology by paying
particular attention to the brain and to
the nervous system. Understanding
the

nervous

system

is

vital

to

understanding psychology in general.
It is through the nervous system that
we experience pleasure and pain, feel
emotions, learn and use language, and
plan goals, just to name a few
examples. In the pages that follow we
will begin by examining how the human
nervous system develops and then we
will learn about the parts of the brain
Measuring “just noticeable differences.”

and how they function. We will
conclude with a section on how

modern psychologists study the brain.
It is worth mentioning here, at the start, that an introduction to the biological aspects of
psychology can be both the most interesting and most frustrating of all topics for new students
of psychology. This is, in large part, due to the fact that there is so much new information to
learn and new vocabulary associated with all the various parts of the brain and nervous system.
In fact, there are 30 key vocabulary words presented in this module! We encourage you not
to get bogged down in difficult words. Instead, pay attention to the broader concepts, perhaps
even skipping over the vocabulary on your first reading. It is helpful to pass back through with
a second reading, once you are already familiar with the topic, with attention to learning the
vocabulary.

Nervous System development across the human lifespan
As a species, humans have evolved a complex nervous system and brain over millions of years.
Comparisons of our nervous systems with those of other animals, such as chimpanzees, show
some similarities. Researchers can also use fossils to study the relationship between brain

41

The Brain and Nervous System

volume and human behavior over the course of evolutionary history. Homo habilis, for
instance, a human ancestor living about 2 million years ago shows a larger brain volume than
its own ancestors but far less than modern homo sapiens. The main difference between
humans and other animals-- in terms of brain development-- is that humans have a much
more developed frontal cortex (the front part of the brain associated with planning).
Interestingly, a person’s unique nervous system develops over the course of their lifespan in
a way that resembles the evolution of nervous systems in animals across vast stretches of
time. For example, the human nervous system begins developing even before a person is
born. It begins as a simple bundle of tissue that forms into a tube and extends along the headto-tail plane becoming the spinal cord and brain. By day 40 of gestation (40 days after
fertilization of the egg) the spinal cord, hindbrain, midbrain and forebrain are all visibly distinct.
What, exactly, is this nervous system that is developing and what does it do?
The nervous system can be thought of as the body’s communication network that consists
of all nerve cells. There are many ways in which we can divide the nervous system to
understand it more clearly. One common way to do so is by parsing it into the central nervous
system and the peripheral nervous system. Each of these can be sub-divided, in turn. Let’s
take a closer, more in-depth look at each. And, don’t worry, the nervous system is complicated
with many parts and many new vocabulary words. It might seem overwhelming at first but
through the figures and a little study you can get it.

The Central Nervous System (CNS): The
Neurons inside the Brain
The Central Nervous System, or CNS for short, is made
up of the brain and spinal cord (see Figure 1). The CNS is
the portion of the nervous system that is encased in bone
(the brain is protected by the skull and the spinal cord is
protected by the spinal column). It is referred to as
“central” because it is the brain and spinal cord that are
primarily responsible for processing sensory information
—touching a hot stove or seeing a rainbow, for example
—and sending signals to the peripheral nervous system
for action. It communicates largely by sending electrical
signals through individual nerve cells that make up the
fundamental building blocks of the nervous system,
called neurons. There are approximately 100 billion

Figure 1: The central nervous system

The Brain and Nervous System

42

neurons in the human brain and each has many contacts with other neurons, called synapses.
If we were able to magnify a view of individual neurons we would see that they are cells made
from distinct parts (see Figure 2). The three main components of a neuron are the dendrites,
the soma, and the axon. Neurons communicate with one another by receiving information
through the dendrites, which act as an antenna. When the dendrites channel this information
to the soma, or cell body, it builds up as an electro-chemical signal. This electrical part of the
signal, called an action potential shoots down the axon, a long tail that leads away from the
soma and toward the next neuron. When people talk about “nerves” in the nervous system,
it typically refers to bundles of axons that form long neural wires along which electrical signals
can travel. Cell-to-cell communication is helped by the fact that the soma is covered by a
myelin sheath—a layer of fatty cells that allow the signal to travel very rapidly from neuron
to neuron.

Figure 2: The parts of a neuron

If we were to zoom in still further we could take a closer look at the synapse, the space between
neurons (see Figure 3). Here, we would see that there is a space between neurons, called the
synaptic gap. To give you a sense of scale we can compare the synaptic gap to the thickness
of a dime, the thinnest of all American coins (about 1.35 mm). You could stack approximately
70,000 synaptic gaps in the thickness of a single coin!
As the action potential, the electrical signal reaches the end of the axon, tiny packets of
chemicals, called neurotransmitters, are released. This is the chemical part of the electrochemical signal. These neurotransmitters are the chemical signals that travel from one neuron
to another, enabling them to communicate with one another. There are many different types

43

The Brain and Nervous System

of neurotransmitters and each has a specialized function. For example, serotonin affects sleep,
hunger and mood. Dopamine is associated with attention, learning and pleasure.
It is amazing to realize that when you think—
when you reach out to grab a glass of water,
when you realize that your best friend is
happy, when you try to remember the name
of the parts of a neuron—what you are
experiencing is actually electro-chemical
impulses shooting between nerves!

The Central Nervous System:
Figure 3: A view of the synapse between neurons

Looking at the Brain as a Whole

If we were to zoom back out and look at the central nervous system again we would see that
the brain is the largest single part of the central nervous system. The brain is the headquarters
of the entire nervous system and it is here that most of your sensing, perception, thinking,
awareness, emotions, and planning take place. For many people the brain is so important
that there is a sense that it is there—inside the brain—that a person’s sense of self is located
(as opposed to being primarily in your toes, by contrast). The brain is so important, in fact,
that it consumes 20% of the total oxygen and calories we consume even though it is only, on
average, about 2% of our overall weight.
It is helpful to examine the various parts of the brain and to understand their unique functions
to get a better sense of the role the brain plays. We will start by looking at very general areas
of the brain and then we will zoom in and look at more specific parts. Anatomists and
neuroscientists often divide the brain into portions based on the location and function of
various brain parts. Among the simplest ways to organize the brain is to describe it as having
three basic portions: the hindbrain, midbrain and forebrain. Another way to look at the brain
is to consider the brain stem, the Cereblellum, and the Cerebrum. There is another part,
called the Limbic System that is less well defined. It is made up of a number of structures that
are “sub-cortical” (existing in the hindbrain) as well as regions of the Cerebrum (see Figure 4).
The brain stem is the most basic structure of the brain and is located at the top of the spine
and bottom of the brain. It is sometimes considered the “oldest” part of the brain because we
can see similar structures in other, less evolved animals such as crocodiles. It is in charge of
a wide range of very basic “life support” functions for the human body including breathing,
digestion, and the beating of the heart. Amazingly, the brain stem sends the signals to keep

44

The Brain and Nervous System

these processes running smoothly without any conscious effort on our behalf.
The limbic system is a collection of highly specialized neural structures that sit at the top of
the brain stem, which are involved in regulating our emotions. Collectively, the limbic system
is a term that doesn’t have clearly defined areas as it includes forebrain regions as well as
hindbrain regions. These include the amygdala, the pituitary gland, the thalamus and the
hypothalamus. These structures influence hunger, the sleep-wake cycle, sexual desire, fear
and aggression, and even memory.
The cerebellum is a structure at the very back of the brain. Aristotle referred to it as the “small
brain” based on its appearance and it is principally involved with movement and posture
although it is also associated with a variety of other thinking processes. The cerebellum, like
the brain stem, coordinates actions without the need for any conscious awareness. This is
why reflexes can sometimes seem so automatic.
The cerebrum (also called the
“cerebral cortex”) is the “newest,”
most advanced portion of the
brain. The cerebral hemispheres
(the left and right hemispheres
that make up each side of the top
of the brain) are in charge of the
types

of

processes

that

are

associated with more awareness
and voluntary control such as
speaking and planning as well as
contain our primary sensory areas
(such as seeing, hearing, feeling,

Figure 4: General areas of the brain (Image: biology corner)

and moving). These two hemispheres
are connected to one another by a thick bundle of neurons called the corpus callosum. There
are instances in which people—either because of a genetic abnormality or as the result of
surgery—have had their corpus callosum severed so that the two halves of the brain cannot
easily communicate with one another. The rare split-brain patients offer helpful insights into
how the brain works. For example, we now understand that the brain is contralateral, or
opposite-sided. This means that the left side of the brain is responsible for controlling a
number of sensory and motor functions of the right side of the body, and vice versa.
Consider this striking example: A split brain patient is seated at a table and an object such as
a car key can be placed where a split-brain patient can only see it through the right visual field.

The Brain and Nervous System

45

Right visual field images will be processed on the left side of the brain and left visual field
images will be processed on the right side of the brain. Because language is largely associated
with the left side of the brain the patient who sees car key in the right visual field when asked
“What do you see?” would answer, “I see a car key.” In contrast, a split-brain patient who only
saw the car key in the left visual field, thus the information went to the non-language right
side of the brain, might have a difficult time speaking the word “car key.” In fact in this case,
the patient is likely to respond “I didn’t see anything at all.” However, if asked to draw the item
with their left hand—a process associated with the right side of the brain—the patient will be
able to do so! See the outside resources below for a video demonstration of this striking
phenomenon.
Besides looking at the brain as an organ that is made up of two halves we can also examine
it by looking at its four various lobes of the cerebral cortex, the outer part of the brain (see
Figure 5). Each of these is associated with a specific function. The occipital lobe, located at
the back of the cerebral cortex, is the house of the visual area of the brain. You can see the
road in front of you when you are driving, track the motion of a ball in the air, and recognize
faces thanks to the occipital lobe. The temporal lobe, located on the underside of the cerebral
cortex, is where sounds and smells are processed. The parietal lobe, at the upper back of the
cerebral cortex, is where touch and taste are processed. Finally, the frontal lobe, located at
the forward part of the cerebral cortex is where behavioral motor plans are processed as well
as a number of highly complicated processes occur including speech and language use,
creative problem solving, and planning and organization.
One particularly fascinating area in
the frontal lobe is called the “motor
strip” (okay, scientists call it the
central sulcus but haven’t you had
enough new vocabulary for the
time being?). This strip running
along the side of the brain is in
charge of voluntary movements
like waving goodbye, wiggling your
eyebrows, and kissing. It is an
excellent example of the way that
the various regions of the brain are
Figure 5: The 4 lobes of the cerebral cortex

highly specialized. Interestingly,
each of our various body parts has

a unique portion of the motor strip devoted to it (see Figure 6). Each individual finger has
about as much dedicated brain space as your entire leg. Your lips, in turn, require about as

46

The Brain and Nervous System

much dedicated brain processing as all of your fingers and your hand combined!

Figure 6: The motor strip

Because the cerebral cortex in general, and the frontal lobe in particular, are associated with
such sophisticated functions as planning and being self-aware they are often thought of as a
higher, less primal portion of the brain. Indeed, other animals such as rats and kangaroos
while they do have frontal regions of their brain do not have the same level of development
in the cerebral cortices. The closer an animal is to humans on the evolutionary tree—think
chimpanzees and gorillas, the more developed is this portion of their brain.

The Peripheral Nervous System
In addition to the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord) there is also a complex
network of nerves that travel to every part of the body. This is called the peripheral nervous
system (PNS) and it carries the signals necessary for the body to survive (see Figure 7). Some
of the signals carried by the PNS are related to voluntary actions. If you want to type a message
to a friend, for instance, you make conscious choices about which letters go in what order
and your brain sends the appropriate signals to your fingers to do the work. Other processes,
by contrast, are not voluntary. Without your awareness your brain is also sending signals to
your organs, your digestive system, and the muscles that are holding you up right now with
instructions about what they should be doing. All of this occurs through the pathways of your
peripheral nervous system.

47

The Brain and Nervous System

Figure 7: The peripheral nervous system

How we study the brain
The brain is difficult to study because it is housed inside the thick bone of the skull. What’s
more, it is difficult to access the brain without hurting or killing the owner of the brain. As a
result, many of the earliest studies of the brain (and indeed this is still true today) focused on
unfortunate people who happened to have damage to some particular area of their brain.
For instance, in the 1860s a surgeon named Paul Broca conducted an autopsy on a former
patient who had lost his powers of speech. Examining his patient’s brain, Broca identified a
damaged area—now called the “Broca’s Area”—on the left side of the brain (see Figure 8).
Over the years a number of researchers have been able to gain insights into the function of
specific regions of the brain from these types of patients.
An alternative to examining the brains or
behaviors of humans with brain damage
or surgical lesions can be found in the
instance of animals. Some researchers
examine the brains of other animals such
as rats, dogs and monkeys. Although
animals brains differ from human brains
in both size and structure there are many
similarities as well. The use of animals for
study can yield important insights into
human brain function.
Figure 8: Broca's Area (Image: Charlyzon)

In modern times, however, we do not have
to exclusively rely on the study of people with brain lesions. Advances in technology have led

48

The Brain and Nervous System

to ever more sophisticated imaging techniques. Just as X-ray technology allows us to peer
inside the body, neuroimaging techniques allow us glimpses of the working brain. Each type
of imaging uses a different technique and each has its own advantages and disadvantages.
Positron

Emission

Tomography

(PET)

records

metabolic activity in the brain by detecting the amount
of radioactive substances, which are injected into a
person’s bloodstream, the brain is consuming. This
technique allows us to see how much an individual uses
a particular part of the brain while at rest, or not
performing a task. Another technique, known as
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) relies
on blood flow. This method measures changes in the
levels of naturally occurring oxygen in the blood. As a
brain region becomes active, it requires more oxygen.
This technique measures brain activity based on this
increase oxygen level.

This means fMRI does not

require a foreign substance to be injected into the body.
Both PET and fMRI scans have poor temporal
resolution , meaning that they cannot tell us exactly
when brain activity occurred. This is because it takes
several seconds for blood to arrive at a portion of the
brain working on a task.
One imaging technique that has better temporal
resolution is Electroencephalography (EEG), which
Above: A PET scan - Below: An fMRI scan (Image:
Erik1980)

measures

electrical

brain

activity

instead of blood flow. Electrodes are
place on the scalp of participants and
they are nearly instantaneous in picking
up electrical activity. Because this
activity could be coming from any
portion of the brain, however, EEG is
known to have poor spatial resolution,
meaning that it is not accurate with
An EEG cap (Image: Chris Hope)

regards to specific location.

49

The Brain and Nervous System

Another technique, known as Diffuse Optical Imaging (DOI) can offer high temporal and
spatial resolution. DOI works by shining infrared light into the brain. It might seem strange
that light can pass through the head and brain. Light properties change as they pass through
oxygenated blood and through active neurons. As a result, researchers can make inferences
regarding where and when brain activity is happening.

Conclusion
It has often been said that the brain studies itself. This means that humans are uniquely
capable of using our most sophisticated organ to understand our most sophisticated organ.
Breakthroughs in the study of the brain and nervous system are among the most exciting
discoveries in all of psychology. In the future, research linking neural activity to complex, real
world attitudes and behavior will help us to understand human psychology and better
intervene in it to help people.

50

The Brain and Nervous System

Outside Resources
Video: Animation of Neurons
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-SHBnExxub8
Video: Split Brain Patient
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZMLzP1VCANo
Web: Animation of the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
http://sites.sinauer.com/neuroscience5e/animations01.01.html
Web: Animation of the Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
http://sites.sinauer.com/neuroscience5e/animations01.02.html
Web: Teaching resources and videos for teaching about the brain, from Colorado State
University:
http://www.learner.org/resources/series142.html
Web: The Brain Museum
http://brainmuseum.org/

Discussion Questions
1. In your opinion is learning about the functions of various parts of the brain by studying
the abilities of brain damaged patients ethical. What, in your opinion, are the potential
benefits and considerations?
2. Are research results on the brain more compelling to you than are research results from
survey studies on attitudes? Why or why not? How does biological research such as studies
of the brain influence public opinion regarding the science of psychology?
3. If humans continue to evolve what changes might you predict in our brains and cognitive
abilities?
4. Which brain scanning techniques, or combination of techniques, do you find to be the
best? Why? Why do you think scientists may or may not employ exactly your recommended
techniques?

51

The Brain and Nervous System

Vocabulary
Action Potential
A transient all-or-nothing electrical current that is conducted down the axon when the
membrane potential reaches the threshold of excitation.
Axon
Part of the neuron that extends off the soma, splitting several times to connect with other
neurons; main output of the neuron.
Brain Stem
The “trunk” of the brain comprised of the medulla, pons, midbrain, and diencephalon.
Broca’s Area
An area in the frontal lobe of the left hemisphere. Implicated in language production.
Central Nervous System
The portion of the nervous system that includes the brain and spinal cord.
Cerebellum
The distinctive structure at the back of the brain, Latin for “small brain.”
Cerebrum
Usually refers to the cerebral cortex and associated white matter, but in some texts includes
the subcortical structures.
Contralateral
Literally “opposite side”; used to refer to the fact that the two hemispheres of the brain process
sensory information and motor commands for the opposite side of the body (e.g., the left
hemisphere controls the right side of the body).
Corpus Callosum
The thick bundle of nerve cells that connect the two hemispheres of the brain and allow them
to communicate.
Dendrites
Part of a neuron that extends away from the cell body and is the main input to the neuron.

The Brain and Nervous System

52

Diffuse Optical Imaging​ (DOI)
A neuroimaging technique that infers brain activity by measuring changes in light as it is
passed through the skull and surface of the brain.
Electroencephalography (EEG)
A neuroimaging technique that measures electrical brain activity via multiple electrodes on
the scalp.
Frontal Lobe
The front most (anterior) part of the cerebrum; anterior to the central sulcus and responsible
for motor output and planning, language, judgment, and decision-making.
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI): A neuroimaging technique that infers brain
activity by measuring changes in oxygen levels in the blood.
Limbic System
Includes the subcortical structures of the amygdala and hippocampal formation as well as
some cortical structures; responsible for aversion and gratification.
Myelin Sheath
Fatty tissue, that insulates the axons of the neurons; myelin is necessary for normal conduction
of electrical impulses among neurons.
Nervous System
The body’s network for electrochemical communication. This system includes all the nerves
cells in the body.
Neurons
Individual brain cells
Neurotransmitters
Chemical substance released by the presynaptic terminal button that acts on the postsynaptic
cell.
Occipital Lobe
The back most (posterior) part of the cerebrum; involved in vision.
Parietal Lobe

The Brain and Nervous System

53

The part of the cerebrum between the frontal and occipital lobes; involved in bodily sensations,
visual attention, and integrating the senses.
Peripheral Nervous System
All of the nerve cells that connect the central nervous system to all the other parts of the body.
Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
A neuroimaging technique that measures brain activity by detecting the presence of a
radioactive substance in the brain that is initially injected into the bloodstream and then pulled
in by active brain tissue.
Soma
Cell body of a neuron that contains the nucleus and genetic information, and directs protein
synthesis.
Spatial Resolution
A term that refers to how small the elements of an image are; high spatial resolution means
the device or technique can resolve very small elements; in neuroscience it describes how
small of a structure in the brain can be imaged.
Split-brain Patient
A patient who has had most or all of his or her corpus callosum severed.
Synapses
Junction between the presynaptic terminal button of one neuron and the dendrite, axon, or
soma of another postsynaptic neuron.
Synaptic Gap
Also known as the synaptic cleft; the small space between the presynaptic terminal button
and the postsynaptic dendritic spine, axon, or soma.
Temporal Lobe
The part of the cerebrum in front of (anterior to) the occipital lobe and below the lateral fissure;
involved in vision, auditory processing, memory, and integrating vision and audition.
Temporal Resolution
A term that refers to how small a unit of time can be measured; high temporal resolution
means capable of resolving very small units of time; in neuroscience it describes how precisely
in time a process can be measured in the brain.

4
Hormones & Behavior
Randy J. Nelson

The goal of this module is to introduce you to the topic of hormones and behavior. This field
of study is also called behavioral endocrinology, which is the scientific study of the interaction
between hormones and behavior. This interaction is bidirectional: hormones can influence
behavior, and behavior can sometimes influence hormone concentrations. Hormones are
chemical messengers released from endocrine glands that travel through the blood system
to influence the nervous system to regulate behaviors such as aggression, mating, and
parenting of individuals.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•
•

Define the basic terminology and basic principles of hormone–behavior interactions.
Explain the role of hormones in behavioral sex differentiation.
Explain the role of hormones in aggressive behavior.
Explain the role of hormones in parental behavior.
Provide examples of some common hormone–behavior interactions.

Introduction
This module describes the relationship between hormones and behavior. Many readers are
likely already familiar with the general idea that hormones can affect behavior. Students are
generally familiar with the idea that sex-hormone concentrations increase in the blood during
puberty and decrease as we age, especially after about 50 years of age. Sexual behavior shows

Hormones & Behavior

55

a similar pattern. Most people also know about the relationship between aggression and
anabolic steroid hormones, and they know that administration of artificial steroid hormones

Hormones & Behavior

56

sometimes results in uncontrollable, violent behavior called “roid rage.” Many different
hormones can influence several types of behavior, but for the purpose of this module, we will
restrict our discussion to just a few examples of hormones and behaviors. For example, are
behavioral sex differences the result of hormones, the environment, or some combination of
factors? Why are men much more likely than women to commit aggressive acts? Are hormones
involved in mediating the so-called maternal “instinct”? Behavioral endocrinologists are
interested in how the general physiological effects of hormones alter the development and
expression of behavior and how behavior may influence the effects of hormones. This module
describes, both phenomenologically and functionally, how hormones affect behavior.
To understand the hormone-behavior relationship, it is important briefly to describe
hormones. Hormones are organic chemical messengers produced and released by specialized
glands called endocrine glands. Hormones are released from these glands into the blood,
where they may travel to act on target structures at some distance from their origin. Hormones
are similar in function to neurotransmitters, the chemicals used by the nervous system in
coordinating animals’ activities. However, hormones can operate over a greater distance and
over a much greater temporal range than neurotransmitters (Box 1). Examples of hormones
that influence behavior include steroid hormones such as testosterone (a common type of
androgen), estradiol (a common type of estrogen), progesterone (a common type of
progestin), and cortisol (a common type of glucocorticoid) (Table 1). Several types of protein
or peptide (small protein) hormones also influence behavior, including oxytocin, vasopressin,
prolactin, and leptin.

Hormones coordinate the physiology and behavior of individuals by regulating, integrating,
and controlling bodily functions. Over evolutionary time, hormones have often been co-opted
by the nervous system to influence behavior to ensure reproductive success. For example,
the same hormones, testosterone and estradiol, that cause gamete (egg or sperm) maturation
also promote mating behavior. This dual hormonal function ensures that mating behavior

57

Hormones & Behavior

Table 1: Prominent Hormones That Influence Behavior

occurs when animals have mature gametes available for fertilization. Another example of
endocrine regulation of physiological and behavioral function is provided by pregnancy.
Estrogens and progesterone concentrations are elevated during pregnancy, and these
hormones are often involved in mediating maternal behavior in the mothers.
Not all cells are influenced by each and every
hormone. Rather, any given hormone can
directly influence only cells that have specific
hormone receptors for that particular
hormone. Cells that have these specific
receptors are called target cells for the
hormone. The interaction of a hormone with
its receptor begins a series of cellular events
that

eventually

lead

to

activation

of

enzymatic pathways or, alternatively, turns
on or turns off gene activation that regulates
protein synthesis. The newly synthesized
proteins may activate or deactivate other
This is an image of oxytocin with its protein neurophysin.

genes, causing yet another cascade of

Oxytocin is often called the “neurotransmitter of love.” To learn

cellular

more about it, see Noba’s module Biochemistry of Love.
[Image: Edgar181]

events.

Importantly,

sufficient

numbers of appropriate hormone receptors
must be available for a specific hormone to

produce any effects. For example, testosterone is important for male sexual behavior. If men
have too little testosterone, then sexual motivation may be low, and it can be restored by
testosterone treatment. However, if men have normal or even elevated levels of testosterone
yet display low sexual drive, then it might be possible for a lack of receptors to be the cause

Hormones & Behavior

58

and treatment with additional hormones will not be effective.
How might hormones affect behavior? In terms of their behavior, one can think of humans
and other animals conceptually as comprised of three interacting components: (1) input
systems (sensory systems), (2) integrators (the central nervous system), and (3) output
systems, or effectors (e.g., muscles). Hormones do not cause behavioral changes. Rather,
hormones influence these three systems so that specific stimuli are more likely to elicit certain
responses in the appropriate behavioral or social context. In other words, hormones change
the probability that a particular behavior will be emitted in the appropriate situation (Nelson,
2011). This is a critical distinction that can affect how we think of hormone-behavior
relationships.
We can apply this three-component behavioral scheme to a simple behavior, singing in zebra
finches. Only male zebra finches sing. If the testes of adult male finches are removed, then
the birds reduce singing, but castrated finches resume singing if the testes are reimplanted,
or if the birds are treated with either testosterone or estradiol. Although we commonly
consider androgens to be “male” hormones and estrogens to be “female” hormones, it is
common for testosterone to be converted to estradiol in nerve cells (Figure 1). Thus, many
male-like behaviors are associated with the actions of estrogens! Indeed, all estrogens must
first be converted from androgens because of the typical biochemical synthesis process. If
the converting enzyme is low or missing, then it is possible for females to produce excessive
androgens and subsequently develop associated male traits. It is also possible for estrogens
in the environment to affect the nervous system of animals, including people (e.g., Kidd et al.,
2007). Again, singing behavior is most frequent when blood testosterone or estrogen
concentrations are high. Males sing to attract mates or ward off potential competitors from
their territories.
Although it is apparent from these observations that estrogens are somehow involved in
singing, how might the three-component framework just introduced help us to formulate
hypotheses to explore estrogen’s role in this behavior? By examining input systems, we could
determine whether estrogens alter the birds’ sensory capabilities, making the environmental
cues that normally elicit singing more salient. If this were the case, then females or competitors
might be more easily seen or heard. Estrogens also could influence the central nervous system.
Neuronal architecture or the speed of neural processing could change in the presence of
estrogens. Higher neural processes (e.g., motivation, attention, or perception) also might be
influenced. Finally, the effector organs, muscles in this case, could be affected by the presence
of estrogens. Blood estrogen concentrations might somehow affect the muscles of a songbird’s
syrinx (the vocal organ of birds). Estrogens, therefore, could affect birdsong by influencing the
sensory capabilities, central processing system, or effector organs of an individual bird. We

Hormones & Behavior

59

Figure 1: Biochemical Pathway for Steroid Hormone Synthesis: It is important to note that testosterone
(an androgen) can be converted to another androgen, DHT, or an estrogen, estradiol. Too much or too
little of the converting enzymes can influence brain and behavior.

do not understand completely how estrogen, derived from testosterone, influences birdsong,
but in most cases, hormones can be considered to affect behavior by influencing one, two,
or all three of these components, and this three-part framework can aid in the design of
hypotheses and experiments to explore these issues.
How might behaviors affect hormones? The birdsong example demonstrates how hormones
can affect behavior, but as noted, the reciprocal relation also occurs; that is, behavior can
affect hormone concentrations. For example, the sight of a territorial intruder may elevate
blood testosterone concentrations in resident male birds and thereby stimulate singing or
fighting behavior. Similarly, male mice or rhesus monkeys that lose a fight decrease circulating
testosterone concentrations for several days or even weeks afterward. Comparable results
have also been reported in humans. Testosterone concentrations are affected not only in
humans involved in physical combat, but also in those involved in simulated battles. For
example, testosterone concentrations were elevated in winners and reduced in losers of

60

Hormones & Behavior

regional chess tournaments.
People do not have to be directly involved in a contest to have their hormones affected by
the outcome of the contest. Male fans of both the Brazilian and Italian teams were recruited
to provide saliva samples to be assayed for testosterone before and after the final game of
the World Cup soccer match in 1994. Brazil and Italy were tied going into the final game, but
Brazil won on a penalty kick at the last possible moment. The Brazilian fans were elated and
the Italian fans were crestfallen. When the samples were assayed, 11 of 12 Brazilian fans who
were sampled had increased testosterone concentrations, and 9 of 9 Italian fans had
decreased testosterone concentrations, compared with pre-game baseline values (Dabbs,
2000).
In some cases, hormones can be affected by
anticipation of behavior. For example, testosterone
concentrations also influence sexual motivation and
behavior in women. In one study, the interaction
between sexual intercourse and testosterone was
compared with other activities (cuddling or exercise) in
women (van Anders, Hamilton, Schmidt, & Watson,
2007). On three separate occasions, women provided
a pre-activity, post-activity, and next-morning saliva
sample. After analysis, the women’s testosterone was
determined to be elevated prior to intercourse as
compared to other times. Thus, an anticipatory
relationship exists between sexual behavior and
testosterone. Testosterone values were higher postintercourse compared to exercise, suggesting that
engaging in sexual behavior may also influence
The expectation of events can influence one’s

hormone concentrations in women.

hormonal activity. How do you think yours is
affected if you anticipate going on a date with a

Sex Differences

romantic interest soon? [Image: junaidrao]

Hens and roosters are different. Cows and bulls are different. Men and women are different.
Even girls and boys are different. Humans, like many animals, are sexually dimorphic (di, “two”;
morph, “type”) in the size and shape of their bodies, their physiology, and for our purposes,
their behavior. The behavior of boys and girls differs in many ways. Girls generally excel in
verbal abilities relative to boys; boys are nearly twice as likely as girls to suffer from dyslexia
(reading difficulties) and stuttering and nearly 4 times more likely to suffer from autism. Boys

61

Hormones & Behavior

are generally better than girls at tasks that
require visuospatial abilities. Girls engage in
nurturing behaviors more frequently than
boys. More than 90% of all anorexia nervosa
cases involve young women. Young men are
twice as likely as young women to suffer from
schizophrenia.

Boys

are

much

more

aggressive and generally engage in more
rough-and-tumble play than girls (Berenbaum,
Martin, Hanish, Briggs, & Fabes, 2008). Many
Sex differences in appearance are often more pronounced

sex differences, such as the difference in

in nonhuman animals than in humans. Male birds

aggressiveness, persist throughout adulthood.

particularly, for example roosters, tend to have physical

For example, there are many more men than

features that differ from the females and also differ

women serving prison sentences for violent

significantly in size. [Image: John Cudworth]

behavior. The hormonal differences between
men and women may account for adult sex

differences that develop during puberty, but what accounts for behavioral sex differences
among children prior to puberty and activation of their gonads? Hormonal secretions from
the developing gonads determine whether the individual develops in a male or female
manner. The mammalian embryonic testes produce androgens, as well as peptide hormones,
that steer the development of the body, central nervous system, and subsequent behavior in
a male direction. The embryonic ovaries of mammals are virtually quiescent and do not secrete
high concentrations of hormones. In the presence of ovaries, or in the complete absence of
any gonads, morphological, neural, and, later, behavioral development follows a female
pathway.
Gonadal steroid hormones have organizational (or programming) effects upon brain and
behavior (Phoenix, Goy, Gerall, & Young, 1959). The organizing effects of steroid hormones
are relatively constrained to the early stages of development. An asymmetry exists in the
effects of testes and ovaries on the organization of behavior in mammals. Hormone exposure
early in life has organizational effects on subsequent rodent behavior; early steroid hormone
treatment causes relatively irreversible and permanent masculinization of rodent behavior
(mating and aggressive). These early hormone effects can be contrasted with the reversible
behavioral influences of steroid hormones provided in adulthood, which are called activational
effects. The activational effects of hormones on adult behavior are temporary and may wane
soon after the hormone is metabolized. Thus, typical male behavior requires exposure to
androgens during gestation (in humans) or immediately after birth (in rodents) to somewhat
masculinize the brain and also requires androgens during or after puberty to activate these
neural circuits. Typical female behavior requires a lack of exposure to androgens early in life

62

Hormones & Behavior

which leads to feminization of the brain and also requires estrogens to activate these neural
circuits in adulthood. But this simple dichotomy, which works well with animals with very
distinct sexual dimorphism in behavior, has many caveats when applied to people.
If you walk through any major toy store, then you will likely observe a couple of aisles filled
with pink boxes and the complete absence of pink packaging of toys in adjacent aisles.
Remarkably, you will also see a strong self-segregation of boys and girls in these aisles. It is
rare to see boys in the “pink” aisles and vice versa. The toy manufacturers are often accused
of making toys that are gender biased, but it seems more likely that boys and girls enjoy
playing with specific types and colors of toys. Indeed, toy manufacturers would immediately
double their sales if they could sell toys to both sexes. Boys generally prefer toys such as trucks
and balls and girls generally prefer toys such as dolls. Although it is doubtful that there are
genes that encode preferences for toy cars and trucks on the Y chromosome, it is possible
that hormones might shape the development of a child’s brain to prefer certain types of toys
or styles of play behavior. It is reasonable to believe that children learn which types of toys
and which styles of play are appropriate to their gender. How can we understand and separate
the contribution of physiological mechanisms from learning to understand sex differences in
human behaviors? To untangle these issues, animal models are often used. Unlike the situation
in humans, where sex differences are usually only a matter of degree (often slight), in some
animals, members of only one sex may
display a particular behavior. As noted,
often only male songbirds sing. Studies
of such strongly sex-biased behaviors
are particularly valuable for understanding
the interaction among behavior, hormones,
and the nervous system.
A study of vervet monkeys calls into
question the primacy of learning in the
establishment of toy preferences (Alexander
& Hines, 2002). Female vervet monkeys
preferred girl-typical toys, such as dolls
or cooking pots, whereas male vervet
monkeys preferred boy-typical toys,
such as cars or balls. There were no sex
differences in preference for gender-

If you think back to the toys and clothing you played with and wore

neutral toys, such as picture books or

in your youth, do you think they were more a result of your hormonal

stuffed animals. Presumably, monkeys

activity or the choices that society and your parents made for you?

have no prior concept of “boy” or “girl”

[Image: Sam Agnew]

Hormones & Behavior

63

toys. Young rhesus monkeys also show similar toy preferences.
What then underlies the sex difference in toy preference? It is possible that certain attributes
of toys (or objects) appeal to either boys or girls. Toys that appeal to boys or male vervet or
rhesus monkeys, in this case, a ball or toy car, are objects that can be moved actively through
space, toys that can be incorporated into active, rough and tumble play. The appeal of toys
that girls or female vervet monkeys prefer appears to be based on color. Pink and red (the
colors of the doll and pot) may provoke attention to infants.
Society may reinforce such stereotypical responses to gender-typical toys. The sex differences
in toy preferences emerge by 12 or 24 months of age and seem fixed by 36 months of age,
but are sex differences in toy preference present during the first year of life? It is difficult to
ask pre-verbal infants what they prefer, but in studies where the investigators examined the
amount of time that babies looked at different toys, eye-tracking data indicate that infants as
young as 3 months showed sex differences in toy preferences; girls preferred dolls, whereas
boys preferred trucks. Another result that suggests, but does not prove, that hormones are
involved in toy preferences is the observation that girls diagnosed with congenital adrenal
hyperplasia (CAH), whose adrenal glands produce varying amounts of androgens early in life,
played with masculine toys more often than girls without CAH. Further, a dose-response
relationship between the extent of the disorder (i.e., degree of fetal androgen exposure) and
degree of masculinization of play behavior was observed. Are the sex differences in toy
preferences or play activity, for example, the inevitable consequences of the differential
endocrine environments of boys and girls, or are these differences imposed by cultural
practices and beliefs? Are these differences the result of receiving gender-specific toys from
an early age, or are these differences some combination of endocrine and cultural factors?
Again, these are difficult questions to unravel in people.
Even when behavioral sex differences appear early in development, there seems to be some
question regarding the influences of societal expectations. One example is the pattern of
human play behavior during which males are more physical; this pattern is seen in a number
of other species including nonhuman primates, rats, and dogs. Is the difference in the
frequency of rough-and-tumble play between boys and girls due to biological factors
associated with being male or female, or is it due to cultural expectations and learning? If
there is a combination of biological and cultural influences mediating the frequency of roughand-tumble play, then what proportion of the variation between the sexes is due to biological
factors and what proportion is due to social influences? Importantly, is it appropriate to talk
about “normal” sex differences when these traits virtually always arrange themselves along
a continuum rather than in discrete categories?

Hormones & Behavior

64

Sex differences are common in humans and in nonhuman animals. Because males and
females differ in the ratio of androgenic and estrogenic steroid hormone concentrations,
behavioral endocrinologists have been particularly interested in the extent to which behavioral
sex differences are mediated by hormones. The process of becoming female or male is called
sexual differentiation. The primary step in sexual differentiation occurs at fertilization. In
mammals, the ovum (which always contains an X chromosome) can be fertilized by a sperm
bearing either a Y or an X chromosome; this process is called sex determination. The
chromosomal sex of homogametic mammals (XX) is female; the chromosomal sex of
heterogametic mammals (XY) is male. Chromosomal sex determines gonadal sex. Virtually
all subsequent sexual differentiation is typically the result of differential exposure to gonadal
steroid hormones. Thus, gonadal sex determines hormonal sex, which regulates
morphological sex. Morphological differences in the central nervous system, as well as in
some effector organs, such as muscles, lead to behavioral sex differences. The process of
sexual differentiation is complicated, and the potential for errors is present. Perinatal
exposure to androgens is the most common cause of anomalous sexual differentiation among
females. The source of androgen may be internal (e.g., secreted by the adrenal glands) or
external (e.g., exposure to environmental estrogens). Turner syndrome results when the
second X chromosome is missing or damaged; these individuals possess dysgenic ovaries
and are not exposed to steroid hormones until puberty. Interestingly, women with Turner
syndrome often have impaired spatial memory.
Female mammals are considered the “neutral” sex; additional physiological steps are required
for male differentiation, and more steps bring more possibilities for errors in differentiation.
Some examples of male anomalous sexual differentiation include 5α-reductase deficiency
(in which XY individuals are born with ambiguous genitalia because of a lack of
dihydrotestosterone and are reared as females, but masculinization occurs during puberty)
and androgen insensitivity syndrome or TFM (in which XY individuals lack receptors for
androgens and develop as females). By studying individuals who do not neatly fall into the
dichotic boxes of female or male and for whom the process of sexual differentiation is atypical,
behavioral endocrinologists glean hints about the process of typical sexual differentiation.
We may ultimately want to know how hormones mediate sex differences in the human brain
and behavior (to the extent to which these differences occur). To understand the mechanisms
underlying sex differences in the brain and behavior, we return to the birdsong example. Birds
provide the best evidence that behavioral sex differences are the result of hormonally induced
structural changes in the brain (Goodson, Saldanha, Hahn, & Soma, 2005). In contrast to
mammals, in which structural differences in neural tissues have not been directly linked to
behavior, structural differences in avian brains have been directly linked to a sexually behavior:
birdsong.

Hormones & Behavior

65

Several brain regions in songbirds display significant sex differences in size. Two major brain
circuit pathways, (1) the song production motor pathway and (2) the auditory transmission
pathway, have been implicated in the learning and production of birdsong. Some parts of the
song production pathway of male zebra finches are 3 to 6 times larger than those of female
conspecifics. The larger size of these brain areas reflects that neurons in these nuclei are
larger, more numerous, and farther apart. Although castration of adult male birds reduces
singing, it does not reduce the size of the brain nuclei controlling song production. Similarly,
androgen treatment of adult female zebra finches does not induce changes either in singing
or in the size of the song control regions. Thus, activational effects of steroid hormones do
not account for the sex differences in singing behavior or brain nucleus size in zebra finches.
The sex differences in these structures are organized or programmed in the egg by estradiol
(masculinizes) or the lack of steroids (feminizes).
Taken together, estrogens appear to be necessary to activate the neural machinery underlying
the song system in birds. The testes of birds primarily produce androgens, which enter the
circulation. The androgens enter neurons containing aromatase, which converts them to
estrogens. Indeed, the brain is the primary source of estrogens, which activate masculine
behaviors in many bird species.

Figure 2: The sexually dimorphic nuclei of the preoptic area (SDN-POA) Gonadal steroid hormones have organizing effects upon
brain and behavior. The organizing effects of steroid hormones are relatively constrained to the early stages of development.
Exposure to testosterone (which is converted to estradiol) or estradiol causes masculinization of the brain. These are crosssections through the brains of rats that show a male (left), a female (center), and a female treated with testosterone as a newborn
(right). Note that the SDN-POA (the dark cell bodies) of the male are substantially larger than those of the untreated female but
are equal in size to those of the testosterone-treated female. The extent that these sex differences in brain structure account
for sex differences in behavior remain unspecified in mammals. OC = optic chiasm; SCN = suprachiasmatic nucleus; V = third
ventricle.

66

Hormones & Behavior

Sex differences in human brain size have been reported for years. More recently, sex
differences in specific brain structures have been discovered (Figure 2). Sex differences in a
number of cognitive functions have also been reported. Females are generally more sensitive
to auditory information, whereas males are more sensitive to visual information. Females are
also typically more sensitive than males to taste and olfactory input. Women display less
lateralization of cognitive functions than men. On average, females generally excel in verbal,
perceptual, and fine motor skills, whereas males outperform females on quantitative and
visuospatial tasks, including map reading and direction finding. Although reliable sex
differences can be documented, these differences in ability are slight. It is important to note
that there is more variation within each sex than between the sexes for most cognitive abilities
(Figure 3).

Figure 3: The Average Sex Differences in Human Performance Often Reflect Significant
Overlap Between the Sexes There are often greater differences in performance between
individuals of the same sex (for example, between Steve and Rick in the figure) than
between individuals of the opposite sex (for example, between Steve and Jane in the
figure).

Aggressive Behaviors

Hormones & Behavior

67

The possibility for aggressive behavior exists whenever the interests of two or more
individuals are in conflict (Nelson, 2006). Conflicts are most likely to arise over limited resources
such as territories, food, and mates. A social interaction decides which animal gains access
to the contested resource. In many cases, a submissive posture or gesture on the part of one
animal avoids the necessity of actual combat over a resource. Animals may also participate
in threat displays or ritualized combat in which dominance is determined but no physical
damage is inflicted.
There is overwhelming circumstantial evidence that androgenic steroid hormones mediate
aggressive behavior across many species. First, seasonal variations in blood plasma
concentrations of testosterone and seasonal variations in aggression coincide. For instance,
the incidence of aggressive behavior peaks for male deer in autumn, when they are secreting
high levels of testosterone. Second, aggressive behaviors increase at the time of puberty,
when the testes become active and blood concentrations of androgens rise. Juvenile deer do
not participate in the fighting during the mating season. Third, in any given species, males are
generally more aggressive than females. This is certainly true of deer; relative to stags, female
deer rarely display aggressive behavior, and their rare aggressive acts are qualitatively
different from the aggressive behavior of aggressive males. Finally, castration typically reduces
aggression in males, and testosterone replacement therapy restores aggression to precastration levels. There are some interesting exceptions to these general observations that
are outside the scope of this module.
As mentioned, males are generally more aggressive than females. Certainly, human males
are much more aggressive than females. Many more men than women are convicted of violent
crimes in North America. The sex differences in human aggressiveness appear very early. At
every age throughout the school years, many more boys than girls initiate physical assaults.
Almost everyone will acknowledge the existence of this sex difference, but assigning a cause
to behavioral sex differences in humans always elicits much debate. It is possible that boys
are more aggressive than girls because androgens promote aggressive behavior and boys
have higher blood concentrations of androgens than girls. It is possible that boys and girls
differ in their aggressiveness because the brains of boys are exposed to androgens prenatally
and the “wiring” of their brains is thus organized in a way that facilitates the expression of
aggression. It is also possible that boys are encouraged and girls are discouraged by family,
peers, or others from acting in an aggressive manner. These three hypotheses are not mutually
exclusive, but it is extremely difficult to discriminate among them to account for sex differences
in human aggressiveness.
What kinds of studies would be necessary to assess these hypotheses? It is usually difficult
to separate out the influences of environment and physiology on the development of behavior

68

Hormones & Behavior

in humans. For example, boys and girls differ
in their rough-and-tumble play at a very
young

age,

physiological

which

suggests

influence

on

an

early

aggression.

However, parents interact with their male and
female offspring differently; they usually play
more roughly with male infants than with
females, which suggests that the sex
difference in aggressiveness is partially
learned. This difference in parental interaction
style is evident by the first week of life.
Because of these complexities in the factors
influencing human behavior, the study of
Researchers have electrically stimulated particular regions in

hormonal

effects

on

sex-differentiated

people’s brains, and these individuals have burst into

behavior has been pursued in nonhuman

aggressive, violent behavior, helping demonstrate that such

animals, for which environmental influences

responses are hardwired into us. [Image: Riccardo Cuppini]

can be held relatively constant. Animal
models for which sexual differentiation

occurs postnatally are often used so that this process can be easily manipulated
experimentally.
Again, with the appropriate animal model, we can address the questions posed above: Is the
sex difference in aggression due to higher adult blood concentrations of androgens in males
than in females, or are males more aggressive than females because their brains are organized
differently by perinatal hormones? Are males usually more aggressive than females because
of an interaction of early and current blood androgen concentrations? If male mice are
castrated prior to their sixth day of life, then treated with testosterone propionate in
adulthood, they show low levels of aggression. Similarly, females ovariectomized prior to their
sixth day but given androgens in adulthood do not express male-like levels of aggression.
Treatment of perinatally gonadectomized males or females with testosterone prior to their
sixth day life and also in adulthood results in a level of aggression similar to that observed in
typical male mice. Thus, in mice, the proclivity for males to act more aggressively than females
is organized perinatally by androgens but also requires the presence of androgens after
puberty in order to be fully expressed. In other words, aggression in male mice is both
organized and activated by androgens. Testosterone exposure in adulthood without prior
organization of the brain by steroid hormones does not evoke typical male levels of aggression.
The hormonal control of aggressive behavior in house mice is thus similar to the hormonal
mediation of heterosexual male mating behavior in other rodent species. Aggressive behavior
is both organized and activated by androgens in many species, including rats, hamsters, voles,

69

Hormones & Behavior

dogs, and possibly some primate species.

Parental Behaviors
Parental behavior can be considered to be any behavior that contributes directly to the
survival of fertilized eggs or offspring that have left the body of the female. There are many
patterns of mammalian parental care. The developmental status of the newborn is an
important factor driving the type and quality of parental care in a species. Maternal care is
much more common than paternal care. The vast majority of research on the hormonal
correlates of mammalian parental behavior has been conducted on rats. Rats bear altricial
young, and mothers perform a cluster of stereotyped maternal behaviors, including nest
building, crouching over the pups to allow nursing and to provide warmth, pup retrieval, and
increased aggression directed at intruders. If you expose nonpregnant female rats (or males)
to pups, their most common reaction is to huddle far away from them. Rats avoid new things
(neophobia). However, if you expose adult rats to pups every day, they soon begin to behave
maternally. This process is called concaveation or sensitization and it appears to serve to
reduce the adult rats’ fear of pups.
Of course a new mother needs to act maternal as soon as her offspring arrive—not in a week.
The onset of maternal behavior in rats is mediated by hormones. Several methods of study,
such as hormone removal and replacement therapy, have been used to determine the
hormonal correlates of rat maternal behavior. A fast decline of blood concentrations of
progesterone in late pregnancy after sustained high concentrations of this hormone, in
combination with high concentrations of estradiol and probably prolactin and oxytocin,
induces female rats to behave maternally almost immediately in the presence of pups. This
pattern of hormones at parturition overrides the usual fear response of adult rats toward
pups, and it permits the onset of maternal behavior. Thus, the so-called maternal “instinct”
requires hormones to increase the approach tendency and lower the avoidance tendency.
Laboratory strains of mice and rats are usually docile, but mothers can be quite aggressive
toward animals that venture too close to their litter. Progesterone appears to be the primary
hormone that induces this maternal aggression in rodents, but species differences exist. The
role of maternal aggression in women’s behavior has not been adequately described or tested.
A series of elegant experiments by Alison Fleming and her collaborators studied the endocrine
correlates of the behavior of human mothers as well as the endocrine correlates of maternal
attitudes as expressed in self-report questionnaires. Responses such as patting, cuddling, or
kissing the baby were called affectionate behaviors; talking, singing, or cooing to the baby
were considered vocal behaviors. Both affectionate and vocal behaviors were considered

70

Hormones & Behavior

approach behaviors. Basic caregiving activities, such as changing diapers and burping the
infants, were also recorded. In these studies, no relationship between hormone
concentrations and maternal responsiveness, as measured by attitude questionnaires, was
found. For example, most women showed an increasing positive self-image during early
pregnancy that dipped during the second half of pregnancy, but recovered after parturition.
A related dip in feelings of maternal engagement occurred during late pregnancy, but
rebounded substantially after birth in most women. However, when behavior, rather than
questionnaire responses, was compared with hormone concentrations, a different story
emerged. Blood plasma concentrations of cortisol were positively associated with approach
behaviors. In other words, women who had high concentrations of blood cortisol, in samples
obtained immediately before or after nursing, engaged in more physically affectionate
behaviors and talked more often to their babies than mothers with low cortisol concentrations.
Additional analyses from this study revealed that the correlation was even greater for mothers
that had reported positive maternal regard (feelings and attitudes) during gestation. Indeed,
nearly half of the variation in maternal behavior among women could be accounted for by
cortisol concentrations and positive maternal attitudes during pregnancy.
Presumably, cortisol does not induce
maternal behaviors directly, but it may
act indirectly on the quality of maternal
care by evoking an increase in the
mother’s general level of arousal, thus
increasing

her

responsiveness

to

infant-generated cues. New mothers
with high cortisol concentrations were
also more attracted to their infant’s
odors, were superior in identifying their
infants, and generally found cues from
Although cortisol may not directly increase maternal behaviors, the

infants

highly

appealing

next time your mom does your laundry, you know one hormone to

Steiner, & Corter, 1997).

(Fleming,

thank. [Image: Scott & Elaine van der Chijs]

The medial preoptic area is critical for
the expression of rat maternal behavior. The amygdala appears to tonically inhibit the
expression of maternal behavior. Adult rats are fearful of pups, a response that is apparently
mediated by chemosensory information. Lesions of the amygdala or afferent sensory
pathways from the vomeronasal organ to the amygdala disinhibit the expression of maternal
behavior. Hormones or sensitization likely act to disinhibit the amygdala, thus permitting the
occurrence of maternal behavior. Although correlations have been established, direct
evidence of brain structural changes in human mothers remains unspecified (Fleming &

Hormones & Behavior

71

Gonzalez, 2009).
Considered together, there are many examples of hormones influencing behavior and of
behavior feeding back to influence hormone secretion. More and more examples of hormone–
behavior interactions are discovered, including hormones in the mediation of food and fluid
intake, social interactions, salt balance, learning and memory, stress coping, as well as
psychopathology including depression, anxiety disorders, eating disorders, postpartum
depression, and seasonal depression. Additional research should reveal how these hormone–
behavior interactions are mediated.

72

Hormones & Behavior

Outside Resources
Book: Adkins-Regan, E. (2005). Hormones and animal social behavior. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Book: Beach, F. A. (1948). Hormones and behavior. New York: Paul Hoeber.
Book: Beach, F. A. (1975). Behavioral endocrinology: An emerging discipline. American
Scientist, 63: 178–187.
Book: Nelson, R. J. (2011). An introduction to behavioral endocrinology (4th ed.). Sunderland,
MA: Sinauer Associates.
Book: Pfaff, D. W. (2009). Hormones, brain, and behavior (2nd ed.). New York: Academic Press.
Book: Pfaff, D. W., Phillips, I. M., & Rubin, R. T. (2005). Principles of hormone/behavior relations.
New York: Academic Press.

Discussion Questions
1. What are some of the problems associated with attempting to determine causation in a
hormone–behavior interaction? What are the best ways to address these problems?
2. Hormones cause changes in the rates of cellular processes or in cellular morphology. What
are some ways that these hormonally induced cellular changes might theoretically produce
profound changes in behavior?
3. List and describe some behavioral sex differences that you have noticed between boys
and girls. What causes girls and boys to choose different toys? Do you think that the sex
differences you have noted arise from biological causes or are learned? How would you
go about establishing your opinions as fact?
4. Why is it inappropriate to refer to androgens as “male” hormones and estrogens as “female”
hormones?
5. Imagine that you discovered that the brains of architects were different from those of nonarchitects—specifically, that the “drawstraightem nuclei” of the right temporal lobe were
enlarged in architects as compared with non-architects. Would you argue that architects
were destined to be architects because of their brain organization or that experience as

Hormones & Behavior

an architect changed their brains? How would you resolve this issue?

73

74

Hormones & Behavior

Vocabulary
5α-reductase
An enzyme required to convert testosterone to 5α-dihydrotestosterone.
Aggression
A form of social interaction that includes threat, attack, and fighting.
Aromatase
An enzyme that converts androgens into estrogens.
Chromosomal sex
The sex of an individual as determined by the sex chromosomes (typically XX or XY) received
at the time of fertilization.
Defeminization
The removal of the potential for female traits.
Demasculinization
The removal of the potential for male traits.
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT)
A primary androgen that is an androgenic steroid product of testosterone and binds strongly
to androgen receptors.
Endocrine gland
A ductless gland from which hormones are released into the blood system in response to
specific biological signals.
Estrogen
Any of the C18 class of steroid hormones, so named because of the estrus-generating
properties in females. Biologically important estrogens include estradiol and estriol.
Feminization
The induction of female traits.
Gonadal sex
The sex of an individual as determined by the possession of either ovaries or testes. Females

Hormones & Behavior

75

have ovaries, whereas males have testes.
Hormone
An organic chemical messenger released from endocrine cells that travels through the blood
to interact with target cells at some distance to cause a biological response.
Masculinization
The induction of male traits.
Maternal behavior
Parental behavior performed by the mother or other female.
Neurotransmitter
A chemical messenger that travels between neurons to provide communication. Some
neurotransmitters, such as norepinephrine, can leak into the blood system and act as
hormones.
Oxytocin
A peptide hormone secreted by the pituitary gland to trigger lactation, as well as social bonding.
Parental behavior
Behaviors performed in relation to one’s offspring that contributes directly to the survival of
those offspring
Paternal behavior
Parental behavior performed by the father or other male.
Progesterone
A primary progestin that is involved in pregnancy and mating behaviors.
Progestin
A class of C21 steroid hormones named for their progestational (pregnancy-supporting)
effects. Progesterone is a common progestin.
Prohormone
A molecule that can act as a hormone itself or be converted into another hormone with
different properties. For example, testosterone can serve as a hormone or as a prohormone
for either dihydrotestosterone or estradiol.

Hormones & Behavior

76

Prolactin
A protein hormone that is highly conserved throughout the animal kingdom. It has many
biological functions associated with reproduction and synergistic actions with steroid
hormones.
Receptor
A chemical structure on the cell surface or inside of a cell that has an affinity for a specific
chemical configuration of a hormone, neurotransmitter, or other compound.
Sex determination
The point at which an individual begins to develop as either a male or a female. In animals
that have sex chromosomes, this occurs at fertilization. Females are XX and males are XY. All
eggs bear X chromosomes, whereas sperm can either bear X or Y chromosomes. Thus, it is
the males that determine the sex of the offspring.
Sex differentiation
The process by which individuals develop the characteristics associated with being male or
female. Differential exposure to gonadal steroids during early development causes sexual
differentiation of several structures including the brain.
Target cell
A cell that has receptors for a specific chemical messenger (hormone or neurotransmitter).
Testosterone
The primary androgen secreted by the testes of most vertebrate animals, including men.

77

Hormones & Behavior

References
Alexander, G. M. & Hines, M. (2002). Sex differences in response to children’s toys in nonhuman
primates (Cercopithecus aethiops sabaeus). Evolution and Human Behavior, 23, 467–479.
Berenbaum, S. A., Martin, C. L., Hanish, L. D., Briggs, P. T., & Fabes, R. A. (2008). Sex differences
in children’s play. In J. B. Becker, K. J. Berkley, N. Geary, E. Hampson, J. Herman, & E. Young
(Eds.), Sex differences in the brain: From genes to behavior. New York: Oxford University Press.
Dabbs, J. M. (2000). Heroes, rogues, and lovers: Testosterone and behavior. Columbus, OH:
McGraw Hill.
Fleming, A. S., & Gonzalez, A. (2009). Neurobiology of human maternal care. In P. T. Ellison &
P. B. Gray (Eds.), Endocrinology of social relationships (pp. 294–318). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Fleming, A. S., Steiner, M., & Corter, C. (1997). Cortisol, hedonics, and maternal responsiveness
in human mothers. Hormones and Behavior, 32, 85–98.
Goodson, J. L., Saldanha, C. J., Hahn, T. P., Soma, K. K. (2005). Recent advances in behavioral
neuroendocrinology: Insights from studies on birds. Hormones and Behavior, 48, 461–73.
Kidd, K. A., Blanchfield, P. J., Mills, K. H., Palace, V. P., Evans, R. E. Lazorchak, J. M. & Flick, R.
(2007). Collapse of a fish population following exposure to a synthetic estrogen.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,104, 8897–8901.
Nelson, R. J. (Ed.) (2006). Biology of aggression. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nelson, R.J. (2011). An introduction to behavioral endocrinology (4th ed.). Sunderland, MA:
Sinauer Associates.
Phoenix, C. H., Goy, R. W., Gerall, A. A., & Young, W. C. (1959). Organizing action of prenatally
administered testosterone propionate on the tissues mediating mating behavior in the
female guinea pig. Endocrinology, 65: 369–382.
van Anders, S., Hamilton, L., Schmidt, N., & Watson, N. (2007). Associations between
testosterone secretion and sexual activity in women. Hormones and Behavior, 51, 477–82.

Chapter 4: Sensation & Perception

5
Sensation and Perception
Adam John Privitera

The topics of sensation and perception are among the oldest and most important in all of
psychology. People are equipped with senses such as sight, hearing and taste that help us to
take in the world around us. Amazingly, our senses have the ability to convert real-world
information into electrical information that can be processed by the brain. The way we
interpret this information-- our perceptions-- is what leads to our experiences of the world.
In this module, you will learn about the biological processes of sensation and how these can
be combined to create perceptions.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•
•
•

Differentiate the processes of sensation and perception.
Explain the basic principles of sensation and perception.
Describe the function of each of our senses.
Outline the anatomy of the sense organs and their projections to the nervous system.
Apply knowledge of sensation and perception to real world examples.
Explain the consequences of multimodal perception.

Introduction
Once I was hiking at Cape Lookout State Park in Tillamook, Oregon. After passing through
a vibrantly colored, pleasantly scented, temperate rainforest, I arrived at a cliff overlooking

80

Sensation and Perception

the Pacific Ocean. I grabbed the cold metal
railing near the edge and looked out at the
sea. Below me, I could see a pod of sea lions
swimming in the deep blue water. All
around me I could smell the salt from the
sea and the scent of wet, fallen leaves.
This description of a single memory highlights
the way a person’s senses are so important to
our experience of the world around us.
Before discussing each of our extraordinary
senses individually, it is necessary to cover
some basic concepts that apply to all of them.

Our senses combine to create our perceptions of the world

It is probably best to start with one very

[Image: Adam John Privitera]

important distinction that can often be
confusing: the difference between sensation and perception. The physical process during
which our sensory organs—those involved with hearing and taste, for example—respond to
external stimuli is called sensation. Sensation happens when you eat noodles or feel the wind
on your face or hear a car horn honking in the distance. During sensation, our sense organs
are engaging in transduction, the conversion of one form of energy into another. Physical
energy such as light or a sound wave is converted into a form of energy the brain can
understand: electrical stimulation. After our brain receives the electrical signals, we make
sense of all this stimulation and begin to appreciate the complex world around us. This
psychological process—making sense of the stimuli—is called perception. It is during this
process that you are able to identify a gas leak in your home or a song that reminds you of a
specific afternoon spent with friends.
Regardless of whether we are talking about sight or taste or any of the individual senses, there
are a number of basic principles that influence the way our sense organs work. The first of
these influences is our ability to detect an external stimulus. Each sense organ—our eyes or
tongue, for instance—requires a minimal amount of stimulation needed in order to detect a
stimulus. This absolute threshold explains why you don’t smell the perfume someone is
wearing in a classroom unless they are somewhat close to you.
The way we measure absolute thresholds is by using a method called signal detection. This
process involves presenting stimuli of varying intensities to a research participant in order to
determine the level at which he or she can reliably detect stimulation in a given sense. During
one type of hearing test, for example, a person listens to increasingly louder tones (starting

Sensation and Perception

81

from silence) in an effort to determine the threshold at which he or she begins to hear (see
Additional Resources for a video demonstration of a high-frequency ringtone that can only
be heard by young people). Correctly indicating that a sound was heard is called a hit; failing
to do so is called a miss. Additionally, indicating that a sound was heard when one wasn’t
played is called a false alarm, and correctly identifying when a sound wasn’t played is a correct
rejection.
Through these and other studies, we have been able to gain an understanding of just how
remarkable our senses are. For example, the human eye is capable of detecting candlelight
from 30 miles away in the dark. We are also capable of hearing the ticking of a watch in a quiet
environment from 20 feet away. If you think that’s amazing, I encourage you to read more
about the extreme sensory capabilities of nonhuman animals; many animals possess what
we would consider super-human abilities.
A similar principle to the absolute threshold discussed above underlies our ability to detect
the difference between two stimuli of different intensities. The differential threshold, or just
noticeable difference (JND), for each sense has been studied using similar methods to signal
detection. To illustrate, find a friend and a few objects of known weight (you’ll need objects
that weigh 1, 2, 10 and 11 lbs.—or in metric terms: 1, 2, 5 and 5.5 kg). Have your friend hold
the lightest object (1 lb. or 1 kg). Then, replace this object with the next heaviest and ask him
or her to tell you which one weighs more. Reliably, your friend will say the second object every
single time. It’s extremely easy to tell the difference when something weighs double what
another weighs! However, it is not so easy when the difference is a smaller percentage of the
overall weight. It will be much harder for your friend to reliably tell the difference between 10
and 11 lbs. (or 5 versus 5.5 kg) than it is for 1 and 2 lbs. This is phenomenon is called Weber’s
Law, and it is the idea that bigger stimuli require larger differences to be noticed.
Crossing into the world of perception, it is clear that our experience influences how our brain
processes things. You have tasted food that you like and food that you don’t like. There are
some bands you enjoy and others you can’t stand. However, during the time you first eat
something or hear a band, you process those stimuli using bottom-up processing. This is
when we build up to perception from the individual pieces. Sometimes, though, stimuli we’ve
experienced in our past will influence how we process new ones. This is called top-down
processing. The best way to illustrate these two concepts is with our ability to read. Read the
following quote out loud:
Notice anything odd while you were reading the text in the triangle? Did you notice the second
“the”? If not, it’s likely because you were reading this from a top-down approach. Having a
second “the” doesn’t make sense. We know this. Our brain knows this and doesn’t expect there

82

Sensation and Perception

Figure 1. An example of stimuli processing.

to be a second one, so we have a tendency to skip right over it. In other words, your past
experience has changed the way you perceive the writing in the triangle! A beginning reader
—one who is using a bottom-up approach by carefully attending to each piece—would be
less likely to make this error.
Finally, it should be noted that when we experience a sensory stimulus that doesn’t change,
we stop paying attention to it. This is why we don’t feel the weight of our clothing, hear the
hum of a projector in a lecture hall, or see all the tiny scratches on the lenses of our glasses.
When a stimulus is constant and unchanging, we experience sensory adaptation. During this
process we become less sensitive to that stimulus. A great example of this occurs when we
leave the radio on in our car after we park it at home for the night. When we listen to the radio
on the way home from work the volume seems reasonable. However, the next morning when
we start the car, we might be startled by how loud the radio is. We don’t remember it being
that loud last night. What happened? What happened is that we adapted to the constant
stimulus of the radio volume over the course of the previous day. This required us to continue
to turn up the volume of the radio to combat the constantly decreasing sensitivity. However,
after a number of hours away from that constant stimulus, the volume that was once
reasonable is entirely too loud. We are no longer adapted to that stimulus!
Now that we have introduced some basic sensory principles, let us take on each one of our
fascinating senses individually.

Vision
How vision works

Sensation and Perception

83

Vision is a tricky matter. When we see a pizza, a feather, or a hammer, we are actually seeing
light bounce off that object and into our eye. Light enters the eye through the pupil, a tiny
opening behind the cornea. The pupil regulates the amount of light entering the eye by
contracting (getting smaller) in bright light and dilating (getting larger) in dimmer light. Once
past the pupil, light passes through the lens, which focuses an image on a thin layer of cells
in the back of the eye, called the retina.
Because we have two eyes in different locations, the image focused on each retina is from a
slightly different angle (binocular disparity), providing us with our perception of 3D space
(binocular vision). You can appreciate this by holding a pen in your hand, extending your arm
in front of your face, and looking at the pen while closing each eye in turn. Pay attention to
the apparent position of the pen relative to objects in the background. Depending on which
eye is open, the pen appears to jump back and forth! This is how video game manufacturers
create the perception of 3D without special glasses; two slightly different images are presented
on top of one another.

Figure 2. Diagram of the human eye. Notice the Retina, labeled here: this is the location of the
Cones and Rods in the eye [Image: wikimedia commons].

84

Sensation and Perception

It is in the retina that light is transduced, or converted into electrical signals, by specialized
cells called photoreceptors. The retina contains two main kinds of photoreceptors: rods and
cones. Rods are primarily responsible for our ability to see in dim light conditions, such as
during the night. Cones, on the other hand, provide us with the ability to see color and fine
detail when the light is brighter. Rods and cones differ in their distribution across the retina,
with the highest concentration of cones found in the fovea (the central region of focus), and
rods dominating the periphery (see Figure 2). The difference in distribution can explain why
looking directly at a dim star in the sky makes it seem to disappear; there aren’t enough rods
to process the dim light!
Next, the electrical signal is sent through a layer of cells in the retina, eventually traveling down
the optic nerve. After passing through the thalamus, this signal makes it to the primary visual
cortex, where information about light orientation and movement begin to come together
(Hubel & Wiesel, 1962). Information is then sent to a variety of different areas of the cortex
for more complex processing. Some of these cortical regions are fairly specialized—for
example, for processing faces (fusiform face area) and body parts (extrastriate body area).
Damage to these areas of the cortex can potentially result in a specific kind of agnosia, whereby
a person loses the ability to perceive visual stimuli. A great example of this is illustrated in the
writing of famous neurologist Dr. Oliver Sacks; he experienced prosopagnosia, the inability to
recognize faces. These specialized regions for visual recognition comprise the ventral
pathway (also called the “what” pathway). Other areas involved in processing location and
movement make up the dorsal pathway (also called the “where” pathway). Together, these
pathways process a large amount of information about visual stimuli (Goodale & Milner, 1992).
Phenomena we often refer to as optical illusions provide misleading information to these
“higher” areas of visual processing (see Additional Resources for websites containing amazing
optical illusions).

Dark and light adaptation
Humans have the ability to adapt to changes in light conditions. As mentioned before, rods
are primarily involved in our ability to see in dim light. They are the photoreceptors responsible
for allowing us to see in a dark room. You might notice that this night vision ability takes
around 10 minutes to turn on, a process called dark adaptation. This is because our rods
become bleached in normal light conditions and require time to recover. We experience the
opposite effect when we leave a dark movie theatre and head out into the afternoon sun.
During light adaptation, a large number of rods and cones are bleached at once, causing us
to be blinded for a few seconds. Light adaptation happens almost instantly compared with
dark adaptation. Interestingly, some people think pirates wore a patch over one eye in order

85

Sensation and Perception

to keep it adapted to the dark while the other was adapted to the light. If you want to turn on
a light without losing your night vision, don’t worry about wearing an eye patch, just use a red
light; this wavelength doesn’t bleach your rods.

Color vision
Our cones allow us to see details
in normal light conditions, as well
as color. We have cones that
respond preferentially, not exclusively,
for red, green and blue (Svaetichin,
1955). This trichromatic theory is
not new; it dates back to the early
19th century (Young, 1802; Von
Helmholtz, 1867). This theory,
Figure 3. State at the center of the Canadian flag for fifteen seconds. Then,
shift your eyes away to a white wall or blank piece of paper. You should see

however, does not explain the odd
effect that occurs when we look at
a white wall after staring at a

an "after image" in a different color scheme.

picture for around 30 seconds. Try
this: stare at the image of the flag in Figure 3 for 30 seconds and then immediately look at a
sheet of white paper or a wall. According to the trichromatic theory of color vision, you should
see white when you do that. Is that what you experienced? As you can see, the trichromatic
theory doesn’t explain the afterimage you just witnessed. This is where the opponent-process
theory comes in (Hering, 1920). This theory states that our cones send information to retinal
ganglion cells that respond to pairs of colors (red-green, blue-yellow, black-white). These
specialized cells take information from the cones and compute the difference between the
two colors—a process that explains why we cannot see reddish-green or bluish-yellow, as well
as why we see afterimages. Color blindness can result from issues with the cones or retinal
ganglion cells involved in color vision.

Hearing (Audition)
Some of the most well-known celebrities and top earners in the world are musicians. Our
worship of musicians may seem silly when you consider that all they are doing is vibrating
the air a certain way to create sound waves, the physical stimulus for audition.
People are capable of getting a large amount of information from the basic qualities of sound
waves. The amplitude (or intensity) of a sound wave codes for the loudness of a stimulus;

Sensation and Perception

86

higher amplitude sound waves result in louder sounds. The pitch of a stimulus is coded in the
frequency of a sound wave; higher frequency sounds are higher pitched. We can also gauge
the quality, or timbre, of a sound by the complexity of the sound wave. This allows us to tell
the difference between bright and dull sounds as well as natural and synthesized instruments
(Välimäki & Takala, 1996).

Figure 4. Diagram of the human ear. Notice the Cochlea labeled here: it is the location of the auditory Hair Cells
that are tonotopically organized.

In order for us to sense sound waves from our environment they must reach our inner ear.
Lucky for us, we have evolved tools that allow those waves to be funneled and amplified
during this journey. Initially, sound waves are funneled by your pinna (the external part of
your ear that you can actually see) into your auditory canal (the hole you stick Q-tips into
despite the box advising against it). During their journey, sound waves eventually reach a thin,
stretched membrane called the tympanic membrane (eardrum), which vibrates against the
three smallest bones in the body—the malleus (hammer), the incus (anvil), and the stapes
(stirrup)—collectively called the ossicles. Both the tympanic membrane and the ossicles
amplify the sound waves before they enter the fluid-filled cochlea, a snail-shell-like bone
structure containing auditory hair cells arranged on the basilar membrane (see Figure 4)
according to the frequency they respond to (called tonotopic organization). Depending on
age, humans can normally detect sounds between 20 Hz and 20 kHz. It is inside the cochlea

87

Sensation and Perception

that sound waves are converted into an electrical message.
Because we have an ear on each side of our head, we are capable of localizing sound in 3D
space pretty well (in the same way that having two eyes produces 3D vision). Have you ever
dropped something on the floor without seeing where it went? Did you notice that you were
somewhat capable of locating this object based on the sound it made when it hit the ground?
We can reliably locate something based on which ear receives the sound first. What about
the height of a sound? If both ears receive a sound at the same time, how are we capable of
localizing sound vertically? Research in cats (Populin & Yin, 1998) and humans (Middlebrooks
& Green, 1991) has pointed to differences in the quality of sound waves depending on vertical
positioning.
After being processed by auditory hair cells, electrical signals are sent through the cochlear
nerve (a division of the vestibulocochlear nerve) to the thalamus, and then the primary
auditory cortex of the temporal lobe. Interestingly, the tonotopic organization of the cochlea
is maintained in this area of the cortex (Merzenich, Knight, & Roth, 1975; Romani, Williamson,
& Kaufman, 1982). However, the role of the primary auditory cortex in processing the wide
range of features of sound is still being explored (Walker, Bizley, & Schnupp, 2011).

Balance and the vestibular system
The inner ear isn’t only involved in hearing; it’s also associated with our ability to balance and
detect where we are in space. The vestibular system is comprised of three semicircular canals
—fluid-filled bone structures containing cells that respond to changes in the head’s orientation
in space. Information from the vestibular system is sent through the vestibular nerve (the
other division of the vestibulocochlear nerve) to muscles involved in the movement of our
eyes, neck, and other parts of our body. This information allows us to maintain our gaze on
an object while we are in motion. Disturbances in the vestibular system can result in issues
with balance, including vertigo.

Touch
Who doesn’t love the softness of an old t-shirt or the smoothness of a clean shave? Who
actually enjoys having sand in their swimsuit? Our skin, the body’s largest organ, provides us
with all sorts of information, such as whether something is smooth or bumpy, hot or cold, or
even if it’s painful. Somatosensation—which includes our ability to sense touch, temperature
and pain—transduces physical stimuli, such as fuzzy velvet or scalding water, into electrical
potentials that can be processed by the brain.

88

Sensation and Perception

Tactile sensation
Tactile stimuli—those that are associated with texture—are transduced by special receptors
in the skin called mechanoreceptors. Just like photoreceptors in the eye and auditory hair
cells in the ear, these allow for the conversion of one kind of energy into a form the brain can
understand.

Figure 5. The Homunculus (Latin “little man”) – on the left you see a human body drawn to demonstrate the areas that possess
the most sensitivity – lips, hands, genitals and feet. On the right you see the drawing of the somatosensory cortex in the brain
and the areas in the human body that correspond to it - they are also drawn in proportion to the most sensitive or the most
innervated parts of the body.

After tactile stimuli are converted by mechanoreceptors, information is sent through the
thalamus to the primary somatosensory cortex for further processing. This region of the
cortex is organized in a somatotopic map where different regions are sized based on the
sensitivity of specific parts on the opposite side of the body (Penfield & Rasmussen, 1950).

89

Sensation and Perception

Put simply, various areas of the skin, such as lips and fingertips, are more sensitive than others,
such as shoulders or ankles. This sensitivity can be represented with a homunculus (small
human) shown in Figure 5.

Pain
Most people, if asked, would love to get rid of pain (nociception), because the sensation is
very unpleasant and doesn’t appear to have obvious value. But the perception of pain is our
body’s way of sending us a signal that something is wrong and needs our attention. Without
pain, how would we know when we are accidentally touching a hot stove, or that we should
rest a strained arm after a hard workout?

Phantom limbs
Records of people experiencing phantom limbs after amputations have been around for
centuries (Mitchell, 1871). As the name suggests, people with a phantom limb have the
sensations such as itching seemingly coming from their missing limb. A phantom limb can
also involve phantom limb pain, sometimes described as the muscles of the missing limb
uncomfortably clenching. While the mechanisms underlying these phenomena are not fully
understood, there is evidence to support that the damaged nerves from the amputation site
are still sending information to the brain (Weinstein, 1998) and that the brain is reacting to
this information (Ramachandran & Rogers-Ramachandran, 2000). There is an interesting
treatment for the alleviation of phantom limb pain that works by tricking the brain, using a
special mirror box to create a visual representation of the missing limb. The technique allows
the patient to manipulate this representation into a more comfortable position
(Ramachandran & Rogers-Ramachandran, 1996).

Smell and Taste: The Chemical Senses
The two most underappreciated senses can be lumped into the broad category of chemical
senses. Both olfaction (smell) and gustation (taste) require the transduction of chemical
stimuli into electrical potentials. I say these senses are underappreciated because most people
would give up either one of these if they were forced to give up a sense. While this may not
shock a lot of readers, take into consideration how much money people spend on the perfume
industry annually ($29 billion US Dollars). Many of us pay a lot more for a favorite brand of
food because we prefer the taste. Clearly, we humans care about our chemical senses.

90

Sensation and Perception

Olfaction (smell)
Unlike any of the other senses discussed so far, the receptors involved in our perception of
both smell and taste bind directly with the stimuli they transduce. Odorants in our
environment, very often mixtures of them, bind with olfactory receptors found in the olfactory
epithelium. The binding of odorants to receptors is thought to be similar to how a lock and
key operates, with different odorants binding to different specialized receptors based on their
shape. However, the shape theory of olfaction isn’t universally accepted and alternative
theories exist, including one that argues that the vibrations of odorant molecules correspond
to their subjective smells (Turin, 1996). Regardless of how odorants bind with receptors, the
result is a pattern of neural activity. It is thought that our memories of these patterns of activity
underlie our subjective experience of smell (Shepherd, 2005). Interestingly, because olfactory
receptors send projections to the brain through the cribriform plate of the skull, head trauma
has the potential to cause anosmia, due to the severing of these connections. If you are in a
line of work where you constantly experience head trauma (e.g. professional boxer) and you
develop anosmia, don’t worry—your sense of smell will probably come back (Sumner, 1964).

Gustation (taste)
Taste works in a similar fashion to smell, only with
receptors found in the taste buds of the tongue,
called taste receptor cells. To clarify a common
misconception, taste buds are not the bumps on
your tongue (papillae), but are located in small divots
around these bumps. These receptors also respond
to chemicals from the outside environment, except
these chemicals, called tastants, are contained in the
foods we eat. The binding of these chemicals with
taste receptor cells results in our perception of the
five basic tastes: sweet, sour, bitter, salty and umami
(savory)—although some scientists argue that there
are more (Stewart et al., 2010). Researchers used to
think these tastes formed the basis for a map-like
organization of the tongue; there was even a clever
rationale for the concept, about how the back of the

Ghost Pepper, also known as Bhut Jolokia is one of
the hottest peppers in the world, it’s 10 times hotter
than a habañero, and 400 times hotter than tabasco

tongue sensed bitter so we would know to spit out

sauce. What, do you think would happen to your

poisons, and the front of the tongue sensed sweet

taste receptor cells if you took a bite out of this little

so we could identify high-energy foods. However, we

guy? [Image: Sally Crossthwaite]

Sensation and Perception

91

now know that all areas of the tongue with taste receptor cells are capable of responding to
every taste (Chandrashekar, Hoon, Ryba, & Zuker, 2006).
During the process of eating we are not limited to our sense of taste alone. While we are
chewing, food odorants are forced back up to areas that contain olfactory receptors. This
combination of taste and smell gives us the perception of flavor. If you have doubts about
the interaction between these two senses, I encourage you to think back to consider how the
flavors of your favorite foods are impacted when you have a cold; everything is pretty bland
and boring, right?

Putting it all Together: Multimodal Perception
Though we have spent the majority of this module covering the senses individually, our realworld experience is most often multimodal, involving combinations of our senses into one
perceptual experience. This should be clear after reading the description of walking through
the forest at the beginning of the module; it was the combination of senses that allowed for
that experience. It shouldn’t shock you to find out that at some point information from each
of our senses becomes integrated. Information from one sense has the potential to influence
how we perceive information from another, a process called multimodal perception.
Interestingly, we actually respond more strongly to multimodal stimuli compared to the sum
of each single modality together, an effect called the superadditive effect of multisensory
integration. This can explain how you’re still able to understand what friends are saying to
you at a loud concert, as long as you are able to get visual cues from watching them speak. If
you were having a quiet conversation at a café, you likely wouldn’t need these additional cues.
In fact, the principle of inverse effectiveness states that you are less likely to benefit from
additional cues from other modalities if the initial unimodal stimulus is strong enough (Stein
& Meredith, 1993).
Because we are able to process multimodal sensory stimuli, and the results of those processes
are qualitatively different from those of unimodal stimuli, it’s a fair assumption that the brain
is doing something qualitatively different when they’re being processed. There has been a
growing body of evidence since the mid-90’s on the neural correlates of multimodal
perception. For example, neurons that respond to both visual and auditory stimuli have been
identified in the superior temporal sulcus (Calvert, Hansen, Iversen, & Brammer, 2001).
Additionally, multimodal “what” and “where” pathways have been proposed for auditory and
tactile stimuli (Renier et al., 2009). We aren’t limited to reading about these regions of the
brain and what they do; we can experience them with a few interesting examples (see

92

Sensation and Perception

Additional Resources for the “McGurk Effect,” the “Double Flash Illusion,” and the “Rubber
Hand Illusion”).

Conclusion
Our impressive sensory abilities allow us to experience the most enjoyable and most miserable
experiences, as well as everything in between. Our eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin provide
an interface for the brain to interact with the world around us. While there is simplicity in
covering each sensory modality independently, we are organisms that have evolved the ability
to process multiple modalities as a unified experience.

93

Sensation and Perception

Outside Resources
Audio: Auditory Demonstrations from Richard Warren’s lab at the University of Wisconsin,
Milwaukee
http://www4.uwm.edu/APL/demonstrations.html
Audio: Auditory Demonstrations. CD published by the Acoustical Society of America (ASA).
You can listen to the demonstrations here
http://www.feilding.net/sfuad/musi3012-01/demos/audio/
Book: Ackerman, D. (1990). A natural history of the senses. Vintage.
http://www.dianeackerman.com/a-natural-history-of-the-senses-by-diane-ackerman
Book: Sacks, O. (1998). The man who mistook his wife for a hat: And other clinical tales.
Simon and Schuster.
http://www.oliversacks.com/books-by-oliver-sacks/man-mistook-wife-hat/
Video: Acquired knowledge and its impact on our three-dimensional interpretation of the
world - 3D Street Art
https://youtu.be/GwNeukAmxJw
Video: Acquired knowledge and its impact on our three-dimensional interpretation of the
world - Anamorphic Illusions
https://youtu.be/tBNHPk-Lnkk
Video: Acquired knowledge and its impact on our three-dimensional interpretation of the
world - Optical Illusion
https://youtu.be/YjmHofJ2da0
Video: Cybersenses
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_8rPD6xLB4A
Video: Seeing Sound, Tasting Color
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FTr1VnXKr4A
Video: The Phantom Limb Phenomenon
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1mHIv5ToMTM

Sensation and Perception

94

Web: A regularly updated website covering some of the amazing sensory capabilities of
non-human animals.
http://phenomena.nationalgeographic.com/category/animal-senses/
Web: A special ringtone that is only audible to younger people.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IrewnzQYrPI
Web: Amazing library with visual phenomena and optical illusions, explained
http://michaelbach.de/ot/index.html
Web: An article on the discoveries in echolocation: the use of sound in locating people and
things
http://www.psychologicalscience.org/index.php/publications/observer/2015/december-15/u­
sing-sound-to-get-around.html
Web: An optical illusion demonstration the opponent-process theory of color vision.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qA2brNUo7WA
Web: Anatomy of the eye
http://www.eyecareamerica.org/eyecare/anatomy/
Web: Animation showing tonotopic organization of the basilar membrane.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dyenMluFaUw
Web: Best Illusion of the Year Contest website
http://illusionoftheyear.com/
Web: Demonstration of contrast gain adaptation
http://www.michaelbach.de/ot/lum_contrast-adapt/
Web: Demonstration of illusory contours and lateral inhibition. Mach bands
http://michaelbach.de/ot/lum-MachBands/index.html
Web: Demonstration of illusory contrast and lateral inhibition. The Hermann grid
http://michaelbach.de/ot/lum_herGrid/
Web: Demonstrations and illustrations of cochlear mechanics can be found here
http://lab.rockefeller.edu/hudspeth/graphicalSimulations

95

Sensation and Perception

Web: Double Flash Illusion
https://vimeo.com/39138252
Web: Further information regarding what and where/how pathways
http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/What_and_where_pathways
Web: Great website with a large collection of optical illusions
http://www.michaelbach.de/ot/
Web: McGurk Effect Video
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G-lN8vWm3m0
Web: More demonstrations and illustrations of cochlear mechanics
http://www.neurophys.wisc.edu/animations/
Web: Scientific American Frontiers: Cybersenses
http://www.pbs.org/saf/1509/
Web: The Genetics of Taste
http://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/the-genetics-of-taste-88797110/?no-ist
Web: The Monell Chemical Sense Center website
http://www.monell.org/
Web: The Rubber Hand Illusion
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sxwn1w7MJvk
Web: The Tongue Map: Tasteless Myth Debunked
http://www.livescience.com/7113-tongue-map-tasteless-myth-debunked.html

Discussion Questions
1. There are a number of myths that exist about the sensory capabilities of infants. How would
you design a study to determine what the true sensory capabilities of infants are?
2. A well-documented phenomenon experienced by millennials is the phantom vibration of
a cell phone when no actual text message has been received. How can we use signal
detection theory to explain this?

Sensation and Perception

96

3. What physical features would an organism need in order to be really good at localizing
sound in 3D space? Are there any organisms that currently excel in localizing sound? What
features allow them to do this?
4. What issues would exist with visual recognition of an object if a research participant had
his/her corpus callosum severed? What would you need to do in order to observe these
deficits?

97

Sensation and Perception

Vocabulary
Absolute threshold
The smallest amount of stimulation needed for detection by a sense.
Agnosia
Loss of the ability to perceive stimuli.
Anosmia
Loss of the ability to smell.
Audition
Ability to process auditory stimuli. Also called hearing.
Auditory canal
Tube running from the outer ear to the middle ear.
Auditory hair cells
Receptors in the cochlea that transduce sound into electrical potentials.
Binocular disparity
Difference is images processed by the left and right eyes.
Binocular vision
Our ability to perceive 3D and depth because of the difference between the images on each
of our retinas.
Bottom-up processing
Building up to perceptual experience from individual pieces.
Chemical senses
Our ability to process the environmental stimuli of smell and taste.
Cochlea
Spiral bone structure in the inner ear containing auditory hair cells.
Cones
Photoreceptors of the retina sensitive to color. Located primarily in the fovea.

Sensation and Perception

98

Dark adaptation
Adjustment of eye to low levels of light.
Differential threshold
The smallest difference needed in order to differentiate two stimuli. (See Just Noticeable
Difference (JND))
Dorsal pathway
Pathway of visual processing. The “where” pathway.
Flavor
The combination of smell and taste.
Gustation
Ability to process gustatory stimuli. Also called taste.
Just noticeable difference (JND)
The smallest difference needed in order to differentiate two stimuli. (see Differential
Threshold)
Light adaptation
Adjustment of eye to high levels of light.
Mechanoreceptors
Mechanical sensory receptors in the skin that response to tactile stimulation.
Multimodal perception
The effects that concurrent stimulation in more than one sensory modality has on the
perception of events and objects in the world.
Nociception
Our ability to sense pain.
Odorants
Chemicals transduced by olfactory receptors.
Olfaction
Ability to process olfactory stimuli. Also called smell.

Sensation and Perception

99

Olfactory epithelium
Organ containing olfactory receptors.
Opponent-process theory
Theory proposing color vision as influenced by cells responsive to pairs of colors.
Ossicles
A collection of three small bones in the middle ear that vibrate against the tympanic
membrane.
Perception
The psychological process of interpreting sensory information.
Phantom limb
The perception that a missing limb still exists.
Phantom limb pain
Pain in a limb that no longer exists.
Pinna
Outermost portion of the ear.
Primary auditory cortex
Area of the cortex involved in processing auditory stimuli.
Primary somatosensory cortex
Area of the cortex involved in processing somatosensory stimuli.
Primary visual cortex
Area of the cortex involved in processing visual stimuli.
Principle of inverse effectiveness
The finding that, in general, for a multimodal stimulus, if the response to each unimodal
component (on its own) is weak, then the opportunity for multisensory enhancement is very
large. However, if one component—by itself—is sufficient to evoke a strong response, then
the effect on the response gained by simultaneously processing the other components of the
stimulus will be relatively small.
Retina

Sensation and Perception

100

Cell layer in the back of the eye containing photoreceptors.
Rods
Photoreceptors of the retina sensitive to low levels of light. Located around the fovea.
Sensation
The physical processing of environmental stimuli by the sense organs.
Sensory adaptation
Decrease in sensitivity of a receptor to a stimulus after constant stimulation.
Shape theory of olfaction
Theory proposing that odorants of different size and shape correspond to different smells.
Signal detection
Method for studying the ability to correctly identify sensory stimuli.
Somatosensation
Ability to sense touch, pain and temperature.
Somatotopic map
Organization of the primary somatosensory cortex maintaining a representation of the
arrangement of the body.
Sound waves
Changes in air pressure. The physical stimulus for audition.
Superadditive effect of multisensory integration
The finding that responses to multimodal stimuli are typically greater than the sum of the
independent responses to each unimodal component if it were presented on its own.
Tastants
Chemicals transduced by taste receptor cells.
Taste receptor cells
Receptors that transduce gustatory information.
Top-down processing
Experience influencing the perception of stimuli.

Sensation and Perception

101

Transduction
The conversion of one form of energy into another.
Trichromatic theory
Theory proposing color vision as influenced by three different cones responding preferentially
to red, green and blue.
Tympanic membrane
Thin, stretched membrane in the middle ear that vibrates in response to sound. Also called
the eardrum.
Ventral pathway
Pathway of visual processing. The “what” pathway.
Vestibular system
Parts of the inner ear involved in balance.
Weber’s law
States that just noticeable difference is proportional to the magnitude of the initial stimulus.

102

Sensation and Perception

References
Calvert, G. A., Hansen, P. C., Iversen, S. D., & Brammer, M. J. (2001). Detection of audio-visual
integration sites in humans by application of electrophysiological criteria to the BOLD effect.
Neuroimage, 14(2), 427-438.
Chandrashekar, J., Hoon, M. A., Ryba, N. J., & Zuker, C. S. (2006). The receptors and cells for
mammalian taste. Nature, 444(7117), 288-294.
Goodale, M. A., & Milner, A. D. (1992). Separate visual pathways for perception and action.
Trends in Neurosciences, 15(1), 20-25.
Hering, E. (1920). Grundzüge der Lehre vom Lichtsinn. J.Springer.
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1962). Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional
architecture in the cat's visual cortex. The Journal of Physiology,160(1), 106.
Merzenich, M. M., Knight, P. L., & Roth, G. L. (1975). Representation of cochlea within primary
auditory cortex in the cat. Journal of Neurophysiology, 38(2), 231-249.
Middlebrooks, J. C., & Green, D. M. (1991). Sound localization by human listeners. Annual Review
of Psychology, 42(1), 135-159.
Mitchell, S. W. (1871). Phantom limbs. Lippincott's Magazine of Popular Literature and Science,
8, 563-569.
Penfield, W., & Rasmussen, T. (1950). The cerebral cortex of man; a clinical study of localization
of function. Oxford: England
Populin, L. C., & Yin, T. C. (1998). Behavioral studies of sound localization in the cat. The Journal
of Neuroscience, 18(6), 2147-2160.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Rogers-Ramachandran, D. (2000). Phantom limbs and neural plasticity.
Archives of Neurology, 57(3), 317-320.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Rogers-Ramachandran, D. (1996). Synaesthesia in phantom limbs
induced with mirrors. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, 263
(1369), 377-386.
Renier, L. A., Anurova, I., De Volder, A. G., Carlson, S., VanMeter, J., & Rauschecker, J. P. (2009).
Multisensory integration of sounds and vibrotactile stimuli in processing streams for “what”
and “where”. The Journal of Neuroscience, 29(35), 10950-10960.
Romani, G. L., Williamson, S. J., & Kaufman, L. (1982). Tonotopic organization of the human
auditory cortex. Science, 216(4552), 1339-1340.
Shepherd, G. M. (2005). Outline of a theory of olfactory processing and its relevance to humans.
Chemical Senses, 30(suppl 1), i3-i5.

Sensation and Perception

103

Stein, B. E., & Meredith, M. A. (1993). The merging of the senses. The MIT Press.
Stewart, J. E., Feinle-Bisset, C., Golding, M., Delahunty, C., Clifton, P. M., & Keast, R. S. (2010).
Oral sensitivity to fatty acids, food consumption and BMI in human subjects. British Journal
of Nutrition, 104(01), 145-152.
Sumner, D. (1964). Post Traumatic Anosmia. Brain, 87(1), 107-120.
Svaetichin, G. (1955). Spectral response curves from single cones. Acta physiologica
Scandinavica. Supplementum, 39(134), 17-46.
Turin, L. (1996). A spectroscopic mechanism for primary olfactory reception. Chemical Senses,
21(6), 773-791.
Von Helmholtz, H. (1867). Handbuch der physiologischen Optik (Vol. 9). Voss.
Välimäki, V., & Takala, T. (1996). Virtual musical instruments—natural sound using physical
models. Organised Sound, 1(02), 75-86.
Walker, K. M., Bizley, J. K., King, A. J., & Schnupp, J. W. (2011). Multiplexed and robust
representations of sound features in auditory cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience, 31(41),
14565-14576.
Weinstein, S. M. (1998). Phantom limb pain and related disorders. Neurologic Clinics, 16(4),
919-935.
Young, T. (1802). The Bakerian lecture: On the theory of light and colours. Philosophical
transactions of the Royal Society of London, 12-48.

Chapter 5: Learning & Behavior

6
Conditioning and Learning
Mark E. Bouton

Basic principles of learning are always operating and always influencing human behavior. This
module discusses the two most fundamental forms of learning—classical (Pavlovian) and
instrumental (operant) conditioning. Through them, we respectively learn to associate 1)
stimuli in the environment, or 2) our own behaviors, with significant events, such as rewards
and punishments. The two types of learning have been intensively studied because they have
powerful effects on behavior, and because they provide methods that allow scientists to
analyze learning processes rigorously. This module describes some of the most important
things you need to know about classical and instrumental conditioning, and it illustrates some
of the many ways they help us understand normal and disordered behavior in humans. The
module concludes by introducing the concept of observational learning, which is a form of
learning that is largely distinct from classical and operant conditioning.

Learning Objectives

•

Distinguish between classical (Pavlovian) conditioning and instrumental (operant)
conditioning.

•
•

Understand some important facts about each that tell us how they work.
Understand how they work separately and together to influence human behavior in the
world outside the laboratory.

•

Students will be able to list the four aspects of observational learning according to Social
Learning Theory.

106

Conditioning and Learning

Two Types of Conditioning
Although Ivan Pavlov won a Nobel Prize for studying digestion, he is much more famous for
something else: working with a dog, a bell, and a bowl of saliva. Many people are familiar with
the classic study of “Pavlov’s dog,” but rarely do they understand the significance of its
discovery. In fact, Pavlov’s work helps explain why some people get anxious just looking at a
crowded bus, why the sound of a morning alarm is so hated, and even why we swear off
certain foods we’ve only tried once. Classical (or Pavlovian) conditioning is one of the
fundamental ways we learn about the world around us. But it is far more than just a theory
of learning; it is also arguably a theory of identity. For, once you understand classical
conditioning, you’ll recognize that your favorite music, clothes, even political candidate, might
all be a result of the same process that makes a dog drool at the sound of bell.
Around the turn of the 20th century,
scientists

who

were

interested

in

understanding the behavior of animals
and humans began to appreciate the
importance of two very basic forms of
learning. One, which was first studied by
the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov, is
known

as

classical,

or

Pavlovian

conditioning. In his famous experiment,
Pavlov rang a bell and then gave a dog
some food. After repeating this pairing
multiple times, the dog eventually treated
the bell as a signal for food, and began
salivating in anticipation of the treat. This
kind of result has been reproduced in the
lab using a wide range of signals (e.g.,
tones, light, tastes, settings) paired with
many different events besides food (e.g.,
drugs, shocks, illness; see below).
The Pavlov in All of Us: Does your dog learn to beg for food because

We now believe that this same learning

you reinforce her by feeding her from the table? [Photo: dbmease]

process is engaged, for example, when
humans associate a drug they’ve taken

with the environment in which they’ve taken it; when they associate a stimulus (e.g., a symbol
for vacation, like a big beach towel) with an emotional event (like a burst of happiness); and

Conditioning and Learning

107

when they associate the flavor of a food with getting food poisoning. Although classical
conditioning may seem “old” or “too simple” a theory, it is still widely studied today for at least
two reasons: First, it is a straightforward test of associative learning that can be used to study
other, more complex behaviors. Second, because classical conditioning is always occurring
in our lives, its effects on behavior have important implications for understanding normal
and disordered behavior in humans.
In a general way, classical conditioning occurs whenever neutral stimuli are associated with
psychologically significant events. With food poisoning, for example, although having fish for
dinner may not normally be something to be concerned about (i.e., a “neutral stimuli”), if it
causes you to get sick, you will now likely associate that neutral stimuli (the fish) with the
psychologically significant event of getting sick. These paired events are often described using
terms that can be applied to any situation.
The dog food in Pavlov’s experiment is called the unconditioned stimulus (US) because it
elicits an unconditioned response (UR). That is, without any kind of “training” or “teaching,”
the stimulus produces a natural or instinctual reaction. In Pavlov’s case, the food (US)
automatically makes the dog drool (UR). Other examples of unconditioned stimuli include
loud noises (US) that startle us (UR), or a hot shower (US) that produces pleasure (UR).
On the other hand, a conditioned stimulus produces a conditioned response. A conditioned
stimulus (CS) is a signal that has no importance to the organism until it is paired with something
that does have importance. For example, in Pavlov’s experiment, the bell is the conditioned
stimulus. Before the dog has learned to associate the bell (CS) with the presence of food (US),
hearing the bell means nothing to the dog. However, after multiple pairings of the bell with
the presentation of food, the dog starts to drool at the sound of the bell. This drooling in
response to the bell is the conditioned response (CR). Although it can be confusing, the
conditioned response is almost always the same as the unconditioned response. However, it
is called the conditioned response because it is conditional on (or, depends on) being paired
with the conditioned stimulus (e.g., the bell). To help make this clearer, consider becoming
really hungry when you see the logo for a fast food restaurant. There’s a good chance you’ll
start salivating. Although it is the actual eating of the food (US) that normally produces the
salivation (UR), simply seeing the restaurant’s logo (CS) can trigger the same reaction (CR).
Another example you are probably very familiar with involves your alarm clock. If you’re like
most people, waking up early usually makes you unhappy. In this case, waking up early (US)
produces a natural sensation of grumpiness (UR). Rather than waking up early on your own,
though, you likely have an alarm clock that plays a tone to wake you. Before setting your alarm
to that particular tone, let’s imagine you had neutral feelings about it (i.e., the tone had no

108

Conditioning and Learning

prior meaning for you). However, now that you use it to wake up every morning, you
psychologically “pair” that tone (CS) with your feelings of grumpiness in the morning (UR).
After enough pairings, this tone (CS) will automatically produce your natural response of
grumpiness (CR). Thus, this linkage between the unconditioned stimulus (US; waking up early)
and the conditioned stimulus (CS; the tone) is so strong that the unconditioned response (UR;
being grumpy) will become a conditioned response (CR; e.g., hearing the tone at any point in
the day—whether waking up or walking down the street—will make you grumpy). Modern
studies of classical conditioning use a very wide range of CSs and USs and measure a wide
range of conditioned responses.
Although classical conditioning is a
powerful explanation for how we learn
many different things, there is a second
form of conditioning that also helps
explain how we learn. First studied by
Edward Thorndike, and later extended
by B. F. Skinner, this second type of
conditioning is known as instrumental
or

operant

conditioning.

Operant

conditioning occurs when a behavior (as
opposed to a stimulus) is associated
with the occurrence of a significant
event. In the best-known example, a rat
in a laboratory learns to press a lever in
a cage (called a “Skinner box”) to receive
food. Because the rat has no “natural”
association between pressing a lever

Receiving a reward can condition you toward certain behaviors. For

and getting food, the rat has to learn this

example, when you were a child, your mother may have offered you

connection. At first, the rat may simply

this deal: "Don't make a fuss when we're in the supermarket and

explore its cage, climbing on top of

you'll get a treat on the way out." [Photo: dalioPhoto]

things, burrowing under things, in
search of food. Eventually while poking around its cage, the rat accidentally presses the lever,
and a food pellet drops in. This voluntary behavior is called an operant behavior, because it
“operates” on the environment (i.e., it is an action that the animal itself makes).
Now, once the rat recognizes that it receives a piece of food every time it presses the lever,
the behavior of lever-pressing becomes reinforced. That is, the food pellets serve as
reinforcers because they strengthen the rat’s desire to engage with the environment in this
particular manner. In a parallel example, imagine that you’re playing a street-racing video

109

Conditioning and Learning

game. As you drive through one city course multiple times, you try a number of different
streets to get to the finish line. On one of these trials, you discover a shortcut that dramatically
improves your overall time. You have learned this new path through operant conditioning.
That is, by engaging with your environment (operant responses), you performed a sequence
of behaviors that that was positively reinforced (i.e., you found the shortest distance to the
finish line). And now that you’ve learned how to drive this course, you will perform that same
sequence of driving behaviors (just as the rat presses on the lever) to receive your reward of
a faster finish.
Operant conditioning research studies how the effects of a behavior influence the probability
that it will occur again. For example, the effects of the rat’s lever-pressing behavior (i.e.,
receiving a food pellet) influences the probability that it will keep pressing the lever. For,
according to Thorndike’s law of effect, when a behavior has a positive (satisfying) effect or
consequence, it is likely to be repeated in the future. However, when a behavior has a negative
(painful/annoying) consequence, it is less likely to be repeated in the future. Effects that
increase behaviors are referred to as reinforcers, and effects that decrease them are referred
to as punishers.
An everyday example that helps to illustrate operant conditioning is striving for a good grade
in class—which could be considered a reward for students (i.e., it produces a positive emotional
response). In order to get that reward (similar to the rat learning to press the lever), the student
needs to modify his/her behavior. For example, the student may learn that speaking up in
class gets him/her participation points (a reinforcer), so the student speaks up repeatedly.
However, the student also learns that s/he shouldn’t speak up about just anything; talking
about topics unrelated to school actually costs points. Therefore, through the student’s freely
chosen behaviors, s/he learns which behaviors are reinforced and which are punished.
An important distinction of operant conditioning is that it provides a method for studying how
consequences influence “voluntary” behavior. The rat’s decision to press the lever is voluntary,
in the sense that the rat is free
to

make

and

repeat

that

response whenever it wants.
Classical conditioning, on the
other hand, is just the opposite
—depending instead on “invol­
untary” behavior (e.g., the dog
doesn’t choose to drool; it just
does). So, whereas the rat must
[Image: Bernard W. Balleine]

actively participate and perform

Conditioning and Learning

110

some kind of behavior to attain its reward, the dog in Pavlov’s experiment is a passive
participant. One of the lessons of operant conditioning research, then, is that voluntary
behavior is strongly influenced by its consequences.
The illustration on the left summarizes the basic elements of classical and instrumental
conditioning. The two types of learning differ in many ways. However, modern thinkers often
emphasize the fact that they differ—as illustrated here—in what is learned. In classical
conditioning, the animal behaves as if it has learned to associate a stimulus with a significant
event. In operant conditioning, the animal behaves as if it has learned to associate a behavior
with a significant event. Another difference is that the response in the classical situation (e.
g., salivation) is elicited by a stimulus that comes before it, whereas the response in the operant
case is not elicited by any particular stimulus. Instead, operant responses are said to be emitted.
The word “emitted” further conveys the idea that operant behaviors are essentially voluntary
in nature.
Understanding classical and operant conditioning provides psychologists with many tools for
understanding learning and behavior in the world outside the lab. This is in part because the
two types of learning occur continuously throughout our lives. It has been said that “much
like the laws of gravity, the laws of learning are always in effect” (Spreat & Spreat, 1982).

Useful Things to Know about Classical Conditioning
Classical Conditioning Has Many Effects on Behavior
A classical CS (e.g., the bell) does not merely elicit a simple, unitary reflex. Pavlov emphasized
salivation because that was the only response he measured. But his bell almost certainly
elicited a whole system of responses that functioned to get the organism ready for the
upcoming US (food) (see Timberlake, 2001). For example, in addition to salivation, CSs (such
as the bell) that signal that food is near also elicit the secretion of gastric acid, pancreatic
enzymes, and insulin (which gets blood glucose into cells). All of these responses prepare the
body for digestion. Additionally, the CS elicits approach behavior and a state of excitement.
And presenting a CS for food can also cause animals whose stomachs are full to eat more
food if it is available. In fact, food CSs are so prevalent in modern society, humans are likewise
inclined to eat or feel hungry in response to cues associated with food, such as the sound of
a bag of potato chips opening, the sight of a well-known logo (e.g., Coca-Cola), or the feel of
the couch in front of the television.
Classical conditioning is also involved in other aspects of eating. Flavors associated with certain

Conditioning and Learning

111

nutrients (such as sugar or fat) can become preferred without arousing any awareness of the
pairing. For example, protein is a US that your body automatically craves more of once you
start to consume it (UR): since proteins are highly concentrated in meat, the flavor of meat
becomes a CS (or cue, that proteins are on the way), which perpetuates the cycle of craving
for yet more meat (this automatic bodily reaction now a CR).
In a similar way, flavors associated with stomach pain or illness become avoided and disliked.
For example, a person who gets sick after drinking too much tequila may acquire a profound
dislike of the taste and odor of tequila—a phenomenon called taste aversion conditioning.
The fact that flavors are often associated with so many consequences of eating is important
for animals (including rats and humans) that are frequently exposed to new foods. And it is
clinically relevant. For example, drugs used in chemotherapy often make cancer patients sick.
As a consequence, patients often acquire aversions to foods eaten just before treatment, or
even aversions to such things as the waiting room of the chemotherapy clinic itself (see
Bernstein, 1991; Scalera & Bavieri, 2009).
Classical conditioning occurs with a variety of significant events. If an experimenter sounds a
tone just before applying a mild shock to a rat’s feet, the tone will elicit fear or anxiety after
one or two pairings. Similar fear conditioning plays a role in creating many anxiety disorders
in humans, such as phobias and panic disorders, where people associate cues (such as closed
spaces, or a shopping mall) with panic or other emotional trauma (see Mineka & Zinbarg,
2006). Here, rather than a physical response (like drooling), the CS triggers an emotion.
Another interesting effect of classical conditioning can occur when we ingest drugs. That is,
when a drug is taken, it can be associated with the cues that are present at the same time (e.
g., rooms, odors, drug paraphernalia). In this regard, if someone associates a particular smell
with the sensation induced by the drug, whenever that person smells the same odor afterward,
it may cue responses (physical and/or emotional) related to taking the drug itself. But drug
cues have an even more interesting property: They elicit responses that often “compensate”
for the upcoming effect of the drug (see Siegel, 1989). For example, morphine itself suppresses
pain; however, if someone is used to taking morphine, a cue that signals the “drug is coming
soon” can actually make the person more sensitive to pain. Because the person knows a pain
suppressant will soon be administered, the body becomes more sensitive, anticipating that
“the drug will soon take care of it.” Remarkably, such conditioned compensatory responses
in turn decrease the impact of the drug on the body—because the body has become more
sensitive to pain.
This conditioned compensatory response has many implications. For instance, a drug user
will be most “tolerant” to the drug in the presence of cues that have been associated with it

112

Conditioning and Learning

(because such cues elicit compensatory responses). As a result, overdose is usually not due
to an increase in dosage, but to taking the drug in a new place without the familiar cues—
which would have otherwise allowed the user to tolerate the drug (see Siegel, Hinson, Krank,
& McCully, 1982). Conditioned compensatory responses (which include heightened pain
sensitivity and decreased body temperature, among others) might also cause discomfort, thus
motivating the drug user to continue usage of the drug to reduce them. This is one of several
ways classical conditioning might be a factor in drug addiction and dependence.
A final effect of classical cues is that they motivate ongoing operant behavior (see Balleine,
2005). For example, if a rat has learned via operant conditioning that pressing a lever will give
it a drug, in the presence of cues that signal the “drug is coming soon” (like the sound of the
lever squeaking), the rat will work harder to press the lever than if those cues weren’t present
(i.e., there is no squeaking lever sound). Similarly, in the presence of food-associated cues (e.
g., smells), a rat (or an overeater) will work harder for food. And finally, even in the presence
of negative cues (like something that signals fear), a rat, a human, or any other organism will
work harder to avoid those situations that might lead to trauma. Classical CSs thus have many
effects that can contribute to significant behavioral phenomena.

[Image: Bernard W. Balleine]

The Learning Process
As mentioned earlier, classical conditioning provides a method for studying basic learning
processes. Somewhat counterintuitively, though, studies show that pairing a CS and a US
together is not sufficient for an association to be learned between them. Consider an effect
called blocking (see Kamin, 1969). In this effect, an animal first learns to associate one CS—
call it stimulus A—with a US. In the illustration above, the sound of a bell (stimulus A) is paired
with the presentation of food. Once this association is learned, in a second phase, a second

Conditioning and Learning

113

stimulus—stimulus B—is presented alongside stimulus A, such that the two stimuli are paired
with the US together. In the illustration, a light is added and turned on at the same time the
bell is rung. However, because the animal has already learned the association between
stimulus A (the bell) and the food, the animal doesn’t learn an association between stimulus
B (the light) and the food. That is, the conditioned response only occurs during the presentation
of stimulus A, because the earlier conditioning of A “blocks” the conditioning of B when B is
added to A. The reason? Stimulus A already predicts the US, so the US is not surprising when
it occurs with Stimulus B.
Learning depends on such a surprise, or a discrepancy between what occurs on a conditioning
trial and what is already predicted by cues that are present on the trial. To learn something
through classical conditioning, there must first be some prediction error, or the chance that
a conditioned stimulus won’t lead to the expected outcome. With the example of the bell and
the light, because the bell always leads to the reward of food, there’s no “prediction error”
that the addition of the light helps to correct. However, if the researcher suddenly requires
that the bell and the light both occur in order to receive the food, the bell alone will produce
a prediction error that the animal has to learn.
Blocking and other related effects indicate that the learning process tends to take in the most
valid predictors of significant events and ignore the less useful ones. This is common in the
real world. For example, imagine that your supermarket puts big star-shaped stickers on
products that are on sale. Quickly, you learn that items with the big star-shaped stickers are
cheaper. However, imagine you go into a similar supermarket that not only uses these stickers,
but also uses bright orange price tags to denote a discount. Because of blocking (i.e., you
already know that the star-shaped stickers indicate a discount), you don’t have to learn the
color system, too. The star-shaped stickers tell you everything you need to know (i.e. there’s
no prediction error for the discount), and thus the color system is irrelevant.
Classical conditioning is strongest if the CS and US are intense or salient. It is also best if the
CS and US are relatively new and the organism hasn’t been frequently exposed to them before.
And it is especially strong if the organism’s biology has prepared it to associate a particular
CS and US. For example, rats and humans are naturally inclined to associate an illness with a
flavor, rather than with a light or tone. Because foods are most commonly experienced by
taste, if there is a particular food that makes us ill, associating the flavor (rather than the
appearance—which may be similar to other foods) with the illness will more greatly ensure
we avoid that food in the future, and thus avoid getting sick. This sorting tendency, which is
set up by evolution, is called preparedness.
There are many factors that affect the strength of classical conditioning, and these have been

114

Conditioning and Learning

the subject of much research and theory (see Rescorla & Wagner, 1972; Pearce & Bouton,
2001). Behavioral neuroscientists have also used classical conditioning to investigate many
of the basic brain processes that are involved in learning (see Fanselow & Poulos, 2005;
Thompson & Steinmetz, 2009).

Erasing Classical Learning
After conditioning, the response to the CS can be eliminated if the CS is presented repeatedly
without the US. This effect is called extinction, and the response is said to become
“extinguished.” For example, if Pavlov kept ringing the bell but never gave the dog any food
afterward, eventually the dog’s CR (drooling) would no longer happen when it heard the CS
(the bell), because the bell would no longer be a predictor of food. Extinction is important for
many reasons. For one thing, it is the basis for many therapies that clinical psychologists use
to eliminate maladaptive and unwanted behaviors. Take the example of a person who has a
debilitating fear of spiders: one approach might include systematic exposure to spiders.
Whereas, initially the person has a CR (e.g., extreme fear) every time s/he sees the CS (e.g.,
the spider), after repeatedly being shown pictures of spiders in neutral conditions, pretty soon
the CS no longer predicts the CR (i.e., the person doesn’t have the fear reaction when seeing
spiders, having learned that spiders no longer serve as a “cue” for that fear). Here, repeated
exposure to spiders without an aversive consequence causes extinction.
Psychologists must accept one important fact about extinction, however: it does not
necessarily destroy the original learning (see Bouton, 2004). For example, imagine you strongly
associate the smell of chalkboards with the agony of middle school detention. Now imagine
that, after years of encountering chalkboards, the smell of them no longer recalls the agony
of detention (an example of extinction). However, one day, after entering a new building for
the first time, you suddenly catch a whiff of a chalkboard and WHAM!, the agony of detention
returns. This is called spontaneous recovery: following a lapse in exposure to the CS after
extinction has occurred, sometimes re-exposure to the CS (e.g., the smell of chalkboards) can
evoke the CR again (e.g., the agony of detention).
Another related phenomenon is the renewal effect: After extinction, if the CS is tested in a
new context, such as a different room or location, the CR can also return. In the chalkboard
example, the action of entering a new building—where you don’t expect to smell chalkboards
—suddenly renews the sensations associated with detention. These effects have been
interpreted to suggest that extinction inhibits rather than erases the learned behavior, and
this inhibition is mainly expressed in the context in which it is learned (see “context” in the
Key Vocabulary section below).

Conditioning and Learning

115

This does not mean that extinction is a bad treatment for behavior disorders. Instead, clinicians
can increase its effectiveness by using basic research on learning to help defeat these relapse
effects (see Craske et al., 2008). For example, conducting extinction therapies in contexts
where patients might be most vulnerable to relapsing (e.g., at work), might be a good strategy
for enhancing the therapy’s success.

Useful Things to Know about Instrumental Conditioning
Most of the things that affect the strength of classical conditioning also affect the strength of
instrumental learning—whereby we learn to associate our actions with their outcomes. As
noted earlier, the “bigger” the reinforcer (or punisher), the stronger the learning. And, if an
instrumental behavior is no longer reinforced, it will also be extinguished. Most of the rules
of associative learning that apply to classical conditioning also apply to instrumental learning,
but other facts about instrumental learning are also worth knowing.

Instrumental Responses Come Under Stimulus Control
As you know, the classic operant response in the laboratory is lever-pressing in rats, reinforced
by food. However, things can be arranged so that lever-pressing only produces pellets when
a particular stimulus is present. For example, lever-pressing can be reinforced only when a
light in the Skinner box is turned on; when the light is off, no food is released from leverpressing. The rat soon learns to discriminate between the light-on and light-off conditions,
and presses the lever only in the presence of the light (responses in light-off are extinguished).
In everyday life, think about waiting in the turn lane at a traffic light. Although you know that
green means go, only when you have the green arrow do you turn. In this regard, the operant
behavior is now said to be under stimulus control. And, as is the case with the traffic light, in
the real world, stimulus control is probably the rule.
The stimulus controlling the operant response is called a discriminative stimulus. It can be
associated directly with the response, or the reinforcer (see below). However, it usually does
not elicit the response the way a classical CS does. Instead, it is said to “set the occasion for”
the operant response. For example, a canvas put in front of an artist does not elicit painting
behavior or compel her to paint. It allows, or sets the occasion for, painting to occur.
Stimulus-control techniques are widely used in the laboratory to study perception and other
psychological processes in animals. For example, the rat would not be able to respond
appropriately to light-on and light-off conditions if it could not see the light. Following this
logic, experiments using stimulus-control methods have tested how well animals see colors,

116

Conditioning and Learning

hear ultrasounds, and detect magnetic fields. That is, researchers pair these discriminative
stimuli with those they know the animals already understand (such as pressing the lever). In
this way, the researchers can test if the animals can learn to press the lever only when an
ultrasound is played, for example.
These methods can also be used to study “higher” cognitive processes. For example, pigeons
can learn to peck at different buttons in a Skinner box when pictures of flowers, cars, chairs,
or people are shown on a miniature TV screen (see Wasserman, 1995). Pecking button 1 (and
no other) is reinforced in the presence of a flower image, button 2 in the presence of a chair
image, and so on. Pigeons can learn the discrimination readily, and, under the right conditions,
will even peck the correct buttons associated with pictures of new flowers, cars, chairs, and
people they have never seen before. The birds have learned to categorize the sets of stimuli.
Stimulus-control methods can be used to study how such categorization is learned.

Operant Conditioning Involves Choice
Another thing to know about operant
conditioning is that the response always
requires choosing one behavior over
others. The student who goes to the bar on
Thursday night chooses to drink instead of
staying at home and studying. The rat
chooses to press the lever instead of
sleeping or scratching its ear in the back of
the box. The alternative behaviors are each
associated with their own reinforcers. And
the tendency to perform a particular action
depends on both the reinforcers earned
for it and the reinforcers earned for its
alternatives.
To investigate this idea, choice has been
studied in the Skinner box by making two
levers available for the rat (or two buttons available for the pigeon), each of which has its own
reinforcement or payoff rate. A thorough study of choice in situations like this has led to a
rule called the quantitative law of effect (see Herrnstein, 1970), which can be understood
without going into quantitative detail: The law acknowledges the fact that the effects of
reinforcing one behavior depend crucially on how much reinforcement is earned for the

117

Conditioning and Learning

behavior’s alternatives. For example, if a pigeon learns that pecking one light will reward two
food pellets, whereas the other light only rewards one, the pigeon will only peck the first light.
However, what happens if the first light is more strenuous to reach than the second one? Will
the cost of energy outweigh the bonus of food? Or will the extra food be worth the work? In
general, a given reinforcer will be less reinforcing if there are many alternative reinforcers in
the environment. For this reason, alcohol, sex, or drugs may be less powerful reinforcers if
the person’s environment is full of other sources of reinforcement, such as achievement at
work or love from family members.

Cognition in Instrumental Learning
Modern research also indicates that reinforcers do more than merely strengthen or “stamp
in” the behaviors they are a consequence of, as was Thorndike’s original view. Instead, animals
learn about the specific consequences of each behavior, and will perform a behavior
depending on how much they currently want—or “value”—its consequence.

This idea is best illustrated by a phenomenon called the reinforcer devaluation effect (see
Colwill & Rescorla, 1986). A rat is first trained to perform two instrumental actions (e.g.,
pressing a lever on the left, and on the right), each paired with a different reinforcer (e.g., a
sweet sucrose solution, and a food pellet). At the end of this training, the rat tends to press
both levers, alternating between the sucrose solution and the food pellet. In a second phase,
one of the reinforcers (e.g., the sucrose) is then separately paired with illness. This conditions
a taste aversion to the sucrose. In a final test, the rat is returned to the Skinner box and allowed
to press either lever freely. No reinforcers are presented during this test (i.e., no sucrose or
food comes from pressing the levers), so behavior during testing can only result from the rat’s

Conditioning and Learning

118

memory of what it has learned earlier. Importantly here, the rat chooses not to perform the
response that once produced the reinforcer that it now has an aversion to (e.g., it won’t press
the sucrose lever). This means that the rat has learned and remembered the reinforcer
associated with each response, and can combine that knowledge with the knowledge that the
reinforcer is now “bad.” Reinforcers do not merely stamp in responses; the animal learns
much more than that. The behavior is said to be “goal-directed” (see Dickinson & Balleine,
1994), because it is influenced by the current value of its associated goal (i.e., how much the
rat wants/doesn’t want the reinforcer).
Things can get more complicated, however, if the rat performs the instrumental actions
frequently and repeatedly. That is, if the rat has spent many months learning the value of
pressing each of the levers, the act of pressing them becomes automatic and routine. And
here, this once goal-directed action (i.e., the rat pressing the lever for the goal of getting
sucrose/food) can become a habit. Thus, if a rat spends many months performing the leverpressing behavior (turning such behavior into a habit), even when sucrose is again paired with
illness, the rat will continue to press that lever (see Holland, 2004). After all the practice, the
instrumental response (pressing the lever) is no longer sensitive to reinforcer devaluation.
The rat continues to respond automatically, regardless of the fact that the sucrose from this
lever makes it sick.
Habits are very common in human experience, and can be useful. You do not need to relearn
each day how to make your coffee in the morning or how to brush your teeth. Instrumental
behaviors can eventually become habitual, letting us get the job done while being free to think
about other things.

Putting Classical and Instrumental Conditioning Together
Classical and operant conditioning are usually studied separately. But outside of the laboratory
they almost always occur at the same time. For example, a person who is reinforced for
drinking alcohol or eating excessively learns these behaviors in the presence of certain stimuli
—a pub, a set of friends, a restaurant, or possibly the couch in front of the TV. These stimuli
are also available for association with the reinforcer. In this way, classical and operant
conditioning are always intertwined.
The figure below summarizes this idea, and helps review what we have discussed in this
module. Generally speaking, any reinforced or punished operant response (R) is paired with
an outcome (O) in the presence of some stimulus or set of stimuli (S).

119

Conditioning and Learning

The figure illustrates the types of associations that can be learned in this very general scenario.
For one thing, the organism will learn to associate the response and the outcome (R – O). This
is instrumental conditioning. The learning process here is probably similar to classical
conditioning, with all its emphasis on surprise and prediction error. And, as we discussed
while considering the reinforcer devaluation effect, once R – O is learned, the organism will
be ready to perform the response if the outcome is desired or valued. The value of the
reinforcer can also be influenced by other reinforcers earned for other behaviors in the
situation. These factors are at the heart of instrumental learning.
Second, the organism can also learn to associate the stimulus with the reinforcing outcome
(S – O). This is the classical conditioning component, and as we have seen, it can have many
consequences on behavior. For one thing, the stimulus will come to evoke a system of
responses that help the organism prepare for the reinforcer (not shown in the figure): The
drinker may undergo changes in body temperature; the eater may salivate and have an
increase in insulin secretion. In addition, the stimulus will evoke approach (if the outcome is
positive) or retreat (if the outcome is negative). Presenting the stimulus will also prompt the
instrumental response.
The third association in the
diagram is the one between the
stimulus and the response (S – R).
As discussed earlier, after a lot of
practice, the stimulus may begin
to elicit the response directly. This
is habit learning, whereby the
response occurs relatively auto­
matically, without much mental
processing of the relation between
the action and the outcome and
the outcome’s current value.
The final link in the figure is
between the stimulus and the
response-outcome association [S – (R – O)]. More than just entering into a simple association
with the R or the O, the stimulus can signal that the R – O relationship is now in effect. This is
what we mean when we say that the stimulus can “set the occasion” for the operant response:
It sets the occasion for the response-reinforcer relationship. Through this mechanism, the
painter might begin to paint when given the right tools and the opportunity enabled by the
canvas. The canvas theoretically signals that the behavior of painting will now be reinforced

120

Conditioning and Learning

by positive consequences.
The figure provides a framework that you can use to understand almost any learned behavior
you observe in yourself, your family, or your friends. If you would like to understand it more
deeply, consider taking a course on learning in the future, which will give you a fuller
appreciation of how classical learning, instrumental learning, habit learning, and occasion
setting actually work and interact.

Observational Learning
Not all forms of learning are accounted for entirely by classical and operant conditioning.
Imagine a child walking up to a group of children playing a game on the playground. The game
looks fun, but it is new and unfamiliar. Rather than joining the game immediately, the child
opts to sit back and watch the other children play a round or two. Observing the others, the
child takes note of the ways in which they behave while playing the game. By watching the
behavior of the other kids, the child can figure out the rules of the game and even some
strategies for doing well at the game. This is called observational learning.
Observational learning is a
component of Albert Bandura’s
Social Learning Theory (Bandura,
1977), which posits that individuals
can learn novel responses via
observation

of

key

others’

behaviors. Observational learning
does not necessarily require
reinforcement,

but

instead

hinges on the presence of
others, referred to as social
models. Social models are
A child observing social models to learn the rules of a game. [Photo: horizontal.

typically of higher status or

integration]

authority compared to the
observer, examples of which

include parents, teachers, and police officers. In the example above, the children who already
know how to play the game could be thought of as being authorities—and are therefore social
models—even though they are the same age as the observer. By observing how the social
models behave, an individual is able to learn how to act in a certain situation. Other examples
of observational learning might include a child learning to place her napkin in her lap by

121

Conditioning and Learning

watching her parents at the dinner table, or a customer learning where to find the ketchup
and mustard after observing other customers at a hot dog stand.
Bandura theorizes that the observational learning process consists of four parts. The first is
attention—as, quite simply, one must pay attention to what s/he is observing in order to learn.
The second part is retention: to learn one must be able to retain the behavior s/he is observing
in memory.The third part of observational learning, initiation, acknowledges that the learner
must be able to execute (or initiate) the learned behavior. Lastly, the observer must possess
the motivation to engage in observational learning. In our vignette, the child must want to
learn how to play the game in order to properly engage in observational learning.
Researchers have conducted countless experiments designed to explore observational
learning, the most famous of which is Albert Bandura’s “Bobo doll experiment.”
In this experiment (Bandura, Ross & Ross 1961), Bandura had
children individually observe an adult social model interact with
a clown doll (“Bobo”). For one group of children, the adult
interacted aggressively with Bobo: punching it, kicking it,
throwing it, and even hitting it in the face with a toy mallet.
Another group of children watched the adult interact with other
toys, displaying no aggression toward Bobo. In both instances
the adult left and the children were allowed to interact with Bobo
on their own. Bandura found that children exposed to the
aggressive social model were significantly more likely to behave
aggressively toward Bobo, hitting and kicking him, compared to
those exposed to the non-aggressive model. The researchers
concluded that the children in the aggressive group used their
observations of the adult social model’s behavior to determine
that aggressive behavior toward Bobo was acceptable.

Bobo [Image: wikimedia commons]

While reinforcement was not required to elicit the children’s behavior in Bandura’s first
experiment, it is important to acknowledge that consequences do play a role within
observational learning. A future adaptation of this study (Bandura, Ross, & Ross, 1963)
demonstrated that children in the aggression group showed less aggressive behavior if they
witnessed the adult model receive punishment for aggressing against Bobo. Bandura referred
to this process as vicarious reinforcement, as the children did not experience the
reinforcement or punishment directly, yet were still influenced by observing it.

Conclusion

Conditioning and Learning

122

We have covered three primary explanations for how we learn to behave and interact with
the world around us. Considering your own experiences, how well do these theories apply to
you? Maybe when reflecting on your personal sense of fashion, you realize that you tend to
select clothes others have complimented you on (operant conditioning). Or maybe, thinking
back on a new restaurant you tried recently, you realize you chose it because its commercials
play happy music (classical conditioning). Or maybe you are now always on time with your
assignments, because you saw how others were punished when they were late (observational
learning). Regardless of the activity, behavior, or response, there’s a good chance your
“decision” to do it can be explained based on one of the theories presented in this module.

123

Conditioning and Learning

Outside Resources
Article: Rescorla, R. A. (1988). Pavlovian conditioning: It’s not what you think it is. American
Psychologist, 43, 151–160.
Book: Bouton, M. E. (2007). Learning and behavior: A contemporary synthesis. Sunderland,
MA: Sinauer Associates.
Book: Bouton, M. E. (2009). Learning theory. In B. J. Sadock, V. A. Sadock, & P. Ruiz (Eds.), Kaplan
& Sadock’s comprehensive textbook of psychiatry (9th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 647–658). New York, NY:
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Book: Domjan, M. (2010). The principles of learning and behavior (6th ed.). Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Video: Albert Bandura discusses the Bobo Doll Experiment.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eqNaLerMNOE

Discussion Questions
1. Describe three examples of Pavlovian (classical) conditioning that you have seen in your
own behavior, or that of your friends or family, in the past few days.
2. Describe three examples of instrumental (operant) conditioning that you have seen in your
own behavior, or that of your friends or family, in the past few days.
3. Drugs can be potent reinforcers. Discuss how Pavlovian conditioning and instrumental
conditioning can work together to influence drug taking.
4. In the modern world, processed foods are highly available and have been engineered to
be highly palatable and reinforcing. Discuss how Pavlovian and instrumental conditioning
can work together to explain why people often eat too much.
5. How does blocking challenge the idea that pairings of a CS and US are sufficient to cause
Pavlovian conditioning? What is important in creating Pavlovian learning?
6. How does the reinforcer devaluation effect challenge the idea that reinforcers merely
“stamp in” the operant response? What does the effect tell us that animals actually learn
in operant conditioning?
7. With regards to social learning do you think people learn violence from observing violence

Conditioning and Learning

124

in movies? Why or why not?
8. What do you think you have learned through social learning? Who are your social models?

125

Conditioning and Learning

Vocabulary
Blocking
In classical conditioning, the finding that no conditioning occurs to a stimulus if it is combined
with a previously conditioned stimulus during conditioning trials. Suggests that information,
surprise value, or prediction error is important in conditioning.
Categorize
To sort or arrange different items into classes or categories.
Classical conditioning
The procedure in which an initially neutral stimulus (the conditioned stimulus, or CS) is paired
with an unconditioned stimulus (or US). The result is that the conditioned stimulus begins to
elicit a conditioned response (CR). Classical conditioning is nowadays considered important
as both a behavioral phenomenon and as a method to study simple associative learning.
Same as Pavlovian conditioning.
Conditioned compensatory response
In classical conditioning, a conditioned response that opposes, rather than is the same as, the
unconditioned response. It functions to reduce the strength of the unconditioned response.
Often seen in conditioning when drugs are used as unconditioned stimuli.
Conditioned response (CR)
The response that is elicited by the conditioned stimulus after classical conditioning has taken
place.
Conditioned stimulus (CS)
An initially neutral stimulus (like a bell, light, or tone) that elicits a conditioned response after
it has been associated with an unconditioned stimulus.
Context
Stimuli that are in the background whenever learning occurs. For instance, the Skinner box
or room in which learning takes place is the classic example of a context. However, “context”
can also be provided by internal stimuli, such as the sensory effects of drugs (e.g., being under
the influence of alcohol has stimulus properties that provide a context) and mood states (e.
g., being happy or sad). It can also be provided by a specific period in time—the passage of
time is sometimes said to change the “temporal context.”

Conditioning and Learning

126

Discriminative stimulus
In operant conditioning, a stimulus that signals whether the response will be reinforced. It is
said to “set the occasion” for the operant response.
Extinction
Decrease in the strength of a learned behavior that occurs when the conditioned stimulus is
presented without the unconditioned stimulus (in classical conditioning) or when the behavior
is no longer reinforced (in instrumental conditioning). The term describes both the procedure
(the US or reinforcer is no longer presented) as well as the result of the procedure (the learned
response declines). Behaviors that have been reduced in strength through extinction are said
to be “extinguished.”
Fear conditioning
A type of classical or Pavlovian conditioning in which the conditioned stimulus (CS) is associated
with an aversive unconditioned stimulus (US), such as a foot shock. As a consequence of
learning, the CS comes to evoke fear. The phenomenon is thought to be involved in the
development of anxiety disorders in humans.
Goal-directed behavior
Instrumental behavior that is influenced by the animal’s knowledge of the association between
the behavior and its consequence and the current value of the consequence. Sensitive to the
reinforcer devaluation effect.
Habit
Instrumental behavior that occurs automatically in the presence of a stimulus and is no longer
influenced by the animal’s knowledge of the value of the reinforcer. Insensitive to the reinforcer
devaluation effect.
Instrumental conditioning
Process in which animals learn about the relationship between their behaviors and their
consequences. Also known as operant conditioning.
Law of effect
The idea that instrumental or operant responses are influenced by their effects. Responses
that are followed by a pleasant state of affairs will be strengthened and those that are followed
by discomfort will be weakened. Nowadays, the term refers to the idea that operant or
instrumental behaviors are lawfully controlled by their consequences.
Observational learning

Conditioning and Learning

127

Learning by observing the behavior of others.
Operant
A behavior that is controlled by its consequences. The simplest example is the rat’s leverpressing, which is controlled by the presentation of the reinforcer.
Operant conditioning
See instrumental conditioning.
Pavlovian conditioning
See classical conditioning.
Prediction error
When the outcome of a conditioning trial is different from that which is predicted by the
conditioned stimuli that are present on the trial (i.e., when the US is surprising). Prediction
error is necessary to create Pavlovian conditioning (and associative learning generally). As
learning occurs over repeated conditioning trials, the conditioned stimulus increasingly
predicts the unconditioned stimulus, and prediction error declines. Conditioning works to
correct or reduce prediction error.
Preparedness
The idea that an organism’s evolutionary history can make it easy to learn a particular
association. Because of preparedness, you are more likely to associate the taste of tequila,
and not the circumstances surrounding drinking it, with getting sick. Similarly, humans are
more likely to associate images of spiders and snakes than flowers and mushrooms with
aversive outcomes like shocks.
Punisher
A stimulus that decreases the strength of an operant behavior when it is made a consequence
of the behavior.
Quantitative law of effect
A mathematical rule that states that the effectiveness of a reinforcer at strengthening an
operant response depends on the amount of reinforcement earned for all alternative
behaviors. A reinforcer is less effective if there is a lot of reinforcement in the environment
for other behaviors.
Reinforcer
Any consequence of a behavior that strengthens the behavior or increases the likelihood that

Conditioning and Learning

128

it will be performed it again.
Reinforcer devaluation effect
The finding that an animal will stop performing an instrumental response that once led to a
reinforcer if the reinforcer is separately made aversive or undesirable.
Renewal effect
Recovery of an extinguished response that occurs when the context is changed after
extinction. Especially strong when the change of context involves return to the context in
which conditioning originally occurred. Can occur after extinction in either classical or
instrumental conditioning.
Social Learning Theory
The theory that people can learn new responses and behaviors by observing the behavior of
others.
Social models
Authorities that are the targets for observation and who model behaviors.
Spontaneous recovery
Recovery of an extinguished response that occurs with the passage of time after extinction.
Can occur after extinction in either classical or instrumental conditioning.
Stimulus control
When an operant behavior is controlled by a stimulus that precedes it.
Taste aversion learning
The phenomenon in which a taste is paired with sickness, and this causes the organism to
reject—and dislike—that taste in the future.
Unconditioned response (UR)
In classical conditioning, an innate response that is elicited by a stimulus before (or in the
absence of) conditioning.
Unconditioned stimulus (US)
In classical conditioning, the stimulus that elicits the response before conditioning occurs.
Vicarious reinforcement
Learning that occurs by observing the reinforcement or punishment of another person.

129

Conditioning and Learning

References
Balleine, B. W. (2005). Neural basis of food-seeking: Affect, arousal, and reward in
corticostratolimbic circuits. Physiology & Behavior, 86, 717–730.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall
Bandura, A., Ross, D., Ross, S (1963). Imitation of film-mediated aggressive models. Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology 66(1), 3 - 11.
Bandura, A.; Ross, D.; Ross, S. A. (1961). "Transmission of aggression through the imitation of
aggressive models". Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology 63(3), 575–582.
Bernstein, I. L. (1991). Aversion conditioning in response to cancer and cancer treatment.
Clinical Psychology Review, 11, 185–191.
Bouton, M. E. (2004). Context and behavioral processes in extinction. Learning & Memory, 11,
485–494.
Colwill, R. M., & Rescorla, R. A. (1986). Associative structures in instrumental learning. In G. H.
Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation, (Vol. 20, pp. 55–104). New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Craske, M. G., Kircanski, K., Zelikowsky, M., Mystkowski, J., Chowdhury, N., & Baker, A. (2008).
Optimizing inhibitory learning during exposure therapy. Behaviour Research and Therapy,
46, 5–27.
Dickinson, A., & Balleine, B. W. (1994). Motivational control of goal-directed behavior. Animal
Learning & Behavior, 22, 1–18.
Fanselow, M. S., & Poulos, A. M. (2005). The neuroscience of mammalian associative learning.
Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 207–234.
Herrnstein, R. J. (1970). On the law of effect. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior,
13, 243–266.
Holland, P. C. (2004). Relations between Pavlovian-instrumental transfer and reinforcer
devaluation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 30, 104–117.
Kamin, L. J. (1969). Predictability, surprise, attention, and conditioning. In B. A. Campbell & R.
M. Church (Eds.), Punishment and aversive behavior (pp. 279–296). New York, NY: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Mineka, S., & Zinbarg, R. (2006). A contemporary learning theory perspective on the etiology
of anxiety disorders: It’s not what you thought it was. American Psychologist, 61, 10–26.
Pearce, J. M., & Bouton, M. E. (2001). Theories of associative learning in animals. Annual Review
of Psychology, 52, 111–139.

Conditioning and Learning

130

Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the
effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement. In A. H. Black & W. F. Prokasy (Eds.),
Classical conditioning II: Current research and theory (pp. 64–99). New York, NY: AppletonCentury-Crofts.
Scalera, G., & Bavieri, M. (2009). Role of conditioned taste aversion on the side effects of
chemotherapy in cancer patients. In S. Reilly & T. R. Schachtman (Eds.), Conditioned taste
aversion: Behavioral and neural processes (pp. 513–541). New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Siegel, S. (1989). Pharmacological conditioning and drug effects. In A. J. Goudie & M. EmmettOglesby (Eds.), Psychoactive drugs (pp. 115–180). Clifton, NY: Humana Press.
Siegel, S., Hinson, R. E., Krank, M. D., & McCully, J. (1982). Heroin “overdose” death: Contribution
of drug associated environmental cues. Science, 216, 436–437.
Spreat, S., & Spreat, S. R. (1982). Learning principles. In V. Voith & P. L. Borchelt (Eds.), Veterinary
clinics of North America: Small animal practice (pp. 593–606). Philadelphia, PA: W. B. Saunders.
Thompson, R. F., & Steinmetz, J. E. (2009). The role of the cerebellum in classical conditioningof
discrete behavioral responses. Neuroscience, 162, 732–755.
Timberlake, W. L. (2001). Motivational modes in behavior systems. In R. R. Mowrer & S. B. Klein
(Eds.), Handbook of contemporary learning theories (pp. 155–210). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Wasserman, E. A. (1995). The conceptual abilities of pigeons. American Scientist, 83, 246–255.

Chapter 6: States of Consciousness

7
States of Consciousness
Robert Biswas-Diener & Jake Teeny

No matter what you’re doing--solving homework, playing a video game, simply picking out a
shirt--all of your actions and decisions relate to your consciousness. But as frequently as we
use it, have you ever stopped to ask yourself: What really is consciousness? In this module,
we discuss the different levels of consciousness and how they can affect your behavior in a
variety of situations. As well, we explore the role of consciousness in other, “altered” states
like hypnosis and sleep.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•

Define consciousness and distinguish between high and low conscious states
Explain the relationship between consciousness and bias
Understand the difference between popular portrayals of hypnosis and how it is currently
used therapeutically

Introduction
Have you ever had a fellow motorist stopped beside you at a red light, singing his brains out,
or picking his nose, or otherwise behaving in ways he might not normally do in public? There
is something about being alone in a car that encourages people to zone out and forget that
others can see them. And although these little lapses of attention are amusing for the rest of
us, they are also instructive when it comes to the topic of consciousness.

133

States of Consciousness

Consciousness is a term meant to indicate
awareness. It includes awareness of the self,
of bodily sensations, of thoughts and of the
environment. In English, we use the opposite
word “unconscious” to indicate senselessness
or a barrier to awareness, as in the case of
“Theresa fell off the ladder and hit her head,
knocking herself unconscious.” And yet,
psychological theory and research suggest
that consciousness and unconsciousness
are more complicated than falling off a
This guy is singing his heart out in his one-man mobile music

ladder. That is, consciousness is more than

studio. Have you ever done this? [Image: Joshua Ommen]

just being “on” or “off.” For instance, Sigmund
Freud (1856 – 1939)—perhaps the most

influential psychologist of all time—understood that even while we are awake, many things
lay outside the realm of our conscious awareness (like being in the car and forgetting the rest
of the world can see into your windows and hear your singing). In response to this notion,
Freud introduced the concept of the “subconscious” (Freud, 2001) and proposed that some
of our memories and even our basic motivations are not always accessible to our conscious
minds.
Upon reflection of what constitutes this “awareness of consciousness,” though, it is easy to
see how slippery a topic it is. For example, are people conscious when they’re daydreaming?
What about when they’re drunk? Clearly, consciousness is more of a continuum than an onor-off state of being. In this module, we will describe several levels of consciousness and then
discuss altered states of consciousness such as hypnosis and sleep.

Levels of Awareness
In 1957, a marketing researcher inserted the words “Eat Popcorn” onto one frame of a film
being shown all across the United States. And although that frame was only on screen for
1/24th of a second—a speed too fast to be perceived by conscious awareness—the researcher
reported an increase in popcorn sales by nearly 60%. Almost immediately, all forms of
“subliminal messaging” were regulated in the US and banned in countries such as Australia
and the United Kingdom. And even though it was later shown that the researcher had made
up the data (he hadn’t even inserted the words into the movie frame), this fear about influences
on our subconscious persists. At its heart, this issue pits various levels of awareness against
one another. On the one hand, we have the “low awareness” of subtle, even subliminal

134

States of Consciousness

influences. On the other hand, there is you—the conscious thinking, feeling you which includes
all that you are currently aware of, even reading this sentence. However, when we consider
these different levels of awareness separately, we can better understand how they operate.

Low Awareness
Outside of being in a coma, you are constantly receiving and evaluating sensory information.
Although any moment has too many sights, smells, and sounds for them all to be consciously
considered, our brains are nonetheless processing all that information. For example, have
you ever been at a party, overwhelmed by all the people and conversation, when out of
nowhere you hear your name called? Even though you have no idea what else the person is
saying, you are somehow conscious of your name (for more on this, “the cocktail party effect,”
see Noba’s Module on Attention). So, even though you may not be aware of various stimuli in
your environment, your brain is paying closer attention than you think.
Similar to a reflex (like jumping when startled), some cues in our environment, or significant
sensory information, will automatically elicit a response from us even though we never
consciously perceive it. For example, Öhman and Soares (1994) took participants with a fear
of snakes and connected them to a machine that measured subtle variations in sweating. The
researchers then flashed pictures of different items (e.g., mushrooms, flowers, and most
importantly, snakes) on a screen in front of them, but did so at speeds that left the participant
clueless to what he or she had actually seen. However, when snake pictures were flashed,
these participants started sweating more (i.e., a sign of fear), even though they had no idea
what they’d just viewed!
Yet just because our brains perceive these stimuli without our conscious awareness, do they
really affect our subsequent thoughts and behaviors? In a landmark study, Bargh, Chen, and
Burrows (1996) had participants solve a word search puzzle where the answers pertained to
words about the elderly (e.g., “old,” “grandma”) or something random (e.g., “notebook,”
“tomato”). Afterward, the researchers secretly measured how fast the participants walked
down the hallway exiting the experiment. And although none of the participants were aware
of a theme to the answers, those who had solved a puzzle with elderly words (vs. those random
ones) walked more slowly down the hallway!
This effect called priming (i.e., readily “activating” certain concepts and associations from one’s
memory) has been replicated in a number of other studies. For example, priming the people
by having them drink from a warm glass (vs. a cold one) resulted in behaving more “warmly”
toward others (Williams & Bargh, 2008). Although all of these influences occur beneath one’s

135

States of Consciousness

conscious awareness, they still have a
significant effect on one’s subsequent
thoughts and behaviors.
In the last two decades researchers have
made advances in studying aspects of
psychology that exist beyond conscious
awareness. As you can understand, it is
difficult to use self-reports and surveys to
ask people about motives or beliefs that
they, themselves, might not even be aware
of! One way of side-stepping this difficulty
can be found in the implicit associations
test,

or

IAT

(Greenwald,

McGhee

&

Schwartz, 1998). This research method uses
computers to assess people’s reaction times
to various stimuli and is a very difficult test
to fake because it records automatic reactions that occur in milliseconds. For instance, to shed
light on deeply held biases, the IAT might present photographs of Caucasian faces and Asian
faces while asking research participants to click buttons indicating either “good” or “bad” as
quickly as possible. This method can help uncover non-conscious biases as well as those that
we are motivated to suppress. Even if the participant clicks “good” for every face shown, the
IAT can still pick up minute delays in responding. Delays are associated with more mental
effort needed to process information. When information is processed quickly—as in the
example of white faces being judged as “good”—it can be contrasted with slower processing
—as in the example of Asian faces being judged as “good”—and the difference in processing
speed is reflective of bias. In this regard, the IAT has been used for investigating stereotypes
(Nosek, Banaji & Greenwald, 2002) as well as self-esteem (Greenwald & Farnam, 2000).

High Awareness
Just because we may be influenced by these “invisible” factors, it doesn’t mean we are
helplessly controlled by them. The other side of the awareness continuum is known as “high
awareness.” This is what you think of as effortful attention and decision making. For example,
when you listen to a funny story on a date, consider which class schedule would be preferable,
or complete a complex math problem, you are engaging a state of consciousness that allows
you to be highly aware of and focused on particular details in your environment.

136

States of Consciousness

An actual screenshot from an IAT (Implicit Association Test) that a person might
take to test their own mental representations of various cognitive constructs.
In this particular case, this is an item testing an individual’s unconscious reaction
towards members of various ethnic groups. [Image: Courtesy of Anthony
Greenwald from Project Implicit]

Mindfulness is a state of this heightened conscious awareness of the thoughts passing
through one’s head. For example, have you ever snapped at someone in frustration, only to
take a moment and reflect on why you responded so aggressively? This more effortful
consideration of your thoughts could be described as an expansion of your conscious
awareness as you take the time to consider the possible influences on your thoughts. Research
has shown that when you engage in this more deliberate consideration, you are less persuaded
by irrelevant yet biasing influences, like the presence of a celebrity in an advertisement (Petty
& Cacioppo, 1986). Higher awareness is also associated with recognizing when you’re using
a stereotype, rather than fairly evaluating another person (Gilbert & Hixon, 1991).
Constantly, we’re alternating between low and high thinking states: the less we’re paying
attention, the more likely we’re influenced by non-conscious stimuli (Chaiken, 1980). And
although these subliminal influences may have an effect on us regardless of how effortfully
we’re thinking, we can use our higher conscious awareness to blunt or even reverse the effect
of them. In what’s known as the Flexible Correction Model (Wegener & Petty, 1997), as long
as people are aware that their thoughts or behavior is being influenced by an undue, outside

137

States of Consciousness

source, they will correct their attitude against the bias.
To help make this relationship between lower and
higher conscious thoughts clearer, imagine the brain is
like a train terminal and all of our thoughts are the
different trains you can ride. Sometimes, when you
have low awareness, you just jump on the first train that
opens its doors for you. However, if you’re more mindful
of your thoughts, you can pause to consider all the
various trains and select the one that will best get you
to your destination. But this analogy, and all the other
research we’ve discussed, has only applied to your
standard conception of consciousness. So what about
other states—like sleeping, daydreaming, or hypnosis
—how are these related to our conscious awareness?
Some people practice meditation. This has
been linked to lower stress and higher well-

Other States of Consciousness

being. [Image: Paul Vallejo]

Hypnosis
If you’ve ever watched a stage
hypnotist perform, it may paint a
misleading portrait of this state of
consciousness. The hypnotized people
on stage, for example, appear to be in
a state similar to sleep. However, as
the hypnotist continues with the
show, you would recognize some
profound differences between sleep
and hypnosis. Namely, when you’re
asleep, hearing the word “strawberry”
doesn’t make you flap your arms like
a chicken. In stage performances, the

People being hypnotized on stage. [Image: New Media Expo]

hypnotized participants appear to be highly suggestible, to the point that they are seemingly
under the hypnotist’s control. Such performances are entertaining but have a way of
sensationalizing the true nature of hypnotic states.
Hypnosis is an actual, documented phenomenon—one that has been studied and debated

States of Consciousness

138

Table 1: States of Consciousness.

for over 200 years (Pekala et al., 2010). Franz Mesmer (1734 – 1815) is often credited as among
the first people to “discover” hypnosis, which he used to treat members of elite society who
were experiencing psychological distress. It is from Mesmer’s name that we get the English
word, “mesmerize” meaning “to entrance or transfix a person’s attention.” Mesmer attributed
the effect of hypnosis to “animal magnetism,” a supposed universal force (similar to gravity)
that operates through all human bodies. Even at the time, such an account of hypnosis was
not scientifically supported, and Mesmer himself was frequently the center of controversy.
Over the years, researchers have proposed that hypnosis is a mental state characterized by
reduced peripheral awareness and increased focus on a singular stimulus, which results in
an enhanced susceptibility to suggestion (Kihlstrom, 2003). For example, the hypnotist will
usually induce hypnosis by getting the person to pay attention only to the hypnotist’s voice.
As the individual focuses more and more on that, s/he begins to forget the context of the
setting and responds to the hypnotist’s suggestions as if they were his or her own. Some
people are naturally more suggestible, and therefore more “hypnotizable” than are others,
and this is especially true for those who score high in empathy (Wickramasekera II & Szlyk,
2003). One common “trick” of stage hypnotists is to discard volunteers who are less suggestible
than others. Regardless of one’s predisposition to being hypnotized, this mental state relies
on two psychological processes: a dissociation of the self, and reduction in elaborative (or
“critical”) thinking (Aguado, 2015).
Dissociation is the separation of one’s awareness from everything besides what one is
centrally focused on. For example, if you’ve ever been daydreaming in class, you were likely
so caught up in the fantasy that you didn’t hear a word the teacher said. During hypnosis, this
dissociation becomes even more extreme. That is, a person concentrates so much on the
words of the hypnotist that s/he loses perspective of the rest of the world around them. As a
consequence of dissociation, a person is less effortful, and less self-conscious in consideration
of his or her own thoughts and behaviors. Similar to low awareness states, where one often
acts on the first thought that comes to mind, so, too, in hypnosis does the individual simply
follow the first thought that comes to mind, i.e., the hypnotist’s suggestion. Still, just because

139

States of Consciousness

one is more susceptible to suggestion under hypnosis, it doesn’t mean s/he will do anything
that’s ordered. To be hypnotized, you must first want to be hypnotized (i.e., you can’t be
hypnotized against your will; Lynn & Kirsh, 2006), and once you are hypnotized, you won’t do
anything you wouldn’t also do while in a more natural state of consciousness (Lynn, Rhue, &
Weekes, 1990).
Today, hypnotherapy is still used in a variety of formats, and it has evolved from Mesmer’s
early tinkering with the concept. Modern hypnotherapy often uses a combination of relaxation,
suggestion, motivation and expectancies to create a desired mental or behavioral state.
Although there is mixed evidence on whether hypnotherapy can help with addiction reduction
(e.g., quitting smoking; Abbot et al., 1998) there is some evidence that it can be successful in
treating sufferers of acute and chronic pain (Ewin, 1978; Syrjala et al., 1992). For example, one
study examined the treatment of burn patients with either hypnotherapy, pseudo-hypnosis
(i.e., a placebo condition), or no treatment at all. Afterward, even though people in the placebo
condition experienced a 16% decrease in pain, those in the actual hypnosis condition
experienced a reduction of nearly 50% (Patterson et al., 1996). Thus, even though hypnosis
may be sensationalized for television and movies, its ability to disassociate a person from
their environment (or their pain) in conjunction with increased suggestibility to a clinician’s
recommendations (e.g., “you will feel less anxiety about your chronic pain”) is a documented
practice with actual medical benefits.
Now, similar to hypnotic states, trance states also involve a dissociation of the self; however,
people in a trance state are said to have less voluntary control over their behaviors and actions.
Trance states often occur in religious ceremonies, where the person believes he or she is
“possessed” by an otherworldly being or force. While in trance, people report anecdotal
accounts of a “higher consciousness” or communion with a greater power. However, the body
of research investigating this phenomenon tends to reject the claim that these experiences
constitute an “altered state of consciousness.”
Most researchers today describe both hypnosis and trance states as “subjective” alterations
of consciousness, not an actually distinct or evolved form (Kirsch & Lynn, 1995). Just like you
feel different when you’re in a state of deep relaxation, so, too, are hypnotic and trance states
simply shifts from the standard conscious experience. Researchers contend that even though
both hypnotic and trance states appear and feel wildly different than the normal human
experience, they can be explained by standard socio-cognitive factors like imagination,
expectation, and the interpretation of the situation.

Sleep

140

States of Consciousness

You may have experienced the
sensation, as you are falling asleep,
of falling and then found yourself
jerking forward and grabbing out
as if you were really falling. Sleep is
a unique state of consciousness.
People generally follow a “biological
clock” that impacts when they
naturally become drowsy, when
they fall asleep, and the time they
naturally awaken. The hormone
melatonin increases at night and

Sleep is necessary in order for people to function well [Image:

is

RelaxingMusic]

associated

with

becoming

sleepy. Your natural daily rhythm,
or Circadian Rhythm, can be influenced by the amount of daylight to which you are exposed
as well as your work and activity schedule. Changing your location, such as flying from Canada
to England, can disrupt your natural sleep rhythms, and we call this jet lag. You can overcome
jet lag by synchronizing yourself to the local schedule by exposing yourself to daylight and
forcing yourself to stay awake even though you are naturally sleepy.
Interestingly, sleep itself is more than shutting off for the night (or for a nap). Instead of turning
off like a light with a flick of a switch, your shift in consciousness is reflected in your brain’s
electrical activity. While you are awake and alert your brain activity is marked by beta waves.
Beta waves are characterized by being high in frequency but low in intensity. In addition, they
are the most inconsistent brain wave and this reflects the wide variation in sensory input that
a person processes during the day. As you begin to relax these change to alpha waves. These
waves reflect brain activity that is less frequent, more consistent and more intense. As you
slip into actual sleep you transition through 5 stages of sleep, each characterized by its own
unique pattern of brain activity:

•
•

Stage 1: is a light sleep and is marked by theta waves
Stage 2: is deeper sleep (here there are “sleep spindles,” or occasional very high intensity
brain waves).

•
•
•

Stage 3: is marked by greater muscle relaxation and the appearance of delta waves
Stage 4: is very relaxed and marked by delta waves
Stage 5: sleep marked by rapid eye movement (REM). It is here that people dream most
vividly. Interestingly, this stage is—where brain activity is concerned—similar to

141

States of Consciousness

wakefulness. That is, the brain waves occur less intensely than in other stages of sleep.
Dreams are, arguably, the most interesting
aspect of sleep. Throughout history dreams
have

been

given

special

importance

because of their unique, almost mystical
nature. They have been thought to be
predictions of the future, hints of hidden
aspects of the self, important lessons about
how to live life, or opportunities to engage
in impossible deeds like flying. There are
several competing theories of why humans
dream. One is that it is our nonconscious
attempt to make sense of our daily
experiences and learning. Another, popularized
Figure 1. Changes in brain activity or brainwaves across different
stages of consciousness – from being awake and throughout
various stages of sleep. [Image: OpenStax]

by Freud, is that dreams represent taboo or
troublesome wishes or desires. Regardless
of the specific reason we know a few facts

about dreams: all humans dream, we dream at every stage of sleep, but dreams during REM
sleep are especially vivid. One under explored area of dream research is the possible social
functions of dreams: we often share our dreams with others and use them for entertainment
value.
Sleep serves many functions, one of which is to give us a period of mental and physical
restoration. Children generally need more sleep than adults since they are developing. It is
so vital, in fact, that a lack of sleep is associated with a wide range of problems. People who
do not receive adequate sleep are more irritable, have slower reaction time, have more
difficulty sustaining attention, and make poorer decisions. Interestingly, this is an issue
relevant to the lives of college students. In one highly cited study researchers found that 1 in
5 students took more than 30 minutes to fall asleep at night, 1 in 10 occasionally took sleep
medications, and more than half reported being “mostly tired” in the mornings (Buboltz, et
al, 2001).

Psychoactive Drugs
On April 16, 1943, Albert Hoffman—a Swiss chemist working in a pharmaceutical company—
accidentally ingested a newly synthesized drug. The drug—lysergic acid diethylimide (LSD)—
turned out to be a powerful hallucinogen. Hoffman went home and later reported the effects

142

States of Consciousness

of the drug, describing them as seeing the world through a “warped mirror” and experiencing
visions of “extraordinary shapes with intense, kaleidoscopic play of colors.” Hoffman had
discovered what members of many traditional cultures around the world already knew: there
are substances that, when ingested, can have a powerful effect on perception and on
consciousness.
Drugs operate on human physiology in a variety of ways and researchers and medical doctors
tend to classify drugs according to their effects. Here we will briefly cover 3 categories of drugs:
hallucinogens, depressants, and stimulants.

Hallucinogens
It is possible that hallucinogens are the substance that have, historically, been used the most
widely. Traditional societies have used plant-based hallucinogens such as peyote, ebene, and
psilocybin mushrooms in a wide range of religious ceremonies. Hallucinogens are substances
that alter a person’s perceptions, often by creating visions or hallucinations that are not real.
There are a wide range of hallucinogens and many are used as recreational substances in
industrialized societies. Common examples include marijuana, LSD, and MDMA, also known
as “ecstasy.” Marijuana is the dried flowers of the hemp plant and is often smoked to produce
euphoria. The active ingredient in marijuana is called THC and can produce distortions in the
perception of time, can create a sense of rambling, unrelated thoughts, and is sometimes
associated with increased hunger or excessive laughter. The use and possession of marijuana
is illegal in most places but this appears to be a trend that is changing. Uruguay, Bangladesh,
several of the United States, and a few other countries have recently legalized marijuana. This
may be due, in part, to changing public attitudes or to the fact that marijuana is increasingly
used for medical purposes such as the management of nausea or treating glaucoma.

Depressants
Depressants are substances that, as their name suggests, slow down the body’s physiology
and mental processes. Alcohol is the most widely used depressant. Alcohol’s effects include
the reduction of inhibition, meaning that intoxicated people are more likely to act in ways they
would otherwise be reluctant to. Alcohol’s psychological effects are the result of it increasing
the neurotransmitter GABA. There are also physical effects, such as loss of balance and
coordination, and these stem from the way that alcohol interferes with the coordination of
the visual and motor systems of the brain. Despite the fact that alcohol is so widely accepted
in many cultures it is also associated with a variety of dangers. First, alcohol is toxic, meaning
that it acts like a poison because it is possible to drink more alcohol than the body can

143

States of Consciousness

effectively remove from the bloodstream. When a person’s blood alcohol content (BAC)
reaches .3 to .4% there is a serious risk of death. Second, the lack of judgment and physical
control associated with alcohol is associated with more risk taking behavior or dangerous
behavior such as drunk driving. Finally, alcohol is addictive and heavy drinkers often
experience significant interference with their ability to work effectively or in their close
relationships.
Other common depressants include opiates (also called “narcotics”), which are substances
synthesized from the poppy flower. Opiates stimulate endorphins production in the brain
and because of this they are often used as pain killers by medical professionals. Unfortunately,
because opiates such as Oxycontin so reliably produce euphoria they are increasingly used
—illegally—as recreational substances. Opiates are highly addictive.

Stimulants
Stimulants are substances that “speed up”
the body’s physiological and mental
processes. Two commonly used stimulants
are caffeine—the drug found in coffee and
tea—and nicotine, the active drug in
cigarettes and other tobacco products.
These substances are both legal and
relatively inexpensive, leading to their
widespread

use.

Many

people

are

attracted to stimulants because they feel
more alert when under the influence of
these drugs. As with any drug there are
health risks associated with consumption.
For example, over intoxication of these
types of stimulants can result in anxiety,
headaches,

and

insomnia.

Similarly,

smoking cigarettes—the most common
means of ingesting nicotine—is associated

Caffeine is the most widely consumed stimulant in the world. Be
honest, how many cups did you have today? [Image:
Personeelsnet]

with higher risks of cancer. For instance, among heavy smokers 90% of lung cancer is directly
attributable to smoking (Stewart & Kleihues, 2003).
There are other stimulants such as cocaine and methamphetamine (also known as “crystal
meth” or “ice”) that are illegal substances that are commonly used. These substances act by

144

States of Consciousness

blocking “re-uptake” of dopamine in the brain. This means that the brain does not naturally
clear out the dopamine and that it builds up in the synapse, creating euphoria and alertness.
As the effects wear off it stimulates strong cravings for more of the drug. Because of this these
powerful stimulants are highly addictive.

Conclusion
When you think about your daily life it is easy to get lulled into the belief that there is one
“setting” for your conscious thought. That is, you likely believe that you hold the same opinions,
values, and memories across the day and throughout the week. But “you” are like a dimmer
switch on a light that can be turned from full darkness increasingly on up to full brightness.
This switch is consciousness. At your brightest setting you are fully alert and aware; at dimmer
settings you are day dreaming; and sleep or being knocked unconscious represent dimmer
settings still. The degree to which you are in high, medium, or low states of conscious
awareness affect how susceptible you are to persuasion, how clear your judgment is, and how
much detail you can recall. Understanding levels of awareness, then, is at the heart of
understanding how we learn, decide, remember and many other vital psychological processes.

145

States of Consciousness

Outside Resources
App: Visual illusions for the iPad.
http://www.exploratorium.edu/explore/apps/color-uncovered
Book: A wonderful book about how little we know about ourselves: Wilson, T. D. (2004).
Strangers to ourselves. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674013827
Book: Another wonderful book about free will—or its absence?: Wegner, D. M. (2002). The
illusion of conscious will. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/illusion-conscious-will
Information on alcoholism, alcohol abuse, and treatment:
http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-health/support-treatment
The American Psychological Association has information on getting a good night’s sleep
as well as on sleep disorders
http://www.apa.org/helpcenter/sleep-disorders.aspx
The LSD simulator: This simulator uses optical illusions to simulate the halluginogenic
experience of LSD. Simply follow the instructions in this two minute video. After looking
away you may see the world around you in a warped or pulsating way similar to the effects
of LSD. The effect is temporary and will disappear in about a minute.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y2zBNXW7XtI
The National Sleep Foundation is a non-profit with videos on insomnia, sleep training in
children, and other topics
https://sleepfoundation.org/video-library
Video: An artist who periodically took LSD and drew self-portraits:
http://www.openculture.com/2013/10/artist-draws-nine-portraits-on-lsd-during-1950s-resea­
rch-experiment.html
Video: An interesting video on attention:
http://www.dansimons.com/videos.html
Video: Clip on out-of-body experiences induced using virtual reality.

States of Consciousness

146

https://youtu.be/4PQAc_Z2OfQ
Video: Clip on the rubber hand illusion, from the BBC science series "Horizon."
https://youtu.be/Qsmkgi7FgEo
Video: Clip showing a patient with blindsight, from the documentary "Phantoms in the
Brain."
https://youtu.be/Cy8FSffrNDI
Video: Demonstration of motion-induced blindness - Look steadily at the blue moving
pattern. One or more of the yellow spots may disappear:
https://youtu.be/4Aye9FWgxUg
Video: Howie Mandel from American Idol being hypnotized into shaking hands with people:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f9dFLXV9hs0
Video: Imaging the Brain, Reading the Mind - A talk by Marsel Mesulam.
http://video.at.northwestern.edu/lores/SO_marsel.m4v
Video: Lucas Handwerker – a stage hypnotist discusses the therapeutic aspects of hypnosis:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zepp_H6K5wY
Video: Ted Talk - Simon Lewis: Don't take consciousness for granted
http://www.ted.com/talks/simon_lewis_don_t_take_consciousness_for_granted.html
Video: TED Talk on Dream Research:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y9ArPNAOHCo
Video: The mind-body problem - An interview with Ned Block:
https://vimeo.com/58254376
Want a quick demonstration of priming? (Want a quick demonstration of how powerful
these effects can be? Check out:
https://youtu.be/QTTbDy3AZ9A
Web: A good overview of priming:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Priming_(psychology)
Web: Definitions of Consciousness:

147

States of Consciousness

http://www.consciousentities.com/definitions.htm
Web: Learn more about motion-induced blindness on Michael Bach's website:
http://www.michaelbach.de/ot/mot-mib/index.html

Discussion Questions
1. If someone were in a coma after an accident, and you wanted to better understand how
“conscious” or aware s/he were, how might you go about it?
2. What are some of the factors in daily life that interfere with people’s ability to get adequate
sleep? What interferes with your sleep?
3. How frequently do you remember your dreams? Do you have recurring images or themes
in your dreams? Why do you think that is?
4. Consider times when you fantasize or let your mind wander? Describe these times: are
you more likely to be alone or with others? Are there certain activities you engage in that
seem particularly prone to daydreaming?
5. A number of traditional societies use consciousness altering substances in ceremonies.
Why do you think they do this?
6. Do you think attitudes toward drug use are changing over time? If so, how? Why do you
think these changes occur?
7. Students in high school and college are increasingly using stimulants such as Adderol as
study aids and “performance enhancers.” What is your opinion of this trend?

148

States of Consciousness

Vocabulary
Blood Alcohol Content (BAC)
Blood Alcohol Content (BAC): a measure of the percentage of alcohol found in a person’s
blood. This measure is typically the standard used to determine the extent to which a person
is intoxicated, as in the case of being too impaired to drive a vehicle.
Circadian Rhythm
Circadian Rhythm: The physiological sleep-wake cycle. It is influenced by exposure to sunlight
as well as daily schedule and activity. Biologically, it includes changes in body temperature,
blood pressure and blood sugar.
Consciousness
Consciousness: the awareness or deliberate perception of a stimulus
Cues
Cues: a stimulus that has a particular significance to the perceiver (e.g., a sight or a sound
that has special relevance to the person who saw or heard it)
Depressants
Depressants: a class of drugs that slow down the body’s physiological and mental processes.
Dissociation
Dissociation: the heightened focus on one stimulus or thought such that many other things
around you are ignored; a disconnect between one’s awareness of their environment and the
one object the person is focusing on
Euphoria
Euphoria: an intense feeling of pleasure, excitement or happiness.
Flexible Correction Model
Flexible Correction Model: the ability for people to correct or change their beliefs and
evaluations if they believe these judgments have been biased (e.g., if someone realizes they
only thought their day was great because it was sunny, they may revise their evaluation of
the day to account for this “biasing” influence of the weather)
Hallucinogens
Hallucinogens: substances that, when ingested, alter a person’s perceptions, often by creating

States of Consciousness

149

hallucinations that are not real or distorting their perceptions of time.
Hypnosis
Hypnosis: the state of consciousness whereby a person is highly responsive to the suggestions
of another; this state usually involves a dissociation with one’s environment and an intense
focus on a single stimulus, which is usually accompanied by a sense of relaxation
Hypnotherapy
Hypnotherapy: The use of hypnotic techniques such as relaxation and suggestion to help
engineer desirable change such as lower pain or quitting smoking.
Implicit Associations Test
Implicit Associations Test (IAT): A computer reaction time test that measures a person’s
automatic associations with concepts. For instance, the IAT could be used to measure how
quickly a person makes positive or negative evaluations of members of various ethnic groups.
Jet Lag
Jet Lag: The state of being fatigued and/or having difficulty adjusting to a new time zone after
traveling a long distance (across multiple time zones).
Melatonin
Melatonin: A hormone associated with increased drowsiness and sleep.
Mindfulness
Mindfulness: a state of heightened focus on the thoughts passing through one’s head, as well
as a more controlled evaluation of those thoughts (e.g., do you reject or support the thoughts
you’re having?)
Priming
Priming: the activation of certain thoughts or feelings that make them easier to think of and
act upon
Stimulants
Stimulants: a class of drugs that speed up the body’s physiological and mental processes.
Trance States
Trance: a state of consciousness characterized by the experience of “out-of-body possession,”
or an acute dissociation between one’s self and the current, physical environment surrounding
them.

150

States of Consciousness

References
Abbot, N. C., Stead, L. F., White, A. R., Barnes, J., & Ernst, E. (1998). Hypnotherapy for smoking
cessation. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2.
Aguado, J. F. (2015). Psychological manipulation, hypnosis, and suggestion. International
Journal of Cultic Studies, 648-59.
Bargh, J. A., Chen, M., & Burrows, L. (1996). Automaticity of social behavior: Direct effects of
trait construct and stereotype activation on action. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 71(2), 230.
Buboltz, W., Brown, F. & Soper, B. (2001). Sleep habits and patterns of college students: A
preliminary study. Journal of American College Health, 50, 131-135.
Chaiken, S. (1980). Heuristic versus systematic information processing and the use of source
versus message cues in persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(5), 752.
Ewin, D. M. (1978). Clinical use of hypnosis for attenuation of burn depth. Hypnosis at its
Bicentennial-Selected Papers from the Seventh International Congress of Hypnosis and
Psychosomatic Medicine. New York: Plenum Press.
Freud, S. (2001). The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud: The
Interpretation of Dreams (First Part) (Vol. 4). Random House.
Gilbert, D. T., & Hixon, J. G. (1991). The trouble of thinking: activation and application of
stereotypic beliefs. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60(4), 509.
Greenwald, A. G., & Farnham, S. D. (2000). Using the Implicit Association Test to measure selfesteem and self-concept. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 1022-1038.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. K. L. (1998). Measuring individual differences
in implicit cognition: The Implicit Association Test. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 1464-1480.
Kihlstrom, J.F. (2003). Hypnosis and memory. In J.F. Byrne (Ed.), Learning and memory, 2nd ed.
(pp. 240-242). Farmington Hills, Mi.: Macmillan Reference
Kirsch, I., & Lynn, S. J. (1995). Altered state of hypnosis: Changes in the theoretical landscape.
American Psychologist, 50(10), 846.
Lynn S. J., and Kirsch I. (2006). Essentials of clinical hypnosis. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Lynn, S. J., Rhue, J. W., & Weekes, J. R. (1990). Hypnotic involuntariness: A social-cognitive
analysis. Psychological Review, 97, 169–184.
Nosek, B. A., Banaji, M. R., & Greenwald, A. G. (2002). Harvesting implicit group attitudes and

States of Consciousness

151

beliefs from a demonstration website. Group Dynamics, 6(1), 101-115.
Patterson, D. R., Everett, J. J., Burns, G. L., & Marvin, J. A. (1992). Hypnosis for the treatment of
burn pain. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 713-17
Pekala, R. J., Kumar, V. K., Maurer, R., Elliott-Carter, N., Moon, E., & Mullen, K. (2010).
Suggestibility, expectancy, trance state effects, and hypnotic depth: I. Implications for
understanding hypnotism. American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis, 52(4), 275-290.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The Elaboration Likelihood Model of persuasion. In L.
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (Vol. 19, pp. 123-205). New York:
Academic Press.
Stewart, B. & Kleinhues, P. (2003). World cancer report. World Health Organization.
Syrjala, K. L., Cummings, C., & Donaldson, G. W. (1992). Hypnosis or cognitive behavioral
training for the reduction of pain and nausea during cancer treatment: A controlled clinical
trial. Pain, 48, 137-46.
Wegener, D. T., & Petty, R. E. (1997). The flexible correction model: The role of naive theories
of bias in bias correction. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 29, 142-208.
Wickramasekera II, I. E., & Szlyk, J. (2003). Could empathy be a predictor of hypnotic ability?
International Journal of Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis, 51(4), 390–399.
Williams, L. E., & Bargh, J. A. (2008). Experiencing physical warmth promotes interpersonal
warmth. Science, 322(5901), 606-607.
Öhman, A., & Soares, J. J. (1994). "Unconscious anxiety": phobic responses to masked stimuli.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103(2), 231.

Chapter 7: Memory

8
Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)
Kathleen B. McDermott & Henry L. Roediger

“Memory” is a single term that reflects a number of different abilities: holding information
briefly while working with it (working memory), remembering episodes of one’s life (episodic
memory), and our general knowledge of facts of the world (semantic memory), among other
types. Remembering episodes involves three processes: encoding information (learning it, by
perceiving it and relating it to past knowledge), storing it (maintaining it over time), and then
retrieving it (accessing the information when needed). Failures can occur at any stage, leading
to forgetting or to having false memories. The key to improving one’s memory is to improve
processes of encoding and to use techniques that guarantee effective retrieval. Good encoding
techniques include relating new information to what one already knows, forming mental
images, and creating associations among information that needs to be remembered. The key
to good retrieval is developing effective cues that will lead the rememberer back to the encoded
information. Classic mnemonic systems, known since the time of the ancient Greeks and still
used by some today, can greatly improve one’s memory abilities.

Learning Objectives

•

Define and note differences between the following forms of memory: working memory,
episodic memory, semantic memory, collective memory.

•
•

Describe the three stages in the process of learning and remembering.
Describe strategies that can be used to enhance the original learning or encoding of
information.

•
•

Describe strategies that can improve the process of retrieval.
Describe why the classic mnemonic device, the method of loci, works so well.

154

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

Introduction
In 2013, Simon Reinhard sat in front of 60 people in a room at Washington University, where
he memorized an increasingly long series of digits. On the first round, a computer generated
10 random digits—6 1 9 4 8 5 6 3 7 1—on a screen for 10 seconds. After the series disappeared,
Simon typed them into his computer. His recollection was perfect. In the next phase, 20 digits
appeared on the screen for 20 seconds. Again, Simon got them all correct. No one in the
audience (mostly professors, graduate students, and undergraduate students) could recall
the 20 digits perfectly. Then came 30 digits, studied for 30 seconds; once again, Simon didn’t
misplace even a single digit. For a final trial, 50 digits appeared on the screen for 50 seconds,
and again, Simon got them all right. In fact, Simon would have been happy to keep going. His
record in this task—called “forward digit span”—is 240 digits!
When

most

of

us

performance

like

that

witness
of

a

Simon

Reinhard, we think one of two things:
First, maybe he’s cheating somehow.
(No, he is not.) Second, Simon must
have abilities more advanced than the
rest of humankind. After all, psychologists
established many years ago that the
normal memory span for adults is
about 7 digits, with some of us able to
recall a few more and others a few less
In some ways memory is like file drawers where you store mental

(Miller, 1956). That is why the first

information. Memory is also a series of processes: how does that

phone numbers were limited to 7

information get filed to begin with and how does it get retrieved when

digits—psychologists determined that

needed? [Photo: Jason Carpenter]

many errors occurred (costing the
phone company money) when the

number was increased to even 8 digits. But in normal testing, no one gets 50 digits correct in
a row, much less 240. So, does Simon Reinhard simply have a photographic memory? He does
not. Instead, Simon has taught himself simple strategies for remembering that have greatly
increased his capacity for remembering virtually any type of material—digits, words, faces
and names, poetry, historical dates, and so on. Twelve years earlier, before he started training
his memory abilities, he had a digit span of 7, just like most of us. Simon has been training
his abilities for about 10 years as of this writing, and has risen to be in the top two of “memory
athletes.” In 2012, he came in second place in the World Memory Championships (composed
of 11 tasks), held in London. He currently ranks second in the world, behind another German

155

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

competitor, Johannes Mallow. In this module, we reveal what psychologists and others have
learned about memory, and we also explain the general principles by which you can improve
your own memory for factual material.

Varieties of Memory
For most of us, remembering digits
relies on short-term memory, or working
memory—the ability to hold information
in our minds for a brief time and work
with it (e.g., multiplying 24 x 17 without
using paper would rely on working
memory). Another type of memory is
episodic memory—the ability to remember
the episodes of our lives. If you were
given the task of recalling everything you
did 2 days ago, that would be a test of
episodic

memory;

you

would

be

To be a good chess player you have to learn to increase working

required to mentally travel through the

memory so you can plan ahead for several offensive moves while

day in your mind and note the main

simultaneously anticipating - through use of memory - how the other

events.

player could counter each of your planned moves. [Photo: D-Stanley]

storehouse of more-or-less permanent

Semantic

memory

is

our

knowledge, such as the meanings of
words in a language (e.g., the meaning of “parasol”) and the huge collection of facts about the
world (e.g., there are 196 countries in the world, and 206 bones in your body). Collective memory
refers to the kind of memory that people in a group share (whether family, community,
schoolmates, or citizens of a state or a country). For example, residents of small towns often
strongly identify with those towns, remembering the local customs and historical events in a
unique way. That is, the community’s collective memory passes stories and recollections
between neighbors and to future generations, forming a memory system unto itself.
Psychologists continue to debate the classification of types of memory, as well as which types
rely on others (Tulving, 2007), but for this module we will focus on episodic memory. Episodic
memory is usually what people think of when they hear the word “memory.” For example,
when people say that an older relative is “losing her memory” due to Alzheimer’s disease, the
type of memory-loss they are referring to is the inability to recall events, or episodic memory.
(Semantic memory is actually preserved in early-stage Alzheimer’s disease.) Although
remembering specific events that have happened over the course of one’s entire life (e.g.,

156

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

your experiences in sixth grade) can be referred to as autobiographical memory, we will focus
primarily on the episodic memories of more recent events.

Three Stages of the Learning/Memory Process
Psychologists distinguish between three necessary stages in the learning and memory
process: encoding, storage, and retrieval (Melton, 1963). Encoding is defined as the initial
learning of information; storage refers to maintaining information over time; retrieval is the
ability to access information when you need it. If you meet someone for the first time at a
party, you need to encode her name (Lyn Goff) while you associate her name with her face.
Then you need to maintain the information over time. If you see her a week later, you need
to recognize her face and have it serve as a cue to retrieve her name. Any successful act of
remembering requires that all three stages be intact. However, two types of errors can also
occur. Forgetting is one type: you see the person you met at the party and you cannot recall
her name. The other error is misremembering (false recall or false recognition): you see
someone who looks like Lyn Goff and call the person by that name (false recognition of the
face). Or, you might see the real Lyn Goff, recognize her face, but then call her by the name
of another woman you met at the party (misrecall of her name).
Whenever forgetting or misremembering occurs, we can ask, at which stage in the learning/
memory process was there a failure?—though it is often difficult to answer this question with
precision. One reason for this inaccuracy is that the three stages are not as discrete as our
description implies. Rather, all three stages depend on one another. How we encode
information determines how it will be stored and what cues will be effective when we try to
retrieve it. And too, the act of retrieval itself also changes the way information is subsequently
remembered, usually aiding later recall of the retrieved information. The central point for now
is that the three stages—encoding, storage, and retrieval—affect one another, and are
inextricably bound together.

Encoding
Encoding refers to the initial experience of perceiving and learning information. Psychologists
often study recall by having participants study a list of pictures or words. Encoding in these
situations is fairly straightforward. However, “real life” encoding is much more challenging.
When you walk across campus, for example, you encounter countless sights and sounds—
friends passing by, people playing Frisbee, music in the air. The physical and mental
environments are much too rich for you to encode all the happenings around you or the
internal thoughts you have in response to them. So, an important first principle of encoding

157

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

is that it is selective: we attend to some events in our environment and we ignore others. A
second point about encoding is that it is prolific; we are always encoding the events of our
lives—attending to the world, trying to understand it. Normally this presents no problem, as
our days are filled with routine occurrences, so we don’t need to pay attention to everything.
But if something does happen that seems strange—during your daily walk across campus,
you see a giraffe—then we pay close attention and try to understand why we are seeing what
we are seeing.
Right after your typical walk across campus
(one without the appearance of a giraffe), you
would be able to remember the events
reasonably well if you were asked. You could
say whom you bumped into, what song was
playing from a radio, and so on. However,
suppose someone asked you to recall the same
walk a month later. You wouldn’t stand a
chance. You would likely be able to recount the
basics of a typical walk across campus, but not
the precise details of that particular walk. Yet,
if you had seen a giraffe during that walk, the
event would have been fixed in your mind for
a long time, probably for the rest of your life.
You would tell your friends about it, and, on
later occasions when you saw a giraffe, you
might be reminded of the day you saw one on
campus. Psychologists have long pinpointed
distinctiveness—having an event stand out as
quite different from a background of similar
events—as a key to remembering events (Hunt,
2003).

A giraffe in the context of a zoo or its natural habitat may
register as nothing more than ordinary, but put it in another
setting - in the middle of a campus or a busy city - and its
level of distinctiveness increases dramatically. Distinctiveness

In addition, when vivid memories are tinged

is a key attribute to remembering events. [Image: David

with strong emotional content, they often

Blackwell]

seem to leave a permanent mark on us. Public
tragedies, such as terrorist attacks, often create vivid memories in those who witnessed them.
But even those of us not directly involved in such events may have vivid memories of them,
including memories of first hearing about them. For example, many people are able to recall
their exact physical location when they first learned about the assassination or accidental
death of a national figure. The term flashbulb memory was originally coined by Brown and

158

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

Kulik (1977) to describe this sort of vivid memory of finding out an important piece of news.
The name refers to how some memories seem to be captured in the mind like a flash
photograph; because of the distinctiveness and emotionality of the news, they seem to
become permanently etched in the mind with exceptional clarity compared to other
memories.
Take a moment and think back on your own life. Is there a particular memory that seems
sharper than others? A memory where you can recall unusual details, like the colors of
mundane things around you, or the exact positions of surrounding objects? Although people
have great confidence in flashbulb memories like these, the truth is, our objective accuracy
with them is far from perfect (Talarico & Rubin, 2003). That is, even though people may have
great confidence in what they recall, their memories are not as accurate (e.g., what the actual
colors were; where objects were truly placed) as they tend to imagine. Nonetheless, all other
things being equal, distinctive and emotional events are well-remembered.
Details do not leap perfectly from the world into a person’s mind. We might say that we went
to a party and remember it, but what we remember is (at best) what we encoded. As noted
above, the process of encoding is selective, and in complex situations, relatively few of many
possible details are noticed and encoded. The process of encoding always involves recoding
—that is, taking the information from the form it is delivered to us and then converting it in
a way that we can make sense of it. For example, you might try to remember the colors of a
rainbow by using the acronym ROY G BIV (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, violet). The
process of recoding the colors into a name can help us to remember. However, recoding can
also introduce errors—when we accidentally add
information during encoding, then remember that
new material as if it had been part of the actual
experience (as discussed below).
Psychologists

have

studied

many

recoding

strategies that can be used during study to improve
retention. First, research advises that, as we study,
we should think of the meaning of the events (Craik
& Lockhart, 1972), and we should try to relate new
events to information we already know. This helps
us form associations that we can use to retrieve
information later. Second, imagining events also
Although it requires more effort, using images and

makes them more memorable; creating vivid

associations can improve the process of recoding.

images

[Image: Leo Reynolds]

information) can greatly improve later recall (Bower

out

of

information

(even

verbal

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

159

& Reitman, 1972). Creating imagery is part of the technique Simon Reinhard uses to remember
huge numbers of digits, but we can all use images to encode information more effectively.
The basic concept behind good encoding strategies is to form distinctive memories (ones that
stand out), and to form links or associations among memories to help later retrieval (Hunt &
McDaniel, 1993). Using study strategies such as the ones described here is challenging, but
the effort is well worth the benefits of enhanced learning and retention.
We emphasized earlier that encoding is selective: people cannot encode all information they
are exposed to. However, recoding can add information that was not even seen or heard
during the initial encoding phase. Several of the recoding processes, like forming associations
between memories, can happen without our awareness. This is one reason people can
sometimes remember events that did not actually happen—because during the process of
recoding, details got added. One common way of inducing false memories in the laboratory
employs a word-list technique (Deese, 1959; Roediger & McDermott, 1995). Participants hear
lists of 15 words, like door, glass, pane, shade, ledge, sill, house, open, curtain, frame, view, breeze,
sash, screen, and shutter. Later, participants are given a test in which they are shown a list of
words and asked to pick out the ones they’d heard earlier. This second list contains some
words from the first list (e.g., door, pane, frame) and some words not from the list (e.g., arm,
phone, bottle). In this example, one of the words on the test is window, which—importantly—
does not appear in the first list, but which is related to other words in that list. When subjects
were tested, they were reasonably accurate with the studied words (door, etc.), recognizing
them 72% of the time. However, when window was on the test, they falsely recognized it as
having been on the list 84% of the time (Stadler, Roediger, & McDermott, 1999). The same
thing happened with many other lists the authors used. This phenomenon is referred to as
the DRM (for Deese-Roediger-McDermott) effect. One explanation for such results is that,
while students listened to items in the list, the words triggered the students to think about
window, even though window was never presented. In this way, people seem to encode events
that are not actually part of their experience.
Because humans are creative, we are always going beyond the information we are given: we
automatically make associations and infer from them what is happening. But, as with the
word association mix-up above, sometimes we make false memories from our inferences—
remembering the inferences themselves as if they were actual experiences. To illustrate this,
Brewer (1977) gave people sentences to remember that were designed to elicit pragmatic
inferences. Inferences, in general, refer to instances when something is not explicitly stated,
but we are still able to guess the undisclosed intention. For example, if your friend told you
that she didn’t want to go out to eat, you may infer that she doesn’t have the money to go
out, or that she’s too tired. With pragmatic inferences, there is usually one particular inference
you’re likely to make. Consider the statement Brewer (1977) gave her participants: “The karate

160

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

champion hit the cinder block.” After hearing or seeing this sentence, participants who were
given a memory test tended to remember the statement as having been, “The karate champion
broke the cinder block.” This remembered statement is not necessarily a logical inference (i.
e., it is perfectly reasonable that a karate champion could hit a cinder block without breaking
it). Nevertheless, the pragmatic conclusion from hearing such a sentence is that the block was
likely broken. The participants remembered this inference they made while hearing the
sentence in place of the actual words that were in the sentence (see also McDermott & Chan,
2006).
Encoding—the initial registration of information—is essential in the learning and memory
process. Unless an event is encoded in some fashion, it will not be successfully remembered
later. However, just because an event is encoded (even if it is encoded well), there’s no
guarantee that it will be remembered later.

Storage
Every experience we have changes our
brains. That may seem like a bold, even
strange, claim at first, but it’s true. We encode
each of our experiences within the structures
of

the

nervous

system,

making

new

impressions in the process—and each of
those impressions involves changes in the
brain. Psychologists (and neurobiologists)
say that experiences leave memory traces,
or engrams (the two terms are synonyms).
Memories have to be stored somewhere in
the brain, so in order to do so, the brain

Memory traces, or engrams, are NOT perfectly preserved

biochemically alters itself and its neural

recordings of past experiences. The traces are combined with

tissue. Just like you might write yourself a

current knowledge to reconstruct what we think happened in

note to remind you of something, the brain

the past. [Photo: INDEED]

“writes” a memory trace, changing its own
physical composition to do so. The basic idea is that events (occurrences in our environment)
create engrams through a process of consolidation: the neural changes that occur after
learning to create the memory trace of an experience. Although neurobiologists are concerned
with exactly what neural processes change when memories are created, for psychologists,
the term memory trace simply refers to the physical change in the nervous system (whatever
that may be, exactly) that represents our experience.

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

161

Although the concept of engram or memory trace is extremely useful, we shouldn’t take the
term too literally. It is important to understand that memory traces are not perfect little packets
of information that lie dormant in the brain, waiting to be called forward to give an accurate
report of past experience. Memory traces are not like video or audio recordings, capturing
experience with great accuracy; as discussed earlier, we often have errors in our memory,
which would not exist if memory traces were perfect packets of information. Thus, it is wrong
to think that remembering involves simply “reading out” a faithful record of past experience.
Rather, when we remember past events, we reconstruct them with the aid of our memory
traces—but also with our current belief of what happened. For example, if you were trying to
recall for the police who started a fight at a bar, you may not have a memory trace of who
pushed whom first. However, let’s say you remember that one of the guys held the door open
for you. When thinking back to the start of the fight, this knowledge (of how one guy was
friendly to you) may unconsciously influence your memory of what happened in favor of the
nice guy. Thus, memory is a construction of what you actually recall and what you believe
happened. In a phrase, remembering is reconstructive (we reconstruct our past with the aid
of memory traces) not reproductive (a perfect reproduction or recreation of the past).
Psychologists refer to the time between learning and testing as the retention interval.
Memories can consolidate during that time, aiding retention. However, experiences can also
occur that undermine the memory. For example, think of what you had for lunch yesterday
—a pretty easy task. However, if you had to recall what you had for lunch 17 days ago, you
may well fail (assuming you don’t eat the same thing every day). The 16 lunches you’ve had
since that one have created retroactive interference. Retroactive interference refers to new
activities (i.e., the subsequent lunches) during the retention interval (i.e., the time between
the lunch 17 days ago and now) that interfere with retrieving the specific, older memory (i.e.,
the lunch details from 17 days ago). But just as newer things can interfere with remembering
older things, so can the opposite happen. Proactive interference is when past memories
interfere with the encoding of new ones. For example, if you have ever studied a second
language, often times the grammar and vocabulary of your native language will pop into your
head, impairing your fluency in the foreign language.

162

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

Retroactive interference is one of the main causes of forgetting (McGeoch, 1932). In the module
Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases (http://noba.to/uy49tm37), Elizabeth Loftus
describes her fascinating work on eyewitness memory, in which she shows how memory for
an event can be changed via misinformation supplied during the retention interval. For
example, if you witnessed a car crash but subsequently heard people describing it from their
own perspective, this new information may interfere with or disrupt your own personal
recollection of the crash. In fact, you may even come to remember the event happening exactly
as the others described it! This misinformation effect in eyewitness memory represents a
type of retroactive interference that can occur during the retention interval (see Loftus [2005]
for a review). Of course, if correct information is given during the retention interval, the
witness’s memory will usually be improved.
Although interference may arise between the occurrence of an event and the attempt to recall
it, the effect itself is always expressed when we retrieve memories, the topic to which we turn next.

Retrieval
Endel Tulving argued that “the key process in memory is retrieval” (1991, p. 91). Why should
retrieval be given more prominence than encoding or storage? For one thing, if information
were encoded and stored but could not be retrieved, it would be useless. As discussed
previously in this module, we encode and store thousands of events—conversations, sights
and sounds—every day, creating memory traces. However, we later access only a tiny portion
of what we’ve taken in. Most of our memories will never be used—in the sense of being brought
back to mind, consciously. This fact seems so obvious that we rarely reflect on it. All those
events that happened to you in the fourth grade that seemed so important then? Now, many
years later, you would struggle to remember even a few. You may wonder if the traces of
those memories still exist in some latent form. Unfortunately, with currently available
methods, it is impossible to know.
Psychologists distinguish information that is available in memory from that which is accessible
(Tulving & Pearlstone, 1966). Available information is the information that is stored in memory
—but precisely how much and what types are stored cannot be known. That is, all we can
know is what information we can retrieve—accessible information. The assumption is that
accessible information represents only a tiny slice of the information available in our brains.
Most of us have had the experience of trying to remember some fact or event, giving up, and
then—all of a sudden!—it comes to us at a later time, even after we’ve stopped trying to
remember it. Similarly, we all know the experience of failing to recall a fact, but then, if we are
given several choices (as in a multiple-choice test), we are easily able to recognize it.

163

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

What factors determine what information
can be retrieved from memory? One
critical factor is the type of hints, or
cues, in the environment. You may
hear a song on the radio that suddenly
evokes memories of an earlier time in
your life, even if you were not trying to
remember it when the song came on.
Nevertheless, the song is closely
associated with that time, so it brings
We can't know the entirety of what is in our memory, but only that

the experience to mind.

portion we can actually retrieve. Something that cannot be retrieved
now and which is seemingly gone from memory may, with different

The general principle that underlies

cues applied, reemerge. [Photo: sean dreilinger]

the effectiveness of retrieval cues is
the encoding specificity principle

(Tulving & Thomson, 1973): when people encode information, they do so in specific ways. For
example, take the song on the radio: perhaps you heard it while you were at a terrific party,
having a great, philosophical conversation with a friend. Thus, the song became part of that
whole complex experience. Years later, even though you haven’t thought about that party in
ages, when you hear the song on the radio, the whole experience rushes back to you. In
general, the encoding specificity principle states that, to the extent a retrieval cue (the song)
matches or overlaps the memory trace of an experience (the party, the conversation), it will
be effective in evoking the memory. A classic experiment on the encoding specificity principle
had participants memorize a set of words in a unique setting. Later, the participants were
tested on the word sets, either in the same location they learned the words or a different one.
As a result of encoding specificity, the students who took the test in the same place they
learned the words were actually able to recall more words (Godden & Baddeley, 1975) than
the students who took the test in a new setting. In this instance, the physical context itself
provided cues for retrieval. This is why it’s good to study for midterms and finals in the same
room you’ll be taking them in.
One caution with this principle, though, is that, for the cue to work, it can’t match too many
other experiences (Nairne, 2002; Watkins, 1975). Consider a lab experiment. Suppose you
study 100 items; 99 are words, and one is a picture—of a penguin, item 50 in the list. Afterwards,
the cue “recall the picture” would evoke “penguin” perfectly. No one would miss it. However,
if the word “penguin” were placed in the same spot among the other 99 words, its memorability
would be exceptionally worse. This outcome shows the power of distinctiveness that we
discussed in the section on encoding: one picture is perfectly recalled from among 99 words
because it stands out. Now consider what would happen if the experiment were repeated,

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

164

but there were 25 pictures distributed within the 100-item list. Although the picture of the
penguin would still be there, the probability that the cue “recall the picture” (at item 50) would
be useful for the penguin would drop correspondingly. Watkins (1975) referred to this outcome
as demonstrating the cue overload principle. That is, to be effective, a retrieval cue cannot
be overloaded with too many memories. For the cue “recall the picture” to be effective, it
should only match one item in the target set (as in the one-picture, 99-word case).
To sum up how memory cues function: for a retrieval cue to be effective, a match must exist
between the cue and the desired target memory; furthermore, to produce the best retrieval,
the cue-target relationship should be distinctive. Next, we will see how the encoding specificity
principle can work in practice.
Psychologists measure memory performance by using production tests (involving recall) or
recognition tests (involving the selection of correct from incorrect information, e.g., a multiplechoice test). For example, with our list of 100 words, one group of people might be asked to
recall the list in any order (a free recall test), while a different group might be asked to circle
the 100 studied words out of a mix with another 100, unstudied words (a recognition test). In
this situation, the recognition test would likely produce better performance from participants
than the recall test.
We usually think of recognition tests as being quite easy, because the cue for retrieval is a
copy of the actual event that was presented for study. After all, what could be a better cue
than the exact target (memory) the person is trying to access? In most cases, this line of
reasoning is true; nevertheless, recognition tests do not provide perfect indexes of what is
stored in memory. That is, you can fail to recognize a target staring you right in the face, yet
be able to recall it later with a different set of cues (Watkins & Tulving, 1975). For example,
suppose you had the task of recognizing the surnames of famous authors. At first, you might
think that being given the actual last name would always be the best cue. However, research
has shown this not necessarily to be true (Muter, 1984). When given names such as Tolstoy,
Shaw, Shakespeare, and Lee, subjects might well say that Tolstoy and Shakespeare are famous
authors, whereas Shaw and Lee are not. But, when given a cued recall test using first names,
people often recall items (produce them) that they had failed to recognize before. For example,
in this instance, a cue like George Bernard ________ often leads to a recall of “Shaw,” even though
people initially failed to recognize Shaw as a famous author’s name. Yet, when given the cue
“William,” people may not come up with Shakespeare, because William is a common name
that matches many people (the cue overload principle at work). This strange fact—that recall
can sometimes lead to better performance than recognition—can be explained by the
encoding specificity principle. As a cue, George Bernard _________ matches the way the famous
writer is stored in memory better than does his surname, Shaw, does (even though it is the

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

165

target). Further, the match is quite distinctive with George Bernard ___________, but the cue
William _________________ is much more overloaded (Prince William, William Yeats, William
Faulkner, will.i.am).
The phenomenon we have been describing is called the recognition failure of recallable words,
which highlights the point that a cue will be most effective depending on how the information
has been encoded (Tulving & Thomson, 1973). The point is, the cues that work best to evoke
retrieval are those that recreate the event or name to be remembered, whereas sometimes
even the target itself, such as Shaw in the above example, is not the best cue. Which cue will
be most effective depends on how the information has been encoded.
Whenever we think about our past, we engage in the act of retrieval. We usually think that
retrieval is an objective act because we tend to imagine that retrieving a memory is like pulling
a book from a shelf, and after we are done with it, we return the book to the shelf just as it
was. However, research shows this assumption to be false; far from being a static repository
of data, the memory is constantly changing. In fact, every time we retrieve a memory, it is
altered. For example, the act of retrieval itself (of a fact, concept, or event) makes the retrieved
memory much more likely to be retrieved again, a phenomenon called the testing effect or the
retrieval practice effect (Pyc & Rawson, 2009; Roediger & Karpicke, 2006). However, retrieving
some information can actually cause us to forget other information related to it, a
phenomenon called retrieval-induced forgetting (Anderson, Bjork, & Bjork, 1994). Thus the act
of retrieval can be a double-edged sword—strengthening the memory just retrieved (usually
by a large amount) but harming related information (though this effect is often relatively small).
As discussed earlier, retrieval of distant memories is reconstructive. We weave the concrete
bits and pieces of events in with assumptions and preferences to form a coherent story
(Bartlett, 1932). For example, if during your 10th birthday, your dog got to your cake before
you did, you would likely tell that story for years afterward. Say, then, in later years you
misremember where the dog actually found the cake, but repeat that error over and over
during subsequent retellings of the story. Over time, that inaccuracy would become a basic
fact of the event in your mind. Just as retrieval practice (repetition) enhances accurate
memories, so will it strengthen errors or false memories (McDermott, 2006). Sometimes
memories can even be manufactured just from hearing a vivid story. Consider the following
episode, recounted by Jean Piaget, the famous developmental psychologist, from his
childhood:
One of my first memories would date, if it were true, from my second year. I can still see,
most clearly, the following scene, in which I believed until I was about 15. I was sitting in
my pram . . . when a man tried to kidnap me. I was held in by the strap fastened round

166

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

me while my nurse bravely tried to stand between me and the thief. She received various
scratches, and I can still vaguely see those on her face. . . . When I was about 15, my parents
received a letter from my former nurse saying that she had been converted to the Salvation
Army. She wanted to confess her past faults, and in particular to return the watch she
had been given as a reward on this occasion. She had made up the whole story, faking
the scratches. I therefore must have heard, as a child, this story, which my parents believed,
and projected it into the past in the form of a visual memory. . . . Many real memories are
doubtless of the same order. (Norman & Schacter, 1997, pp. 187–188)
Piaget’s vivid account represents a case of a pure reconstructive memory. He heard the tale
told repeatedly, and doubtless told it (and thought about it) himself. The repeated telling
cemented the events as though they had really happened, just as we are all open to the
possibility of having “many real memories ... of the same order.” The fact that one can
remember precise details (the location, the scratches) does not necessarily indicate that the
memory is true, a point that has been confirmed in laboratory studies, too (e.g., Norman &
Schacter, 1997).

Putting It All Together: Improving Your Memory
A central theme of this module has been the
importance of the encoding and retrieval
processes, and their interaction. To recap: to
improve learning and memory, we need to
encode

information

in

conjunction

with

excellent cues that will bring back the
remembered events when we need them. But
how do we do this? Keep in mind the two critical
principles we have discussed: to maximize
retrieval, we should construct meaningful cues
that remind us of the original experience, and
those cues should be distinctive and not
associated with other memories. These two
conditions are critical in maximizing cue
effectiveness (Nairne, 2002).

Some people employ tricks to help them improve their
memories. [Photo: Flооd]

So, how can these principles be adapted for use in many situations? Let’s go back to how we
started the module, with Simon Reinhard’s ability to memorize huge numbers of digits.
Although it was not obvious, he applied these same general memory principles, but in a more

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

167

deliberate way. In fact, all mnemonic devices, or memory aids/tricks, rely on these
fundamental principles. In a typical case, the person learns a set of cues and then applies
these cues to learn and remember information. Consider the set of 20 items below that are
easy to learn and remember (Bower & Reitman, 1972).
1. is a gun.

11 is penny-one, hot dog bun.

2. is a shoe.

12 is penny-two, airplane glue.

3. is a tree.

13 is penny-three, bumble bee.

4. is a door.

14 is penny-four, grocery store.

5. is knives.

15 is penny-five, big beehive.

6. is sticks.

16 is penny-six, magic tricks.

7. is oven.

17 is penny-seven, go to heaven.

8. is plate.

18 is penny-eight, golden gate.

9. is wine.

19 is penny-nine, ball of twine.

10. is hen.

20 is penny-ten, ballpoint pen.

It would probably take you less than 10 minutes to learn this list and practice recalling it several
times (remember to use retrieval practice!). If you were to do so, you would have a set of peg
words on which you could “hang” memories. In fact, this mnemonic device is called the peg
word technique. If you then needed to remember some discrete items—say a grocery list, or
points you wanted to make in a speech—this method would let you do so in a very precise
yet flexible way. Suppose you had to remember bread, peanut butter, bananas, lettuce, and
so on. The way to use the method is to form a vivid image of what you want to remember
and imagine it interacting with your peg words (as many as you need). For example, for these
items, you might imagine a large gun (the first peg word) shooting a loaf of bread, then a jar
of peanut butter inside a shoe, then large bunches of bananas hanging from a tree, then a
door slamming on a head of lettuce with leaves flying everywhere. The idea is to provide good,
distinctive cues (the weirder the better!) for the information you need to remember while you
are learning it. If you do this, then retrieving it later is relatively easy. You know your cues
perfectly (one is gun, etc.), so you simply go through your cue word list and “look” in your
mind’s eye at the image stored there (bread, in this case).
This peg word method may sound strange at first, but it works quite well, even with little
training (Roediger, 1980). One word of warning, though, is that the items to be remembered
need to be presented relatively slowly at first, until you have practice associating each with
its cue word. People get faster with time. Another interesting aspect of this technique is that

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

168

it’s just as easy to recall the items in backwards order as forwards. This is because the peg
words provide direct access to the memorized items, regardless of order.
How did Simon Reinhard remember those digits? Essentially he has a much more complex
system based on these same principles. In his case, he uses “memory palaces” (elaborate
scenes with discrete places) combined with huge sets of images for digits. For example,
imagine mentally walking through the home where you grew up and identifying as many
distinct areas and objects as possible. Simon has hundreds of such memory palaces that he
uses. Next, for remembering digits, he has memorized a set of 10,000 images. Every four-digit
number for him immediately brings forth a mental image. So, for example, 6187 might recall
Michael Jackson. When Simon hears all the numbers coming at him, he places an image for
every four digits into locations in his memory palace. He can do this at an incredibly rapid
rate, faster than 4 digits per 4 seconds when they are flashed visually, as in the demonstration
at the beginning of the module. As noted, his record is 240 digits, recalled in exact order.
Simon also holds the world record in an event called “speed cards,” which involves memorizing
the precise order of a shuffled deck of cards. Simon was able to do this in 21.19 seconds!
Again, he uses his memory palaces, and he encodes groups of cards as single images.
Many books exist on how to improve memory using mnemonic devices, but all involve forming
distinctive encoding operations and then having an infallible set of memory cues. We should
add that to develop and use these memory systems beyond the basic peg system outlined
above takes a great amount of time and concentration. The World Memory Championships
are held every year and the records keep improving. However, for most common purposes,
just keep in mind that to remember well you need to encode information in a distinctive way
and to have good cues for retrieval. You can adapt a system that will meet most any purpose.

169

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

Outside Resources
Book: Brown, P.C., Roediger, H. L. & McDaniel, M. A. (2014). Smarter, sooner, longer: Effective
strategies for learning and remembering. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Student Video 1: Eureka Foong's - The Misinformation Effect. This is a student-made video
illustrating this phenomenon of altered memory. It was one of the winning entries in the
2014 Noba Student Video Award.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iMPIWkFtd88
Student Video 2: Kara McCord's - Flashbulb Memories. This is a student-made video
illustrating this phenomenon of autobiographical memory. It was one of the winning
entries in the 2014 Noba Student Video Award.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mPhW9bUI4F0
Student Video 3: Ang Rui Xia & Ong Jun Hao's - The Misinformation Effect. Another studentmade video exploring the misinformation effect. Also an award winner from 2014.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gsn9iKmOJLQ
Video: Simon Reinhard breaking the world record in speedcards.
http://vimeo.com/12516465

Discussion Questions
1. Mnemonists like Simon Reinhard develop mental “journeys,” which enable them to use the
method of loci. Develop your own journey, which contains 20 places, in order, that you
know well. One example might be: the front walkway to your parents’ apartment; their
doorbell; the couch in their living room; etc. Be sure to use a set of places that you know
well and that have a natural order to them (e.g., the walkway comes before the doorbell).
Now you are more than halfway toward being able to memorize a set of 20 nouns, in order,
rather quickly. As an optional second step, have a friend make a list of 20 such nouns and
read them to you, slowly (e.g., one every 5 seconds). Use the method to attempt to
remember the 20 items.
2. Recall a recent argument or misunderstanding you have had about memory (e.g., a debate
over whether your girlfriend/boyfriend had agreed to something). In light of what you have
just learned about memory, how do you think about it? Is it possible that the disagreement

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

170

can be understood by one of you making a pragmatic inference?
3. Think about what you’ve just learned in this module and about how you study for tests.
On the basis of what you have just learned, is there something that you want to try that
might help your study habits?

171

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

Vocabulary
Autobiographical memory
Memory for the events of one’s life.
Consolidation
The process occurring after encoding that is believed to stabilize memory traces.
Cue overload principle
The principle stating that the more memories that are associated to a particular retrieval cue,
the less effective the cue will be in prompting retrieval of any one memory.
Distinctiveness
The principle that unusual events (in a context of similar events) will be recalled and recognized
better than uniform (nondistinctive) events.
Encoding
The initial experience of perceiving and learning events.
Encoding specificity principle
The hypothesis that a retrieval cue will be effective to the extent that information encoded
from the cue overlaps or matches information in the engram or memory trace.
Engrams
A term indicating the change in the nervous system representing an event; also, memory trace.
Episodic memory
Memory for events in a particular time and place.
Flashbulb memory
Vivid personal memories of receiving the news of some momentous (and usually emotional)
event.
Memory traces
A term indicating the change in the nervous system representing an event.
Misinformation effect
When erroneous information occurring after an event is remembered as having been part of

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

172

the original event.
Mnemonic devices
A strategy for remembering large amounts of information, usually involving imaging events
occurring on a journey or with some other set of memorized cues.
Recoding
The ubiquitous process during learning of taking information in one form and converting it
to another form, usually one more easily remembered.
Retrieval
The process of accessing stored information.
Retroactive interference
The phenomenon whereby events that occur after some particular event of interest will usually
cause forgetting of the original event.
Semantic memory
The more or less permanent store of knowledge that people have.
Storage
The stage in the learning/memory process that bridges encoding and retrieval; the persistence
of memory over time.

173

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

References
Anderson, M. C., Bjork, R., & Bjork, E. L. (1994). Remembering can cause forgetting: Retrieval
dynamics in long-term memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and
Cognition, 20, 1063–1087.
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Bower, G. H., & Reitman, J. S. (1972). Mnemonic elaboration in multilist learning. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 478–485.
Brewer, W. F. (1977). Memory for the pragmatic implications of sentences. Memory & Cognition,
5(6), 673–678.
Brown, R., & Kulik, J. (1977). Flashbulb memories. Cognition, 5, 73–99.
Chan, J.C.K. & McDermott, K.B. (2006). Remembering pragmatic inferences. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 20, 633-639.
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory research.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11, 671–684.
Deese, J. (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal intrusions in immediate
recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58, 17.
Godden, D. R., & Baddeley, A. D. (1975). Context‐dependent memory in two natural
environments: On land and underwater. British Journal of Psychology,66 (3), 325-331
Hunt, R. (2003). Two contributions of distinctive processing to accurate memory. Journal of
Memory and Language, 48, 811–825.
Hunt, R., & McDaniel, M. A. (1993). The enigma of organization and distinctiveness. Journal of
Memory and Language, 32, 421-445.
Loftus, E. F. (2005). Planting misinformation in the human mind: A 30-year investigation of the
malleability of memory. Learning & Memory, 12, 361–366.
McDermott, K. B. (2006). Paradoxical effects of testing: Repeated retrieval attempts enhance
the likelihood of later accurate and false recall. Memory & Cognition, 34, 261–267.
McGeoch, J. A. (1932). Forgetting and the law of disuse. Psychological Review, 39(4), 352.
Melton, A. W. (1963). Implications of short-term memory for a general theory of memory.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 2, 1–21.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our capacity
for processing information. Psychological Review, 63, 81–97.

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

174

Muter, P. (1984). Recognition and recall of words with a single meaning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 198–202.
Nairne, J. S. (2002). The myth of the encoding-retrieval match. Memory, 10, 389–395.
Norman, K. A., & Schacter, D. L. (1997). False recognition in younger and older adults: Exploring
the characteristics of illusory memories. Memory & Cognition, 25, 838–848.
Pyc, M. A., & Rawson, K. A. (2009). Testing the retrieval effort hypothesis: Does greater difficulty
correctly recalling information lead to higher levels of memory? Journal of Memory and
Language, 60, 437–447.
Roediger, H. L. (1980). The effectiveness of four mnemonics in ordering recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6, 558.
Roediger, H. L., & Karpicke, J. D. (2006). Test-enhanced learning: Taking memory tests improves
long-term retention. Psychological Science, 17, 249–255.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false memories: Remembering words not
presented in lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition, 21,
803–814.
Stadler, M. A., Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1999). Norms for word lists that create false
memories. Memory & Cognition, 27, 494–500.
Talarico, J. M., & Rubin, D. C. (2003). Confidence, not consistency, characterizes flashbulb
memories. Psychological Science, 14, 455–461.
Tulving, E. (2007). Are there 256 different kinds of memory? In J.S. Nairne (Ed.), The foundations
of remembering: Essays in honor of Henry L. Roediger, III (pp. 39–52). New York: Psychology
Press.
Tulving, E. (1991). Interview. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 3, 89–94
Tulving, E., & Bower, G. H. (1975). The logic of memory representations. The psychology of
learning and motivation, 8, 265-301.
Tulving, E., & Pearlstone, Z. (1966). Availability versus accessibility of information in memory
for words. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 5, 381–391.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M. (1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in episodic
memory. Psychological Review, 80, 352–373.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D. M. (1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in episodic
memory. Psychological Review, 80, 352–373.
Watkins, M. J. (1975). Inhibition in recall with extralist “cues.” Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 14, 294–303.

Memory (Encoding, Storage, Retrieval)

175

Watkins, M. J., & Tulving, E. (1975). Episodic memory: When recognition fails. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 104, 5–29.

9
Eyewitness Testimony and Memory
Biases
Cara Laney & Elizabeth F. Loftus

Eyewitnesses can provide very compelling legal testimony, but rather than recording
experiences flawlessly, their memories are susceptible to a variety of errors and biases. They
(like the rest of us) can make errors in remembering specific details and can even remember
whole events that did not actually happen. In this module, we discuss several of the common
types of errors, and what they can tell us about human memory and its interactions with the
legal system.

Learning Objectives

•

Describe the kinds of mistakes that eyewitnesses commonly make and some of the ways
that this can impede justice.

•
•

Explain some of the errors that are common in human memory.
Describe some of the important research that has demonstrated human memory errors
and their consequences.

What Is Eyewitness Testimony?
Eyewitness testimony is what happens when a person witnesses a crime (or accident, or other
legally important event) and later gets up on the stand and recalls for the court all the details
of the witnessed event. It involves a more complicated process than might initially be

177

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

presumed. It includes what happens
during the actual crime to facilitate or
hamper witnessing, as well as everything
that happens from the time the event is
over to the later courtroom appearance.
The eyewitness may be interviewed by
the

police

and

numerous

lawyers,

describe the perpetrator to several
different people, and make an identification
of the perpetrator, among other things.
If two people witness the same event will they both report seeing
the same things? [Photo: Sigfrid Lundberg]

Why Is Eyewitness Testimony
an Important Area of Psychological Research?
When an eyewitness stands up in front of the court and describes what happened from her
own perspective, this testimony can be extremely compelling—it is hard for those hearing
this testimony to take it “with a grain of salt,” or otherwise adjust its power. But to what extent
is this necessary?
There is now a wealth of evidence, from research conducted over several decades, suggesting
that eyewitness testimony is probably the most persuasive form of evidence presented in
court, but in many cases, its accuracy is dubious. There is also evidence that mistaken
eyewitness evidence can lead to wrongful conviction—sending people to prison for years or
decades, even to death row, for crimes they did not commit. Faulty eyewitness testimony has
been implicated in at least 75% of DNA exoneration cases—more than any other cause
(Garrett, 2011). In a particularly famous case, a man named Ronald Cotton was identified by
a rape victim, Jennifer Thompson, as her rapist, and was found guilty and sentenced to life in
prison. After more than 10 years, he was exonerated (and the real rapist identified) based on
DNA evidence. For details on this case and other (relatively) lucky individuals whose false
convictions were subsequently overturned with DNA evidence, see the Innocence Project
website (http://www.innocenceproject.org/).
There is also hope, though, that many of the errors may be avoidable if proper precautions
are taken during the investigative and judicial processes. Psychological science has taught us
what some of those precautions might involve, and we discuss some of that science now.

Misinformation

178

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

In an early study of eyewitness memory, undergraduate
subjects first watched a slideshow depicting a small red car
driving and then hitting a pedestrian (Loftus, Miller, & Burns,
1978). Some subjects were then asked leading questions
about what had happened in the slides. For example,
subjects were asked, “How fast was the car traveling when
it passed the yield sign?” But this question was actually
designed to be misleading, because the original slide
included a stop sign rather than a yield sign.
Later, subjects were shown pairs of slides. One of the pair
was the original slide containing the stop sign; the other
was a replacement slide containing a yield sign. Subjects
were asked which of the pair they had previously seen.
Subjects who had been asked about the yield sign were
likely to pick the slide showing the yield sign, even though
Misinformation can be introduced into
the memory of a witness between the
time of seeing an event and reporting it

they had originally seen the slide with the stop sign. In other
words, the misinformation in the leading question led to
inaccurate memory.

later. Something as straightforward as
which sort of traffic sign was in place at

This phenomenon is called the misinformation effect,

an intersection can be confused if

because the misinformation that subjects were exposed to

subjects are exposed to erroneous
information after the initial incident.

after the event (here in the form of a misleading question)
apparently contaminates subjects’ memories of what they

witnessed. Hundreds of subsequent studies have demonstrated that memory can be
contaminated by erroneous information that people are exposed to after they witness an
event (see Frenda, Nichols, & Loftus, 2011; Loftus, 2005). The misinformation in these studies
has led people to incorrectly remember everything from small but crucial details of a
perpetrator’s appearance to objects as large as a barn that wasn’t there at all.
These studies have demonstrated that young adults (the typical research subjects in
psychology) are often susceptible to misinformation, but that children and older adults can
be even more susceptible (Bartlett & Memon, 2007; Ceci & Bruck, 1995). In addition,
misinformation effects can occur easily, and without any intention to deceive (Allan & Gabbert,
2008). Even slight differences in the wording of a question can lead to misinformation effects.
Subjects in one study were more likely to say yes when asked “Did you see the broken
headlight?” than when asked “Did you see a broken headlight?” (Loftus, 1975).
Other studies have shown that misinformation can corrupt memory even more easily when

179

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

it is encountered in social situations (Gabbert, Memon, Allan, & Wright, 2004). This is a problem
particularly in cases where more than one person witnesses a crime. In these cases, witnesses
tend to talk to one another in the immediate aftermath of the crime, including as they wait
for police to arrive. But because different witnesses are different people with different
perspectives, they are likely to see or notice different things, and thus remember different
things, even when they witness the same event. So when they communicate about the crime
later, they not only reinforce common memories for the event, they also contaminate each
other’s memories for the event (Gabbert, Memon, & Allan, 2003; Paterson & Kemp, 2006;
Takarangi, Parker, & Garry, 2006).
The misinformation effect has been modeled in the laboratory. Researchers had subjects
watch a video in pairs. Both subjects sat in front of the same screen, but because they wore
differently polarized glasses, they saw two different versions of a video, projected onto a
screen. So, although they were both watching the same screen, and believed (quite reasonably)
that they were watching the same video, they were actually watching two different versions
of the video (Garry, French, Kinzett, & Mori, 2008).
In the video, Eric the electrician is seen wandering through an unoccupied house and helping
himself to the contents thereof. A total of eight details were different between the two videos.
After watching the videos, the “co-witnesses” worked together on 12 memory test questions.
Four of these questions dealt with details that were different in the two versions of the video,
so subjects had the chance to influence one another. Then subjects worked individually on
20 additional memory test questions. Eight of these were for details that were different in the
two videos. Subjects’ accuracy was highly dependent on whether they had discussed the
details previously. Their accuracy for items they had not previously discussed with their cowitness was 79%. But for items that they had discussed, their accuracy dropped markedly, to
34%. That is, subjects allowed their co-witnesses to corrupt their memories for what they had
seen.

Identifying Perpetrators
In addition to correctly remembering many details of the crimes they witness, eyewitnesses
often need to remember the faces and other identifying features of the perpetrators of those
crimes. Eyewitnesses are often asked to describe that perpetrator to law enforcement and
later to make identifications from books of mug shots or lineups. Here, too, there is a
substantial body of research demonstrating that eyewitnesses can make serious, but often
understandable and even predictable, errors (Caputo & Dunning, 2007; Cutler & Penrod, 1995).

180

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

In most jurisdictions in the United States, lineups are typically conducted with pictures, called
photo spreads, rather than with actual people standing behind one-way glass (Wells, Memon,
& Penrod, 2006). The eyewitness is given a set of small pictures of perhaps six or eight
individuals who are dressed similarly and photographed in similar circumstances. One of
these individuals is the police suspect, and the remainder are “foils” or “fillers” (people known
to be innocent of the particular crime under investigation). If the eyewitness identifies the
suspect, then the investigation of that suspect is likely to progress. If a witness identifies a foil
or no one, then the police may choose to move their investigation in another direction.
This process is modeled in laboratory
studies of eyewitness identifications. In
these studies, research subjects witness a
mock crime (often as a short video) and
then are asked to make an identification
from a photo or a live lineup. Sometimes
the lineups are target present, meaning
that the perpetrator from the mock crime
is actually in the lineup, and sometimes
they are target absent, meaning that the
lineup is made up entirely of foils. The
Mistakes in identifying perpetrators can be influenced by a

subjects, or mock witnesses, are given

number of factors including poor viewing conditions, too little

some instructions and asked to pick the

time to view the perpetrator, or too much delay from time of

perpetrator out of the lineup. The

witnessing to identification. [Photo: Tim Snell]

particular

details

of

the

witnessing

experience, the instructions, and the
lineup members can all influence the extent to which the mock witness is likely to pick the
perpetrator out of the lineup, or indeed to make any selection at all. Mock witnesses (and
indeed real witnesses) can make errors in two different ways. They can fail to pick the
perpetrator out of a target present lineup (by picking a foil or by neglecting to make a selection),
or they can pick a foil in a target absent lineup (wherein the only correct choice is to not make
a selection).
Some factors have been shown to make eyewitness identification errors particularly likely.
These include poor vision or viewing conditions during the crime, particularly stressful
witnessing experiences, too little time to view the perpetrator or perpetrators, too much delay
between witnessing and identifying, and being asked to identify a perpetrator from a race
other than one’s own (Bornstein, Deffenbacher, Penrod, & McGorty, 2012; Brigham, Bennett,
Meissner, & Mitchell, 2007; Burton, Wilson, Cowan, & Bruce, 1999; Deffenbacher, Bornstein,
Penrod, & McGorty, 2004).

181

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

It is hard for the legal system to do much about most of these problems. But there are some
things that the justice system can do to help lineup identifications “go right.” For example,
investigators can put together high-quality, fair lineups. A fair lineup is one in which the suspect
and each of the foils is equally likely to be chosen by someone who has read an eyewitness
description of the perpetrator but who did not actually witness the crime (Brigham, Ready, &
Spier, 1990). This means that no one in the lineup should “stick out,” and that everyone should
match the description given by the eyewitness. Other important recommendations that have
come out of this research include better ways to conduct lineups, “double blind” lineups,
unbiased instructions for witnesses, and conducting lineups in a sequential fashion (see
Technical Working Group for Eyewitness Evidence, 1999; Wells et al., 1998; Wells & Olson,
2003).

Kinds of Memory Biases
Memory is also susceptible to a wide variety of other biases and errors. People can forget
events that happened to them and people they once knew. They can mix up details across
time and place. They can even remember whole complex events that never happened at all.
Importantly, these errors, once made, can be very hard to unmake. A memory is no less
“memorable” just because it is wrong.
Some small memory errors are commonplace, and you have no doubt experienced many of
them. You set down your keys without paying attention, and then cannot find them later when
you go to look for them. You try to come up with a person’s name but cannot find it, even
though you have the sense that it is right at the tip of your tongue (psychologists actually call
this the tip-of-the-tongue effect, or TOT) (Brown, 1991).
Other sorts of memory biases are more complicated and longer lasting. For example, it turns
out that our expectations and beliefs about how the world works can have huge influences
on our memories. Because many aspects of our everyday lives are full of redundancies, our
memory systems take advantage of the recurring patterns by forming and using schemata,
or memory templates (Alba & Hasher, 1983; Brewer & Treyens, 1981). Thus, we know to expect
that a library will have shelves and tables and librarians, and so we don’t have to spend energy
noticing these at the time. The result of this lack of attention, however, is that one is likely to
remember schema-consistent information (such as tables), and to remember them in a rather
generic way, whether or not they were actually present.

False Memory

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

182

For most of our experiences schematas are a benefit and help with information overload.
However, they may make it difficult or impossible to recall certain details of a situation
later. Do you recall the library as it actually was or the library as approximated by your
library schemata? [Photo: peyri]

Some memory errors are so “large” that they almost belong in a class of their own: false
memories. Back in the early 1990s a pattern emerged whereby people would go into therapy
for depression and other everyday problems, but over the course of the therapy develop
memories for violent and horrible victimhood (Loftus & Ketcham, 1994). These patients’
therapists claimed that the patients were recovering genuine memories of real childhood
abuse, buried deep in their minds for years or even decades. But some experimental
psychologists believed that the memories were instead likely to be false—created in therapy.
These researchers then set out to see whether it would indeed be possible for wholly false
memories to be created by procedures similar to those used in these patients’ therapy.
In early false memory studies, undergraduate subjects’ family members were recruited to
provide events from the students’ lives. The student subjects were told that the researchers
had talked to their family members and learned about four different events from their
childhoods. The researchers asked if the now undergraduate students remembered each of
these four events—introduced via short hints. The subjects were asked to write about each
of the four events in a booklet and then were interviewed two separate times. The trick was
that one of the events came from the researchers rather than the family (and the family had
actually assured the researchers that this event had not happened to the subject). In the first
such study, this researcher-introduced event was a story about being lost in a shopping mall
and rescued by an older adult. In this study, after just being asked whether they remembered

183

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

these events occurring on three separate occasions, a quarter of subjects came to believe
that they had indeed been lost in the mall (Loftus & Pickrell, 1995). In subsequent studies,
similar procedures were used to get subjects to believe that they nearly drowned and had
been rescued by a lifeguard, or that they had spilled punch on the bride’s parents at a family
wedding, or that they had been attacked by a vicious animal as a child, among other events
(Heaps & Nash, 1999; Hyman, Husband, & Billings, 1995; Porter, Yuille, & Lehman, 1999).
More recent false memory studies have used a variety of different manipulations to produce
false memories in substantial minorities and even occasional majorities of manipulated
subjects (Braun, Ellis, & Loftus, 2002; Lindsay, Hagen, Read, Wade, & Garry, 2004; Mazzoni,
Loftus, Seitz, & Lynn, 1999; Seamon, Philbin, & Harrison, 2006; Wade, Garry, Read, & Lindsay,
2002). For example, one group of researchers used a mock-advertising study, wherein subjects
were asked to review (fake) advertisements for Disney vacations, to convince subjects that
they had once met the character Bugs Bunny at Disneyland—an impossible false memory
because Bugs is a Warner Brothers character (Braun et al., 2002). Another group of researchers
photoshopped childhood photographs of their subjects into a hot air balloon picture and then
asked the subjects to try to remember and describe their hot air balloon experience (Wade
et al., 2002). Other researchers gave subjects unmanipulated class photographs from their
childhoods along with a fake story about a class prank, and thus enhanced the likelihood that
subjects would falsely remember the prank (Lindsay et al., 2004).
Using a false feedback manipulation, we have been able to persuade subjects to falsely
remember having a variety of childhood experiences. In these studies, subjects are told
(falsely) that a powerful computer system has analyzed questionnaires that they completed
previously and has concluded that they had a particular experience years earlier. Subjects
apparently believe what the computer says about them and adjust their memories to match
this new information. A variety of different false memories have been implanted in this way.
In some studies, subjects are told they once got sick on a particular food (Bernstein, Laney,
Morris, & Loftus, 2005). These memories can then spill out into other aspects of subjects’ lives,
such that they often become less interested in eating that food in the future (Bernstein &
Loftus, 2009b). Other false memories implanted with this methodology include having an
unpleasant experience with the character Pluto at Disneyland and witnessing physical violence
between one’s parents (Berkowitz, Laney, Morris, Garry, & Loftus, 2008; Laney & Loftus, 2008).
Importantly, once these false memories are implanted—whether through complex methods
or simple ones—it is extremely difficult to tell them apart from true memories (Bernstein &
Loftus, 2009a; Laney & Loftus, 2008).

Conclusion

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

184

To conclude, eyewitness testimony is very powerful and convincing to jurors, even though it
is not particularly reliable. Identification errors occur, and these errors can lead to people
being falsely accused and even convicted. Likewise, eyewitness memory can be corrupted by
leading questions, misinterpretations of events, conversations with co-witnesses, and their
own expectations for what should have happened. People can even come to remember whole
events that never occurred.
The problems with memory in the legal system are real. But what can we do to start to fix
them? A number of specific recommendations have already been made, and many of these
are in the process of being implemented (e.g., Steblay & Loftus, 2012; Technical Working Group
for Eyewitness Evidence, 1999; Wells et al., 1998). Some of these recommendations are aimed
at specific legal procedures, including when and how witnesses should be interviewed, and
how lineups should be constructed and conducted. Other recommendations call for
appropriate education (often in the form of expert witness testimony) to be provided to jury
members and others tasked with assessing eyewitness memory. Eyewitness testimony can
be of great value to the legal system, but decades of research now argues that this testimony
is often given far more weight than its accuracy justifies.

185

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

Outside Resources
Video 1: Eureka Foong's - The Misinformation Effect. This is a student-made video
illustrating this phenomenon of altered memory. It was one of the winning entries in the
2014 Noba Student Video Award.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iMPIWkFtd88
Video 2: Ang Rui Xia & Ong Jun Hao's - The Misinformation Effect. Another student-made
video exploring the misinformation effect. Also an award winner from 2014.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gsn9iKmOJLQ

Discussion Questions
1. Imagine that you are a juror in a murder case where an eyewitness testifies. In what ways
might your knowledge of memory errors affect your use of this testimony?
2. How true to life do you think television shows such as CSI or Law & Order are in their
portrayals of eyewitnesses?
3. Many jurisdictions in the United States use “show-ups,” where an eyewitness is brought to
a suspect (who may be standing on the street or in handcuffs in the back of a police car)
and asked, “Is this the perpetrator?” Is this a good or bad idea, from a psychological
perspective? Why?

186

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

Vocabulary
False memories
Memory for an event that never actually occurred, implanted by experimental manipulation
or other means.
Foils
Any member of a lineup (whether live or photograph) other than the suspect.
Misinformation effect
A memory error caused by exposure to incorrect information between the original event (e.
g., a crime) and later memory test (e.g., an interview, lineup, or day in court).
Mock witnesses
A research subject who plays the part of a witness in a study.
Photo spreads
A selection of normally small photographs of faces given to a witness for the purpose of
identifying a perpetrator.
Schema (plural: schemata)
A memory template, created through repeated exposure to a particular class of objects or
events.

187

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

References
Alba, J. W., & Hasher, L. (1983). Is memory schematic? Psychological Bulletin, 93, 203–231.
Allan, K., & Gabbert, F. (2008). I still think it was a banana: Memorable “lies” and forgettable
“truths.” Acta Psychologica, 127, 299–308.
Bartlett, J., & Memon, A. (2007). Eyewitness memory in young and older adults. In: M.P. Toglia,
J.D. Read, D.F. Ross, & R.C.L. Lindsay (Eds.), The handbook of eyewitness psychology: Volume
II: Memory for people (pp. 309–338). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Berkowitz, S. R., Laney, C., Morris, E. K., Garry, M., & Loftus, E. F. (2008). Pluto behaving badly:
False beliefs and their consequences. American Journal of Psychology, 121, 643–660.
Bernstein, D. M., & Loftus, E. F. (2009b). The consequences of false memories for food
preferences and choices. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 135–139.
Bernstein, D. M., & Loftus, E. F., (2009a). How to tell if a particular memory is true or false.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 370–374.
Bernstein, D. M., Laney, C., Morris, E. K., & Loftus, E. F. (2005). False memories about food can
lead to food avoidance. Social Cognition, 23, 11–34.
Bornstein, B. H., Deffenbacher, K. A., Penrod, S. D., & McGorty, E. K. (2012). Effects of exposure
time and cognitive operations on facial identification accuracy: A meta-analysis of two
variables associated with initial memory strength. Psychology, Crime, & Law, 18, 473–490.
Braun, K. A., Ellis, R., & Loftus, E. F. (2002). Make my memory: How advertising can change our
memories of the past. Psychology and Marketing, 19, 1–23.
Brewer, W. F., & Treyens, J. C. (1981). Role of schemata in memory for places. Cognitive
Psychology, 13, 207–230.
Brigham, J. C., Bennett, L. B., Meissner, C. A., & Mitchell, T. L. (2007). The influence of race on
eyewitness memory. In R. C. L. Lindsay, D. F. Ross, J. D. Read, & M. P. Toglia (Eds.), Handbook
of eyewitness psychology, Vol. 2: Memory for people (pp. 257–281). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Brigham, J. C., Ready, D. J., & Spier, S. A. (1990). Standards for evaluating the fairness of
photographic lineups. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 11, 149–163.
Burton, A. M., Wilson, S., Cowan, M., & Bruce, V. (1999). Face recognition in poor-quality video:
Evidence from security surveillance. Psychological Science, 10, 243–248.
Caputo, D., & Dunning, D. (2007). Distinguishing accurate identifications from erroneous ones:
Post-dictive indicators of eyewitness accuracy. In R. C. L. Lindsay, D. F. Ross, J. D. Read, &
M. P. Toglia (Eds.), Handbook of eyewitness psychology, Vol. 2: Memory for people (pp. 427–

Eyewitness Testimony and Memory Biases

188

449). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Ceci, S. J., & Bruck, M. (1995). Jeopardy in the courtroom: A scientific analysis of children’s
testimony. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Heaps, C., & Nash, M. (1999). Individual differences in imagination inflation. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 6, 313–138.
Hyman, I. E., Jr., Husband, T. H., & Billings, F. J. (1995). False memories of childhood experiences.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 9, 181–197.
Laney, C., & Loftus, E. F. (2008). Emotional content of true and false memories. Memory, 16,
500–516.
Lindsay, D. S., Hagen, L., Read, J. D., Wade, K. A., & Garry, M. (2004). True photographs and
false memories. Psychological Science, 15, 149–154.
Loftus, E. F., & Pickrell, J. E. (1995). The formation of false memories. Psychiatric Annals, 25,
720–725.
Mazzoni, G. A. L., Loftus, E. F., Seitz, A., & Lynn, S.J. (1999). Changing beliefs and memories
through dream interpretation. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 13, 125–144.
Porter, S., Yuille, J. C., & Lehman, D. R. (1999). The nature of real, implanted, and fabricated
memories for emotional childhood events: Implications for the recovered memory debate.
Law and Human Behavior, 23, 517–537.
Seamon, J. G., Philbin, M. M., & Harrison, L. G. (2006). Do you remember proposing marriage
to the Pepsi machine? False recollections from a campus walk. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 13, 752–7596.
Steblay, N. M., & Loftus, E. F. (2012). Eyewitness memory and the legal system. In E. Shafir
(Ed.), The behavioural foundations of public policy (pp. 145–162). Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Technical Working Group for Eyewitness Evidence. (1999). Eyewitness evidence: A guide for
law enforcement. Research Report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice.
Wade, K. A., Garry, M., Read, J. D., & Lindsay, S. A. (2002). A picture is worth a thousand lies.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9, 597–603.
Wells, G. L., Small, M., Penrod, S., Malpass, R. S., Fulero, S. M., & Brimacombe, C. A. E. (1998).
Eyewitness identification procedures: Recommendations for lineups and photospreads.
Law and Human Behavior, 22, 603–647.

10
Failures of Awareness: The Case of
Inattentional Blindness
Daniel Simons

We think important objects and events in our world will automatically grab our attention, but
they often don’t, particularly when our attention is focused on something else. The failure to
notice unexpected objects or events when attention is focused elsewhere is now known as
inattentional blindness. The study of such failures of awareness has a long history, but their
practical importance has received increasing attention over the past decade. This module
describes the history and status of research on inattentional blindness, discusses the reasons
why we find these results to be counterintuitive, and the implications of failures of awareness
for how we see and act in our world.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•

Learn about inattentional blindness and why it occurs.
Identify ways in which failures of awareness are counterintuitive.
Better understand the link between focused attention and failures of awareness.

Do you regularly spot editing errors in movies? Can you multitask effectively, texting while
talking with your friends or watching television? Are you fully aware of your surroundings? If
you answered yes to any of those questions, you’re not alone. And, you’re most likely wrong.
More than 50 years ago, experimental psychologists began documenting the many ways that
our perception of the world is limited, not by our eyes and ears, but by our minds. We appear

190

Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

able to process only one stream of information at a time, effectively filtering other information
from awareness. To a large extent, we perceive only that which receives the focus of our
cognitive efforts: our attention.
Imagine the following task, known as
dichotic listening (e.g., Cherry, 1953;
Moray, 1959; Treisman, 1960): You put
on a set of headphones that play two
completely different speech streams,
one to your left ear and one to your
right ear. Your task is to repeat each
syllable spoken into your left ear as
quickly and accurately as possible,
mimicking each sound as you hear it.
When

performing

this

attention-

demanding task, you won’t notice if the
speaker in your right ear switches to a
different language or is replaced by a
different speaker with a similar voice.
You won’t notice if the content of their
Some researchers contend that there really is no such thing as multi-

speech becomes nonsensical. In effect,

tasking. Instead, people are just rapidly switching their attention

you are deaf to the substance of the

between tasks, rather than holding those tasks in their attention at

ignored speech. But, that is not

the same time. [Image: Melvin Gaal]

because of the limits of your auditory
senses. It is a form of cognitive

deafness, due to the nature of focused, selective attention. Even if the speaker on your right
headphone says your name, you will notice it only about one-third of the time (Conway, Cowan,
& Bunting, 2001). And, at least by some accounts, you only notice it that often because you
still devote some of your limited attention to the ignored speech stream (Holendar, 1986). In
this task, you will tend to notice only large physical changes (e.g., a switch from a male to a
female speaker), but not substantive ones, except in rare cases.
This selective listening task highlights the power of attention to filter extraneous information
from awareness while letting in only those elements of our world that we want to hear. Focused
attention is crucial to our powers of observation, making it possible for us to zero in on what
we want to see or hear while filtering out irrelevant distractions. But, it has consequences as
well: We can miss what would otherwise be obvious and important signals.
The same pattern holds for vision. In a groundbreaking series of studies in the 1970s and

191

Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

early 1980s, Neisser and his colleagues devised a visual analogue of the dichotic listening task
(Neisser & Becklen, 1975). Their subjects viewed a video of two distinct, but partially
transparent and overlapping, events. For example, one event might involve two people playing
a hand-clapping game and the other might show people passing a ball. Because the two events
were partially transparent and overlapping, both produced sensory signals on the retina
regardless of which event received the participant’s attention. When participants were asked
to monitor one of the events by counting the number of times the actors performed an action
(e.g., hand clapping or completed passes), they often failed to notice unexpected events in
the ignored video stream (e.g., the hand-clapping players stopping their game and shaking
hands). As for dichotic listening, the participants were unaware of events happening outside
the focus of their attention, even when looking right at them. They could tell that other “stuff”
was happening on the screen, but many were unaware of the meaning or substance of that
stuff.
To test the power of selective attention to
induce failures of awareness, Neisser and
colleagues (Neisser, 1979) designed a variant
of this task in which participants watched a
video of two teams of players, one wearing
white shirts and one wearing black shirts.
Subjects were asked to press a key whenever
the players in white successfully passed a ball,
but to ignore the players in black. As for the
other videos, the teams were filmed separately
and then superimposed so that they literally
occupied the same space (they were partially
transparent). Partway through the video, a
person wearing a raincoat and carrying an
umbrella strolled through the scene. People
were so intently focused on spotting passes
that they often missed the “umbrella woman.”
(Pro tip: If you look closely at the video, you’ll
see that Ulric Neisser plays on both the black
and white teams.)
Have you ever been paying attention to something so
closely you missed another event in the background? Or

These surprising findings were well known in

have you ever been so used to seeing something a certain

the field, but for decades, researchers

way that when it changed, you didn’t even notice it had?

dismissed their implications because the

[Image: Lafayette College]

displays had such an odd, ghostly appearance.

Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

192

Of course, we would notice if the displays were fully opaque and vivid rather than partly
transparent and grainy. Surprisingly, no studies were built on Neisser’s method for nearly 20
years. Inspired by these counterintuitive findings and after discussing them with Neisser
himself, Christopher Chabris and I revisited them in the late 1990s (Simons & Chabris, 1999).
We replicated Neisser’s work, again finding that many people missed the umbrella woman
when all of the actors in the video were partially transparent and occupying the same space.
But, we added another wrinkle: a version of the video in which all of the actions of both teams
of players were choreographed and filmed with a single camera. The players moved in and
around each other and were fully visible. In the most dramatic version, we had a woman in a
gorilla suit walk into the scene, stop to face the camera, thump her chest, and then walk off
the other side after nine seconds on screen. Fully half the observers missed the gorilla when
counting passes by the team in white.
This phenomenon is now known as inattentional blindness, the surprising failure to notice
an unexpected object or event when attention is focused on something else (Mack & Rock,
1998). The past 15 years has seen a surge of interest in such failures of awareness, and we
now have a better handle on the factors that cause people to miss unexpected events as well
as the range of situations in which inattentional blindness occurs. People are much more
likely to notice unexpected objects that share features with the attended items in a display
(Most et al., 2001). For example, if you count passes by the players wearing black, you are
more likely to notice the gorilla than if you count passes by the players wearing white because
the color of the gorilla more closely matches that of the black-shirted players (Simons &
Chabris, 1999). However, even unique items can go unnoticed. In one task, people monitored
black shapes and ignored white shapes that moved around a computer window (Most et al.,
2001). Approximately 30
percent of them failed to
detect the bright red
cross traversing the display,
even though it was the
only colored item and
was

visible

for

five

seconds.
Another crucial influence
on noticing is the effort
you put into the attention-

Typically, even when we’re intently focused on a stationary object, a moving object will

demanding task. If you

catch our attention. Why is this? Some researchers claim, evolutionarily speaking, we are

have to keep separate

more attuned to movement because it likely indicated food or a threat was near. [Image:

counts of bounce passes

Phil Roeder]

Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

193

and aerial passes, you are less likely to notice the gorilla (Simons & Chabris, 1999), and if you
are tracking faster moving objects, you are less likely to notice (Simons & Jensen, 2009). You
can even miss unexpected visual objects when you devote your limited cognitive resources
to a memory task (Fougnie & Marois, 2007), so the limits are not purely visual. Instead, they
appear to reflect limits on the capacity of attention. Without attention to the unexpected
event, you are unlikely to become aware of it (Mack & Rock, 1998; Most, Scholl, Clifford, &
Simons, 2005).
Inattentional blindness is not just a laboratory curiosity—it also occurs in the real world and
under more natural conditions. In a recent study (Chabris, Weinberger, Fontaine, & Simons,
2011), Chabris and colleagues simulated a famous police misconduct case in which a Boston
police officer was convicted of lying because he claimed not to have seen a brutal beating
(Lehr, 2009). At the time, he had been chasing a murder suspect and ran right past the scene
of a brutal assault. In Chabris’ simulation, subjects jogged behind an experimenter who ran
right past a simulated fight scene. At night, 65 percent missed the fight scene. Even during
broad daylight, 44 percent of observers jogged right passed it without noticing, lending some
plausibility to the Boston cop’s story that he was telling the truth and never saw the beating.
Perhaps more importantly, auditory distractions can induce real-world failures to see.
Although people believe they can multitask, few can. And, talking on a phone while driving or
walking decreases situation awareness and increases the chances that people will miss
something important (Strayer & Johnston, 2001). In a dramatic illustration of cell phone–
induced inattentional blindness, Ira Hymen observed that people talking on a cell phone as
they walked across a college campus were less likely than other pedestrians to notice a
unicycling clown who rode across their path (Hyman, Boss, Wise, McKenzie, & Caggiano, 2011).
Recently, the study of this sort of awareness failure has returned to its roots in studies of
listening, with studies documenting inattentional deafness: When listening to a set of spatially
localized conversations over headphones, people often fail to notice the voice of a person
walking through the scene repeatedly stating “I am a gorilla” (Dalton & Fraenkel, 2012). Under
conditions of focused attention, we see and hear far less of the unattended information than
we might expect (Macdonald & Lavie, 2011; Wayand, Levin, & Varakin, 2005).
We now have a good understanding of the ways in which focused attention affects the
detection of unexpected objects falling outside that focus. The greater the demands on
attention, the less likely people are to notice objects falling outside their attention (Macdonald
& Lavie, 2011; Simons & Chabris, 1999; Simons & Jensen, 2009). The more like the ignored
elements of a scene, the less likely people are to notice. And, the more distracted we are, the
less likely we are to be aware of our surroundings. Under conditions of distraction, we

194

Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

effectively develop tunnel vision.
Despite this growing understanding
of the limits of attention and the
factors that lead to more or less
noticing, we have relatively less
understanding of individual differences
in noticing (Simons & Jensen, 2009).
Do some people consistently notice
the unexpected while others are
obliviously unaware of their surrou­
ndings? Or, are we all subject to
Now you see me, now you don’t! Although the research on attention has

inattentional

blindness

due

to

only developed over the last few decades, magicians have been taking

structural limits on the nature of

advantages of our susceptibility to misguided focus for centuries. [Image:

attention? The question remains

Les Black]

controversial. A few studies suggest
that those people who have a

greater working memory capacity are more likely to notice unexpected objects (Hannon &
Richards, 2010; Richards, Hannon, & Derakshan, 2010). In effect, those who have more
resources available when focusing attention are more likely to spot other aspects of their
world. However, other studies find no such relationship: Those with greater working memory
capacity are not any more likely to spot an unexpected object or event (Seegmiller, Watson,
& Strayer, 2011; Bredemeier & Simons, 2012). There are theoretical reasons to predict each
pattern. With more resources available, people should be more likely to notice (see Macdonald
& Lavie, 2011). However, people with greater working memory capacity also tend to be better
able to maintain their focus on their prescribed task, meaning that they should be less likely
to notice. At least one study suggests that the ability to perform a task does not predict the
likelihood of noticing (Simons & Jensen, 2009; for a replication, see Bredemeier & Simons,
2012). In a study I conducted with Melinda Jensen, we measured how well people could track
moving objects around a display, gradually increasing the speed until people reached a level
of 75% accuracy. Tracking ability varied greatly: Some people could track objects at more than
twice the speed others could. Yet, the ability to track objects more easily was unrelated to the
odds of noticing an unexpected event. Apparently, as long as people try to perform the tracking
task, they are relatively unlikely to notice unexpected events.
What makes these findings interesting and important is that they run counter to our intuitions.
Most people are confident they would notice the chest-thumping gorilla. In fact, nearly 90%
believe they would spot the gorilla (Levin & Angelone, 2008), and in a national survey, 78%
agreed with the statement, “People generally notice when something unexpected enters their

Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

195

field of view, even when they’re paying attention to something else” (Simons & Chabris, 2010).
Similarly, people are convinced that they would spot errors in movies or changes to a
conversation partner (Levin & Angelone, 2008). We think we see and remember far more of
our surroundings than we actually do. But why do we have such mistaken intuitions?
One explanation for this mistaken intuition is that our experiences themselves mislead us
(Simons & Chabris, 2010). We rarely experience a study situation such as the gorilla experiment
in which we are forced to confront something obvious that we just missed. That partly explains
why demonstrations such as that one are so powerful: We expect that we would notice the
gorilla, and we cannot readily explain away our failure to notice it. Most of the time, we are
happily unaware of what we have missed, but we are fully aware of those elements of a scene
that we have noticed. Consequently, if we assume our experiences are representative of the
state of the world, we will conclude that we notice unexpected events. We don’t easily think
about what we’re missing.
Given the limits on attention coupled with our mistaken impression that important events will
capture our attention, how has our species survived? Why weren’t our ancestors eaten by
unexpected predators? One reason is that our ability to focus attention intently might have
been more evolutionarily useful than the ability to notice unexpected events. After all, for an
event to be unexpected, it must occur relatively infrequently. Moreover, most events don’t
require our immediate attention, so if inattentional blindness delays our ability to notice the
events, the consequences could well be minimal. In a social context, others might notice that
event and call attention to it. Although inattentional blindness might have had minimal
consequences over the course of our evolutionary history, it does have consequences now.
At pedestrian speeds and with minimal distraction, inattentional blindness might not matter
for survival. But in modern society, we face greater distractions and move at greater speeds,
and even a minor delay in noticing something unexpected can mean the difference between
a fender-bender and a lethal collision. If talking on a phone increases your odds of missing a
unicycling clown, it likely also increases your odds of missing the child who runs into the street
or the car that runs a red light. Why, then, do people continue to talk on the phone when
driving? The reason might well be the same mistaken intuition that makes inattentional
blindness surprising: Drivers simply do not notice how distracted they are when they are
talking on a phone, so they believe they can drive just as well when talking on a phone even
though they can’t (Strayer & Johnston, 2001).
So, what can you do about inattentional blindness? The short answer appears to be, “not
much.” There is no magical elixir that will overcome the limits on attention, allowing you to
notice everything (and that would not be a good outcome anyway). But, there is something

Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

196

you can do to mitigate the consequences of such limits. Now that you know about inattentional
blindness, you can take steps to limit its impact by recognizing how your intuitions will lead
you astray.
First, maximize the attention you
do have available by avoiding
distractions, especially under conditions
for which an unexpected event
might be catastrophic. The ring of
a new call or the ding of a new text
are hard to resist, so make it
impossible to succumb to the
temptation by turning your phone
off or putting it somewhere out of
reach when you are driving. If you
know that you will be tempted and
you know that using your phone
Even though you may think you can drive, text, listen to music, and make
will increase inattentional blindness,
a smoothie at the same time, really, your focus should be only on the road,
for everything else can easily distract you from what’s most important:
you must be proactive. Second, pay
driving safely! [Image: Michael Heigl]
attention to what others might not
notice. If you are a bicyclist, don’t
assume that the driver sees you, even if they appear to make eye contact. Looking is not the
same as seeing. Only by understanding the limits of attention and by recognizing our mistaken
beliefs about what we “know” to be true can we avoid the modern-day consequences of those
limits.

Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

197

Outside Resources
Article: Scholarpedia article on inattentional blindness
http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Inattentional_blindness
Video: The original gorilla video
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vJG698U2Mvo
Video: The sequel to the gorilla video
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IGQmdoK_ZfY
Web: Website for Chabris & Simons book, The Invisible Gorilla. Includes links to videos and
descriptions of the research on inattentional blindness
http://www.theinvisiblegorilla.com

Discussion Questions
1. Many people, upon learning about inattentional blindness, try to think of ways to eliminate
it, allowing themselves complete situation awareness. Why might we be far worse off if we
were not subject to inattentional blindness?
2. If inattentional blindness cannot be eliminated, what steps might you take to avoid its
consequences?
3. Can you think of situations in which inattentional blindness is highly likely to be a problem?
Can you think of cases in which inattentional blindness would not have much of an impact?

Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

198

Vocabulary
Dichotic listening
A task in which different audio streams are presented to each ear. Typically, people are asked
to monitor one stream while ignoring the other.
Inattentional blindness
The failure to notice a fully visible, but unexpected, object or event when attention is devoted
to something else.
Inattentional deafness
The auditory analog of inattentional blindness. People fail to notice an unexpected sound or
voice when attention is devoted to other aspects of a scene.
Selective listening
A method for studying selective attention in which people focus attention on one auditory
stream of information while deliberately ignoring other auditory information.

Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

199

References
Bredemeier, K., & Simons, D. J. (2012). Working memory and inattentional blindness.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 19, 239–244.
Chabris, C. F., Weinberger, A., Fontaine, M., & Simons, D. J. (2011). You do not talk about fight
club if you do not notice fight club: Inattentional blindness for a simulated real-world
assault. i-Perception, 2, 150–153.
Cherry, E. C. (1953). Experiments on the recognition of speech with one and two ears. Journal
of the Acoustical Society of America, 25, 975–979.
Conway, A. R. A., Cowan, N., & Bunting, M. F. (2001). The cocktail party phenomenon revisited:
The importance of working memory capacity. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 331–335.
Dalton, P., & Fraenkel, N. (2012). Gorillas we have missed: Sustained inattentional deafness
for dynamic events. Cognition, 124, 367–372.
Levin, D. T., & Angelone, B. L. (2008). The visual metacognition questionnaire: A measure of
intuitions about vision. The American Journal of Psychology, 121, 451–472.
Macdonald, J. S. P., & Lavie, N. (2011). Visual perceptual load induces inattentional deafness.
Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 73, 1780–1789.
Mack A., & Rock I. (1998). Inattentional blindness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Moray, N. (1959). Attention in dichotic listening: Affective cues and the influence of instructions.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 11, 56–60.
Most, S. B., Scholl, B. J., Clifford, E. R., & Simons, D. J. (2005). What you see is what you set:
Sustained inattentional blindness and the capture of awareness. Psychological Review, 112,
217–242.
Most, S. B., Simons, D. J., Scholl, B. J., Jimenez, R., Clifford, E., & Chabris, C. F. (2001). How not
to be seen: The contribution of similarity and selective ignoring to sustained inattentional
blindness. Psychological Science, 12, 9–17.
Neisser U., & Becklen R., (1975). Selective looking: Attending to visually specified events.
Cognitive Psychology, 7, 480–494.
Neisser, U. (1979). The control of information pickup in selective looking. In A. D. Pick (Ed.),
Perception and its development: A tribute to Eleanor J. Gibson (pp. 201–219). Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Richards, A., Hannon, E., & Derakshan, N. (2010). Predicting and manipulating the incidence
of inattentional blindness. Psychological Research, 74, 513–523.
Seegmiller, J. K., Watson, J. M., & Strayer, D. L. (2011). Individual differences in susceptibility

Failures of Awareness: The Case of Inattentional Blindness

200

to inattentional blindness. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 37, 785–791.
Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (2010). The invisible gorilla, and other ways our intuitions deceive
us. New York, NY: Crown.
Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Gorillas in our midst: Sustained inattentional blindness
for dynamic events. Perception, 28, 1059–1074.
Simons, D. J., & Jensen, M. S. (2009). The effects of individual differences and task difficulty on
inattentional blindness. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(2), 398–403.
Strayer, D. L., & Johnston, W. A. (2001). Driven to distraction: Dual-task studies of simulated
driving and conversing on a cellular telephone. Psychological Science, 12, 462–466.
Treisman, A. (1960). Contextual cues in selective listening. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 12, 242–248.
Wayand. J. F., Levin, D. T., & Varakin, D. A. (2005). Inattentional blindness for a noxious
multimodal stimulus. The American Journal of Psychology, 118, 339–352.

Chapter 8: Motivation

11
Functions of Emotions
Hyisung Hwang & David Matsumoto

Emotions play a crucial role in our lives because they have important functions. This module
describes those functions, dividing the discussion into three areas: the intrapersonal, the
interpersonal, and the social and cultural functions of emotions. The section on the
intrapersonal functions of emotion describes the roles that emotions play within each of us
individually; the section on the interpersonal functions of emotion describes the meanings
of emotions to our relationships with others; and the section on the social and cultural
functions of emotion describes the roles and meanings that emotions have to the
maintenance and effective functioning of our societies and cultures at large. All in all we will
see that emotions are a crucially important aspect of our psychological composition, having
meaning and function to each of us individually, to our relationships with others in groups,
and to our societies as a whole.

Learning Objectives

•
•

Gain an appreciation of the importance of emotion in human life.
Understand the functions and meanings of emotion in three areas of life: the intrapersonal,
interpersonal, and social–cultural.

•

Give examples of the role and function of emotion in each of the three areas described.

Introduction
It is impossible to imagine life without emotion. We treasure our feelings—the joy at a ball

203

Functions of Emotions

game, the pleasure of the
touch of a loved one, or the fun
with friends on a night out.
Even negative emotions are
important, such as the sadness
when a loved one dies, the
anger when violated, the fear
that overcomes us in a scary or
unknown situation, or the guilt
or shame toward others when
our sins are made public.
Emotions color life experiences
and give those experiences
Emotions help us navigate the complex social landscape of our lives. [Image:
Danilo Urbina]

meaning and flavor.
In fact, emotions play many

important roles in people’s lives and have been the topic of scientific inquiry in psychology
for well over a century (Cannon, 1927; Darwin, 1872; James, 1890). This module explores why
we have emotions and why they are important. Doing so requires us to understand the
function of emotions, and this module does so below by dividing the discussion into three
sections. The first concerns the intrapersonal functions of emotion, which refer to the role
that emotions play within each of us individually. The second concerns the interpersonal
functions of emotion, which refer to the role emotions play between individuals within a group.
The third concerns the social and cultural functions of emotion, which refer to the role that
emotions play in the maintenance of social order within a society. All in all, we will see that
emotions inform us of who we are, what our relationships with others are like, and how to
behave in social interactions. Emotions give meaning to events; without emotions, those
events would be mere facts. Emotions help coordinate interpersonal relationships. And
emotions play an important role in the cultural functioning of keeping human societies
together.

Intrapersonal Functions of Emotion
Emotions Help us Act Quickly with Minimal Conscious Awareness
Emotions are rapid information-processing systems that help us act with minimal thinking
(Tooby & Cosmides, 2008). Problems associated with birth, battle, death, and seduction have
occurred throughout evolutionary history and emotions evolved to aid humans in adapting

204

Functions of Emotions

to those problems rapidly and
with minimal conscious cognitive
intervention. If we did not have
emotions, we could not make
rapid decisions concerning whether
to attack, defend, flee, care for
others, reject food, or approach
something useful, all of which
were functionally adaptive in
our evolutionary history and
helped

us

to

survive.

For

instance, drinking spoiled milk
The emotion of disgust serves to protect us from toxins and contamination, of
the physical and moral variety. Consider: would you wear a sweater that was

or

eating

rotten

eggs

has

previously worn by a murderer? Probably not, even though there is no actual

negative consequences for our

“contamination” that will transfer from the sweater to you. [Image: Bill Couch]

welfare. The emotion of disgust,
however, helps us immediately

take action by not ingesting them in the first place or by vomiting them out. This response is
adaptive because it aids, ultimately, in our survival and allows us to act immediately without
much thinking. In some instances, taking the time to sit and rationally think about what to do,
calculating cost–benefit ratios in one’s mind, is a luxury that might cost one one’s life. Emotions
evolved so that we can act without that depth of thinking.

Emotions Prepare the Body for Immediate Action
Emotions prepare us for behavior. When triggered, emotions orchestrate systems such as
perception, attention, inference, learning, memory, goal choice, motivational priorities,
physiological reactions, motor behaviors, and behavioral decision making (Cosmides & Tooby,
2000; Tooby & Cosmides, 2008). Emotions simultaneously activate certain systems and
deactivate others in order to prevent the chaos of competing systems operating at the same
time, allowing for coordinated responses to environmental stimuli (Levenson, 1999). For
instance, when we are afraid, our bodies shut down temporarily unneeded digestive
processes, resulting in saliva reduction (a dry mouth); blood flows disproportionately to the
lower half of the body; the visual field expands; and air is breathed in, all preparing the body
to flee. Emotions initiate a system of components that includes subjective experience,
expressive behaviors, physiological reactions, action tendencies, and cognition, all for the
purposes of specific actions; the term “emotion” is, in reality, a metaphor for these reactions.
One common misunderstanding many people have when thinking about emotions, however,

205

Functions of Emotions

is the belief that emotions must always directly produce action. This is not true. Emotion
certainly prepares the body for action; but whether people actually engage in action is
dependent on many factors, such as the context within which the emotion has occurred, the
target of the emotion, the perceived consequences of one’s actions, previous experiences,
and so forth (Baumeister, Vohs, DeWall, & Zhang, 2007; Matsumoto & Wilson, 2008). Thus,
emotions are just one of many determinants of behavior, albeit an important one.

Emotions Influence Thoughts
Emotions are also connected to thoughts and memories. Memories are not just facts that are
encoded in our brains; they are colored with the emotions felt at those times the facts occurred
(Wang & Ross, 2007). Thus, emotions serve as the neural glue that connects those disparate
facts in our minds. That is why it is easier to remember happy thoughts when happy, and
angry times when angry. Emotions serve as the affective basis of many attitudes, values, and
beliefs that we have about the world and the people around us; without emotions those
attitudes, values, and beliefs would be just statements without meaning, and emotions give
those statements meaning. Emotions influence our thinking processes, sometimes in
constructive ways, sometimes not. It is difficult to think critically and clearly when we feel
intense emotions, but easier when we are not overwhelmed with emotions (Matsumoto,
Hirayama, & LeRoux, 2006).

Emotions Motivate Future Behaviors
Because emotions prepare our bodies for immediate action, influence thoughts, and can be
felt, they are important motivators of future behavior. Many of us strive to experience the
feelings of satisfaction, joy, pride, or triumph in our accomplishments and achievements. At
the same time, we also work very hard to avoid strong negative feelings; for example, once
we have felt the emotion of disgust when drinking the spoiled milk, we generally work very
hard to avoid having those feelings again (e.g., checking the expiration date on the label before
buying the milk, smelling the milk before drinking it, watching if the milk curdles in one’s coffee
before drinking it). Emotions, therefore, not only influence immediate actions but also serve
as an important motivational basis for future behaviors.

Interpersonal Functions of Emotion
Emotions are expressed both verbally through words and nonverbally through facial
expressions, voices, gestures, body postures, and movements. We are constantly expressing

206

Functions of Emotions

emotions when interacting
with others, and others can
reliably judge those emotional
expressions (Elfenbein & Ambady,
2002; Matsumoto, 2001); thus,
emotions have signal value to
others and influence others
and our social interactions.
Emotions and their expressions
communicate information to
others about our feelings,
intentions, relationship with
the target of the emotions,

Emotions can act as signals to our friends and partners, conveying information

and the environment. Because

about the quality of the relationship. [Image: Mo Riza]

emotions have this communi­
cative signal value, they help solve social problems by evoking responses from others, by
signaling the nature of interpersonal relationships, and by providing incentives for desired
social behavior (Keltner, 2003).

Emotional Expressions Facilitate Specific Behaviors in Perceivers
Because facial expressions of emotion are universal social signals, they contain meaning not
only about the expressor’s psychological state but also about that person’s intent and
subsequent behavior. This information affects what the perceiver is likely to do. People
observing fearful faces, for instance, are more likely to produce approach-related behaviors,
whereas people who observe angry faces are more likely to produce avoidance-related
behaviors (Marsh, Ambady, & Kleck, 2005). Even subliminal presentation of smiles produces
increases in how much beverage people pour and consume and how much they are willing
to pay for it; presentation of angry faces decreases these behaviors (Winkielman, Berridge, &
Wilbarger, 2005). Also, emotional displays evoke specific, complementary emotional
responses from observers; for example, anger evokes fear in others (Dimberg & Ohman, 1996;
Esteves, Dimberg, & Ohman, 1994), whereas distress evokes sympathy and aid (Eisenberg et
al., 1989).

Emotional Expressions Signal the Nature of Interpersonal Relationships
Emotional expressions provide information about the nature of the relationships among
interactants. Some of the most important and provocative set of findings in this area come

207

Functions of Emotions

from studies involving married couples (Gottman & Levenson, 1992; Gottman, Levenson, &
Woodin, 2001). In this research, married couples visited a laboratory after having not seen
each other for 24 hours, and then engaged in intimate conversations about daily events or
issues of conflict. Discrete expressions of contempt, especially by the men, and disgust,
especially by the women, predicted later marital dissatisfaction and even divorce.

Emotional Expressions Provide Incentives for Desired Social Behavior
Facial expressions of emotion are important regulators of social interaction. In the
developmental literature, this concept has been investigated under the concept of social
referencing (Klinnert, Campos, & Sorce, 1983); that is, the process whereby infants seek out
information from others to clarify a situation and then use that information to act. To date,
the strongest demonstration of social referencing comes from work on the visual cliff. In the
first study to investigate this concept, Campos and colleagues (Sorce, Emde, Campos, &
Klinnert, 1985) placed mothers on the far end of the “cliff” from the infant. Mothers first smiled
to the infants and placed a toy on top the safety glass to attract them; infants invariably began
crawling to their mothers. When the infants were in the center of the table, however, the
mother then posed an expression of fear, sadness, anger, interest, or joy. The results were
clearly different for the different faces; no infant crossed the table when the mother showed
fear; only 6% did when the mother posed anger, 33% crossed when the mother posed sadness,
and approximately 75% of the infants crossed when the mother posed joy or interest.
Other studies provide similar support for facial expressions as regulators of social interaction.
In one study (Bradshaw, 1986), experimenters posed facial expressions of neutral, anger, or
disgust toward babies as they moved toward an object and measured the amount of inhibition
the babies showed in touching the object. The results for 10- and 15-month olds were the
same: anger produced the greatest inhibition, followed by disgust, with neutral the least. This
study was later replicated (Hertenstein & Campos, 2004) using joy and disgust expressions,
altering the method so that the infants were not allowed to touch the toy (compared with a
distractor object) until one hour after exposure to the expression. At 14 months of age,
significantly more infants touched the toy when they saw joyful expressions, but fewer touched
the toy when the infants saw disgust.

Social and Cultural Functions of Emotion
If you stop to think about many things we take for granted in our daily lives, we cannot help
but come to the conclusion that modern human life is a colorful tapestry of many groups and
individual lives woven together in a complex yet functional way. For example, when you’re

208

Functions of Emotions

hungry, you might go to the local
grocery store and buy some
food. Ever stop to think about
how you’re able to do that? You
might buy a banana that was
grown in a field in southeast Asia
being raised by farmers there,
where they planted the tree,
cared for it, and picked the fruit.
They probably handed that fruit
off to a distribution chain that
allowed multiple people somewhere
to use tools such as cranes,
Although there are cultural differences in the display of emotion, almost all

trucks, cargo bins, ships or

infants start showing emotion such as smiling or reacting to their caretaker as

airplanes (that were also created

early as 6 weeks after their birth. [Image: Christopher Lance]

by multiple people somewhere)
to bring that banana to your

store. The store had people to care for that banana until you came and got it and to barter
with you for it (with your money). You may have gotten to the store riding a vehicle that was
produced somewhere else in the world by others, and you were probably wearing clothes
produced by some other people somewhere else.
Thus, human social life is complex. Individuals are members of multiple groups, with multiple
social roles, norms, and expectations, and people move rapidly in and out of the multiple
groups of which they are members. Moreover, much of human social life is unique because
it revolves around cities, where many people of disparate backgrounds come together. This
creates the enormous potential for social chaos, which can easily occur if individuals are not
coordinated well and relationships not organized systematically.
One of the important functions of culture is to provide this necessary coordination and
organization. Doing so allows individuals and groups to negotiate the social complexity of
human social life, thereby maintaining social order and preventing social chaos. Culture does
this by providing a meaning and information system to its members, which is shared by a
group and transmitted across generations, that allows the group to meet basic needs of
survival, pursue happiness and well-being, and derive meaning from life (Matsumoto & Juang,
2013). Culture is what allowed the banana from southeast Asia to appear on your table.
Cultural transmission of the meaning and information system to its members is, therefore, a
crucial aspect of culture. One of the ways this transmission occurs is through the development

Functions of Emotions

209

of worldviews (including attitudes, values, beliefs, and norms) related to emotions (Matsumoto
& Hwang, 2013; Matsumoto et al., 2008). Worldviews related to emotions provide guidelines
for desirable emotions that facilitate norms for regulating individual behaviors and
interpersonal relationships. Our cultural backgrounds tell us which emotions are ideal to have,
and which are not (Tsai, Knutson, & Fung, 2006). The cultural transmission of information
related to emotions occurs in many ways, from childrearers to children, as well as from the
cultural products available in our world, such as books, movies, ads, and the like (Schönpflug,
2009; Tsai, Louie, Chen, & Uchida, 2007).
Cultures also inform us about what to do with our emotions—that is, how to manage or modify
them—when we experience them. One of the ways in which this is done is through the
management of our emotional expressions through cultural display rules (Friesen, 1972).
These are rules that are learned early in life that specify the management and modification
of our emotional expressions according to social circumstances. Thus, we learn that “big boys
don’t cry” or to laugh at the boss’s jokes even though they’re not funny. By affecting how
individuals express their emotions, culture also influences how people experience them as
well.
Because one of the major functions of culture is to maintain social order in order to ensure
group efficiency and thus survival, cultures create worldviews, rules, guidelines, and norms
concerning emotions because emotions have important intra- and interpersonal functions,
as described above, and are important motivators of behavior. Norms concerning emotion
and its regulation in all cultures serve the purpose of maintaining social order. Cultural
worldviews and norms help us manage and modify our emotional reactions (and thus
behaviors) by helping us to have certain kinds of emotional experiences in the first place and
by managing our reactions and subsequent behaviors once we have them. By doing so, our
culturally moderated emotions can help us engage in socially appropriate behaviors, as
defined by our cultures, and thus reduce social complexity and increase social order, avoiding
social chaos. All of this allows us to live relatively harmonious and constructive lives in groups.
If cultural worldviews and norms about emotions did not exist, people would just run amok
having all kinds of emotional experiences, expressing their emotions and then behaving in
all sorts of unpredictable and potentially harmful ways. If that were the case, it would be very
difficult for groups and societies to function effectively, and even for humans to survive as a
species, if emotions were not regulated in culturally defined ways for the common, social
good. Thus, emotions play a critical role in the successful functioning of any society and culture.

210

Functions of Emotions

Outside Resources
Alberta, G. M., Rieckmann, T. R., & Rush, J. D. (2000). Issues and recommendations for
teaching an ethnic/culture-based course. Teaching of Psychology, 27,102-107. doi:10.1207/
S15328023TOP2702_05
http://top.sagepub.com/content/27/2/102.short
CrashCourse (2014, August 4). Feeling all the feels: Crash course psychology #25. [Video
file]. Retrieved from:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gAMbkJk6gnE
Hughesm A. (2011). Exercises and demonstrations to promote student engagement in
motivation and courses. In R. Miller, E. Balcetis, S. Burns, D. Daniel, B. Saville, & W. Woody
(Eds.), Promoting Student Engagement: Volume 2: Activities, Exercises and Demonstrations
for Psychology Courses. (pp. 79-82) Washington DC, Society for the Teaching of Psychology,
American Psychological Association.
http://teachpsych.org/ebooks/pse2011/vol2/index.php
Johnston, E., & Olson, L. (2015). The feeling brain: The biology and psychology of emotions.
New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company.
http://books.wwnorton.com/books/The-Feeling-Brain/
NPR News: Science Of Sadness And Joy: 'Inside Out' Gets Childhood Emotions Right
http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2015/06/13/413980258/science-of-sadness-and-j­
oy-inside-out-gets-childhood-emotions-right
Online Psychology Laboratory: Motivation and Emotion resources
http://opl.apa.org/Resources.aspx#Motivation
Web: See how well you can read other people’s facial expressions of emotion
http://www.humintell.com/free-demos/

Discussion Questions
1. When emotions occur, why do they simultaneously activate certain physiological and
psychological systems in the body and deactivate others?

Functions of Emotions

211

2. Why is it difficult for people to act rationally and think happy thoughts when they are angry?
Conversely, why is it difficult to remember sad memories or have sad thoughts when people
are happy?
3. You’re walking down a deserted street when you come across a stranger who looks scared.
What would you say? What would you do? Why?
4. You’re walking down a deserted street when you come across a stranger who looks angry.
What would you say? What would you do? Why?
5. Think about the messages children receive from their environment (such as from parents,
mass media, the Internet, Hollywood movies, billboards, and storybooks). In what ways do
these messages influence the kinds of emotions that children should and should not feel?

212

Functions of Emotions

Vocabulary
Cultural display rules
These are rules that are learned early in life that specify the management and modification
of emotional expressions according to social circumstances. Cultural display rules can work
in a number of different ways. For example, they can require individuals to express emotions
“as is” (i.e., as they feel them), to exaggerate their expressions to show more than what is
actually felt, to tone down their expressions to show less than what is actually felt, to conceal
their feelings by expressing something else, or to show nothing at all.
Interpersonal
This refers to the relationship or interaction between two or more individuals in a group. Thus,
the interpersonal functions of emotion refer to the effects of one’s emotion on others, or to
the relationship between oneself and others.
Intrapersonal
This refers to what occurs within oneself. Thus, the intrapersonal functions of emotion refer
to the effects of emotion to individuals that occur physically inside their bodies and
psychologically inside their minds.
Social and cultural
Society refers to a system of relationships between individuals and groups of individuals;
culture refers to the meaning and information afforded to that system that is transmitted
across generations. Thus, the social and cultural functions of emotion refer to the effects that
emotions have on the functioning and maintenance of societies and cultures.
Social referencing
This refers to the process whereby individuals look for information from others to clarify a
situation, and then use that information to act. Thus, individuals will often use the emotional
expressions of others as a source of information to make decisions about their own behavior.

213

Functions of Emotions

References
Baumeister, R. F., Vohs, K. D., DeWall, N., & Zhang, L. (2007). How emotion shapes behavior:
Feedback, anticipation, and reflection, rather than direct causation. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 11(2), 167–203.
Bradshaw, D. (1986). Immediate and prolonged effectiveness of negative emotion expressions in
inhibiting infants' actions (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Berkeley, CA: University of
California, Berkeley.
Cannon, W. B. (1927). The James–Lange theory of emotions: A critical examination and an
alternative theory. American Journal of Psychology, 39, 106–124.
Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (2000). Evolutionary psychology and the emotions. In M. Lewis & J.
M. Haviland-Jones (Eds.), Handbook of emotions (2nd ed., pp. 91–115). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.
Darwin, C. (1872). The expression of emotion in man and animals. New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Dimberg, U., & Ohman, A. (1996). Behold the wrath: Psychophysiological responses to facial
stimuli. Motivation & Emotion, 20(2), 149–182.
Eisenberg, N., Fabes, R. A., Miller, P. A., Fultz, J., Shell, R., Mathy, R. M., & Reno, R. R. (1989).
Relation of sympathy and distress to prosocial behavior: A multimethod study. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 55–66.
Elfenbein, H. A., & Ambady, N. (2002). On the universality and cultural specificity of emotion
recognition: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 128(2), 205–235.
Esteves, F., Dimberg, U., & Ohman, A. (1994). Automatically elicited fear: Conditioned skin
conductance responses to masked facial expressions. Cognition and Emotion, 8(5), 393–413.
Friesen, W. V. (1972). Cultural differences in facial expressions in a social situation: An experimental
test of the concept of display rules (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). San Francisco, CA:
University of California, San Francisco.
Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1992). Marital processes predictive of later dissolution:
Behavior, physiology, and health. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63(2), 221–223.
Gottman, J. M., Levenson, R. W., & Woodin, E. (2001). Facial expressions during marital conflict.
Journal of Family Communication, 1, 37–57.
Hertenstein, M. J., & Campos, J. J. (2004). The retention effects of an adult's emotional displays
on infant behavior. Child Development, 75(2), 595–613.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology. New York, NY: Holt.

Functions of Emotions

214

Keltner, D. (2003). Expression and the course of life: Studies of emotion, personality, and
psychopathology from a social-functional perspective. In P. Ekman, J. Campos, R. J.
Davidson, & F.B.M. De Waal (Eds.), Emotions inside out: 130 years after Darwin's “The expression
of the emotions in man and animals” (Vol. 1000, pp. 222–243). New York, NY: New York
Academy of Sciences.
Klinnert, M. D., Campos, J. J., & Sorce, J. F. (1983). Emotions as behavior regulators: Social
referencing in infancy. In R. Plutchik & H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion: Theory, research, and
experience (pp. 57–86). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Levenson, R. W. (1999). The intrapersonal functions of emotion. Cognition and Emotion, 13(5),
481–504.
Marsh, A. A., Ambady, N., & Kleck, R. E. (2005). The effects of fear and anger facial expressions
on approach- and avoidance-related behaviors. Emotion, 5(1), 119–124.
Matsumoto, D. (2001). Culture and emotion. In D. Matsumoto (Ed.), The handbook of culture
and psychology (pp. 171–194). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Matsumoto, D., & Hwang, H. C. (2013). Assessing cross-cultural competence: A review of
available tests. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 44(6), 849–873.
Matsumoto, D., & Juang, L. (2013). Culture and psychology (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Cengage.
Matsumoto, D., & Wilson, J. (2008). Culture, emotion, and motivation. In R. M. Sorrentino & S.
Yamaguchi (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition across cultures (pp. 541–563). New
York, NY: Elsevier.
Matsumoto, D., Hirayama, S., & LeRoux, J. A. (2006). Psychological skills related to adjustment.
In P.T.P. Wong & L.C.J. Wong (Eds.), Handbook of multicultural perspectives on stress and coping
(pp. 387–405). New York, NY: Springer.
Matsumoto, D., Yoo, S. H., Nakagawa, S., Alexandre, J., Altarriba, J., Anguas-Wong, A. M., et al.
(2008). Culture, emotion regulation, and adjustment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 94(6), 925–937.
Schönpflug, U. (Ed.). (2009). Cultural transmission: Developmental, psychological, social and
methodological aspects. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Sorce, J. F., Emde, J. J., Campos, J. J., & Klinnert, M. D. (1985). Maternal emotional signaling: Its
effect on the visual cliff behavior of 1-year-olds. Developmental Psychology, 21, 195–200.
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (2008). The evolutionary psychology of the emotions and their
relationship to internal regulatory variables. In M. Lewis, J. M. Haviland-Jones, & L. Feldman
Barrett (Eds.), Handbook of Emotions (3rd ed., pp. 114–137). New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Tsai, J. L., Knutson, B., & Fung, H. H. (2006). Cultural variation in affect valuation. Journal of

Functions of Emotions

215

Personality and Social Psychology, 90(2), 288–307.
Tsai, J. L., Louie, J. Y., Chen, E. E., & Uchida, Y. (2007). Learning what feelings to desire:
Socialization of ideal affect through children’s storybooks. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 33(1), 17–30.
Wang, Q., & Ross, M. (2007). Culture and memory. In S. Kitayama & D. Cohen (Eds.), Handbook
of cultural psychology (pp. 645–667). New York, NY: Guilford.
Winkielman, P., Berridge, K. C., & Wilbarger, J. L. (2005). Unconscious affective reactions to
masked happy versus angry faces influence consumption behavior and judgments of value.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31(1), 121–135.

12
Motives and Goals
Ayelet Fishbach & Maferima Touré-Tillery

Your decisions and behaviors are often the result of a goal or motive you possess. This module
provides an overview of the main theories and findings on goals and motivation. We address
the origins, manifestations, and types of goals, and the various factors that influence
motivation in goal pursuit. We further address goal conflict and, specifically, the exercise of
self-control in protecting long-term goals from momentary temptations.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•
•

Define the basic terminology related to goals, motivation, self-regulation, and self-control.
Describe the antecedents and consequences of goal activation.
Describe the factors that influence motivation in the course of goal pursuit.
Explain the process underlying goal activation, self-regulation, and self-control.
Give examples of goal activation effects, self-regulation processes, and self-control
processes.

Introduction
Every New Year, many people make resolutions—or goals—that go unsatisfied: eat healthier;
pay better attention in class; lose weight. As much as we know our lives would improve if we
actually achieved these goals, people quite often don’t follow through. But what if that didn’t
have to be the case? What if every time we made a goal, we actually accomplished it? Each
day, our behavior is the result of countless goals—maybe not goals in the way we think of

217

Motives and Goals

them, like getting that beach body or being the first person to land on Mars. But even with
“mundane” goals, like getting food from the grocery store, or showing up to work on time, we
are often enacting the same psychological processes involved with achieving loftier dreams.
To understand how we can better attain our goals, let’s begin with defining what a goal is and
what underlies it, psychologically.
A goal is the cognitive representation of a
desired state, or, in other words, our mental
idea of how we’d like things to turn out
(Fishbach & Ferguson 2007; Kruglanski,
1996). This desired end state of a goal can
be clearly defined (e.g., stepping on the
surface of Mars), or it can be more abstract
and represent a state that is never fully
completed (e.g., eating healthy). Underlying
all of these goals, though, is motivation, or
the psychological driving force that enables
action in the pursuit of that goal (Lewin,
1935). Motivation can stem from two places.
First, it can come from the benefits
associated with the process of pursuing a
goal (intrinsic motivation). For example, you

Goals are fundamental guides for human behavior. Some are
biological in origin, some are cultural in nature and some are
unique to the individual. [Photo: SweetOnVeg]

might be driven by the desire to have a fulfilling experience while working on your Mars
mission. Second, motivation can also come from the benefits associated with achieving a goal
(extrinsic motivation), such as the fame and fortune that come with being the first person on
Mars (Deci & Ryan, 1985). One easy way to consider intrinsic and extrinsic motivation is through
the eyes of a student. Does the student work hard on assignments because the act of learning
is pleasing (intrinsic motivation)? Or does the student work hard to get good grades, which
will help land a good job (extrinsic motivation)?
Social psychologists recognize that goal pursuit and the motivations that underlie it do not
depend solely on an individual’s personality. Rather, they are products of personal
characteristics and situational factors. Indeed, cues in a person’s immediate environment—
including images, words, sounds, and the presence of other people—can activate, or prime,
a goal. This activation can be conscious, such that the person is aware of the environmental
cues influencing his/her pursuit of a goal. However, this activation can also occur outside a
person’s awareness, and lead to nonconscious goal pursuit. In this case, the person is unaware
of why s/he is pursuing a goal and may not even realize that s/he is pursuing it.

218

Motives and Goals

In this module, we review key aspects of goals and motivation. First, we discuss the origins
and manifestation of goals. Then, we review factors that influence individuals’ motivation in
the course of pursuing a goal (self-regulation). Finally, we discuss what motivates individuals
to keep following their goals when faced with other conflicting desires—for example, when a
tempting opportunity to socialize on Facebook presents itself in the course of studying for an
exam (self-control).

The Origins and Manifestation of Goals
Goal Adoption
What makes us commit to a goal? Researchers tend to agree that commitment stems from
the sense that a goal is both valuable and attainable, and that we adopt goals that are highly
likely to bring positive outcomes (i.e., one’s commitment = the value of the goal × the expectancy
it will be achieved) (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1974; Liberman & Förster, 2008). This process of
committing to a goal can occur without much conscious deliberation. For example, people
infer value and attainability, and will nonconsciously determine their commitment based on
those factors, as well as the outcomes of past goals. Indeed, people often learn about
themselves the same way they learn about other people—by observing their behaviors (in
this case, their own) and drawing inferences about their preferences. For example, after taking
a kickboxing class, you might infer from your efforts that you are indeed committed to staying
physically fit (Fishbach, Zhang, & Koo, 2009).

Goal Priming
We don’t always act on our goals in every context. For instance, sometimes we’ll order a salad
for lunch, in keeping with our dietary goals, while other times we’ll order only dessert. So,
what makes people adhere to a goal in any given context? Cues in the immediate environment
(e.g., objects, images, sounds—anything that primes a goal) can have a remarkable influence
on the pursuit of goals to which people are already committed (Bargh, 1990; Custers, Aarts,
Oikawa, & Elliot, 2009; Förster, Liberman, & Friedman, 2007). How do these cues work? In
memory, goals are organized in associative networks. That is, each goal is connected to other
goals, concepts, and behaviors. Particularly, each goal is connected to corresponding means
—activities and objects that help us attain the goal (Kruglanski et al., 2002). For example, the
goal to stay physically fit may be associated with several means, including a nearby gym, one’s
bicycle, or even a training partner. Cues related to the goal or means (e.g., an ad for running
shoes, a comment about weight loss) can activate or prime the pursuit of that goal. For

219

Motives and Goals

example, the presence of one’s training partner, or even seeing the word “workout” in a puzzle,
can activate the goal of staying physically fit and, hence, increase a person’s motivation to
exercise. Soon after goal priming, the motivation to act on the goal peaks then slowly declines,
after some delay, as the person moves away from the primer or after s/he pursues the goal
(Bargh, Gollwitzer, Lee-Chai, Barndollar, & Trotschel, 2001).

Consequences of Goal Activation
The

activation

of

a

goal

and

the

accompanying increase in motivation can
influence many aspects of behavior and
judgment, including how people perceive,
evaluate, and feel about the world around
them. Indeed, motivational states can even
alter something as fundamental as visual
perception.

For

example,

Balcetis

and

Dunning (2006) showed participants an
ambiguous figure (e.g., “I3”) and asked them
whether they saw the letter B or the number
13. The researchers found that when
participants had the goal of seeing a letter (e.
g., because seeing a number required the
participants to drink a gross tasting juice),

What does this image represent to you, a number or a letter?

they in fact saw a B. It wasn’t that the

Training to run the Boston Marathon? Need to pass 13 credit

participants were simply lying, either; their

hours to graduate this semester? The details of your goals

goal literally changed how they perceived the
world!

may influence how you interpret the world around you.
[Photo: Leo Reynolds]

Goals can also exert a strong influence on how people evaluate the objects (and people)
around them. When pursuing a goal such as quenching one’s thirst, people evaluate goalrelevant objects (e.g., a glass) more positively than objects that are not relevant to the goal (e.
g., a pencil). Furthermore, those with the goal of quenching their thirst rate the glass more
positively than people who are not pursuing the goal (Ferguson & Bargh, 2004). As discussed
earlier, priming a goal can lead to behaviors like this (consistent with the goal), even though
the person isn’t necessarily aware of why (i.e., the source of the motivation). For example,
after research participants saw words related to achievement (in the context of solving a word
search), they automatically performed better on a subsequent achievement test—without
being at all aware that the achievement words had influenced them (Bargh & Chartrand, 1999;

220

Motives and Goals

Srull & Wyer, 1979).

Self-Regulation in Goal Pursuit
Many of the behaviors we like to engage in are inconsistent with achieving our goals. For
example, you may want to be physically fit, but you may also really like German chocolate
cake. Self-regulation refers to the process through which individuals alter their perceptions,
feelings, and actions in the pursuit of a goal. For example, filling up on fruits at a dessert party
is one way someone might alter his or her actions to help with goal attainment. In the following
section, we review the main theories and findings on self-regulation.

From Deliberation to Implementation
Self-regulation involves two basic stages, each with its own distinct mindset. First, a person
must decide which of many potential goals to pursue at a given point in time (deliberative
phase). While in the deliberative phase, a person often has a mindset that fosters an effective
assessment of goals. That is, one tends to be open-minded and realistic about available goals
to pursue. However, such scrutiny of one’s choices sometimes hinders action. For example,
in the deliberative phase about how to spend time, someone might consider improving health,
academic performance, or developing a hobby. At the same time, though, this deliberation
involves considering realistic obstacles, such as one’s busy schedule, which may discourage
the person from believing the goals can likely be achieved (and thus, doesn’t work toward any
of them).
However, after deciding which goal to follow, the second stage involves planning specific
actions related to the goal (implemental phase). In the implemental phase, a person tends
to have a mindset conducive to the effective implementation of a goal through immediate
action—i.e., with the planning done, we’re ready to jump right into attaining our goal.
Unfortunately, though, this mindset often leads to closed-mindedness and unrealistically
positive expectations about the chosen goal (Gollwitzer, Heckhausen, & Steller, 1990;
Kruglanski et al., 2000; Thaler & Shefrin, 1981). For example, in order to follow a health goal,
a person might register for a gym membership and start exercising. In doing so, s/he assumes
this is all that’s needed to achieve the goal (closed-mindedness), and after a few weeks, it
should be accomplished (unrealistic expectations).

Regulation of Ought- and Ideals-Goals

221

Motives and Goals

In addition to two phases in goal pursuit, research
also distinguishes between two distinct selfregulatory orientations (or perceptions of effectiveness)
in pursuing a goal: prevention and promotion. A
prevention focus emphasizes safety, responsibility,
and security needs, and views goals as “oughts.” That
is, for those who are prevention-oriented, a goal is
viewed as something they should be doing, and they
tend to focus on avoiding potential problems (e.g.,
exercising to avoid health threats). This selfregulatory focus leads to a vigilant strategy aimed
at avoiding losses (the presence of negatives) and
approaching non-losses (the absence of negatives).
On the other hand, a promotion focus views goals as
“ideals,” and emphasizes hopes, accomplishments,
and advancement needs. Here, people view their
Different individuals may have different orientations

goals as something they want to do that will bring

toward the same goal. One person - with a

them added pleasure (e.g., exercising because being

prevention orientation -might pursue a fitness goal
primarily to prevent negative health problems, while

healthy allows them to do more activities). This type

another person - with a promotion orientation -

of orientation leads to the adoption of an eager

might pursue the same goal in order to look and feel

strategy concerned with approaching gains (the

better. [Photo: thelearningcurvedotca]

presence of positives) and avoiding non-gains (the
absence of positives).

To compare these two strategies, consider the goal of saving money. Prevention-focused
people will save money because they believe it’s what they should be doing (an ought), and
because they’re concerned about not having any money (avoiding a harm). Promotion-focused
people, on the other hand, will save money because they want to have extra funds (a desire)
so they can do new and fun activities (attaining an advancement). Although these two
strategies result in very similar behaviors, emphasizing potential losses will motivate
individuals with a prevention focus, whereas emphasizing potential gains will motivate
individuals with a promotion focus. And these orientations—responding better to either a
prevention or promotion focus— differ across individuals (chronic regulatory focus) and
situations (momentary regulatory focus; Higgins, 1997).

A Cybernetic Process of Self-Regulation
Self-regulation depends on feelings that arise from comparing actual progress to expected

222

Motives and Goals

progress. During goal pursuit, individuals calculate the discrepancy between their current
state (i.e., all goal-related actions completed so far) and their desired end state (i.e., what they
view as “achieving the goal”). After determining this difference, the person then acts to close
that gap (Miller, Galanter, & Pribram, 1960; Powers, 1973). In this cybernetic process of selfregulation (or, internal system directing how a person should control behavior), a higher-thanexpected rate of closing the discrepancy creates a signal in the form of positive feelings. For
example, if you’re nearly finished with a class project (i.e., a low discrepancy between your
progress and what it will take to completely finish), you feel good about yourself. However,
these positive feelings tend to make individuals “coast,” or reduce their efforts on the focal
goal, and shift their focus to other goals (e.g., you’re almost done with your project for one
class, so you start working on a paper for another). By contrast, a lower-than-expected rate
of closing the gap elicits negative feelings, which leads to greater effort investment on the
focal goal (Carver & Scheier, 1998). If it is the day before a project’s due and you’ve hardly
started it, you will likely feel anxious and stop all other activities to make progress on your
project.

Highlighting One Goal or Balancing Between Goals
When we’ve completed steps toward achieving our goal, looking back on the behaviors or
actions that helped us make such progress can have implications for future behaviors and
actions (see The Dynamics of Self-Regulation framework; Fishbach et al., 2009). Remember,
commitment results from the perceived value and attainability of a goal, whereas progress
describes the perception of a reduced discrepancy between the current state and desired end
state (i.e., the cybernetic process). After achieving a goal, when people interpret their previous
actions as a sign of commitment to it, they tend to highlight the pursuit of that goal, prioritizing
it and putting more effort toward it. However, when people interpret their previous actions
as a sign of progress, they tend to balance between the goal and other goals, putting less
effort into the focal goal. For example, if buying a product on sale reinforces your commitment
to the goal of saving money, you will continue to behave financially responsibly. However, if
you perceive the same action (buying the sale item) as evidence of progress toward the goal
of saving money, you might feel like you can “take a break” from your goal, justifying splurging
on a subsequent purchase. Several factors can influence the meanings people assign to
previous goal actions. For example, the more confident a person is about a commitment to
a goal, the more likely s/he is to infer progress rather than commitment from his/her actions
(Koo & Fishbach, 2008).

Conflicting Goals and Self-Control

223

Motives and Goals

In the pursuit of our ordinary and
extraordinary goals (e.g., staying physically
or financially healthy, landing on Mars), we
inevitably come across other goals (e.g.,
eating delicious food, exploring Earth) that
might get in the way of our lofty ambitions.
In such situations, we must exercise selfcontrol to stay on course. Self-control is the
capacity to control impulses, emotions,
desires, and actions in order to resist a
temptation (e.g., going on a shopping spree)
and protect a valued goal (e.g., stay
financially sound). As such, self-control is a
process of self-regulation in contexts
Immediate gratification has a way of interfering with the pursuit

involving a clear trade-off between long-

of more significant long-term goals. New shoes feel awfully

term interests (e.g., health, financial, or

good right now but don't do anything to get us closer to our
financial savings target. [Photo: LipglossJunkie]

Martian) and some form of immediate
gratification (Fishbach & Converse, 2010;

Rachlin, 2000; Read, Loewenstein, & Rabin, 1999; Thaler & Shefrin, 1981). For example,
whereas reading each page of a textbook requires self-regulation, doing so while resisting the
tempting sounds of friends socializing in the next room requires self-control. And although
you may tend to believe self-control is just a personal characteristic that varies across
individuals, it is like a muscle, in that it becomes drained by being used but is also strengthened
in the process.

Self-Control as an Innate Ability
Mischel, Shoda, and Rodriguez (1989) identified enduring individual differences in self-control
and found that the persistent capacity to postpone immediate gratification for the sake of
future interests leads to greater cognitive and social competence over the course of a lifetime.
In a famous series of lab experiments (first conducted by Mischel & Baker, 1975), preschoolers
3–5 years old were asked to choose between getting a smaller treat immediately (e.g., a single
marshmallow) or waiting as long as 15 minutes to get a better one (e.g., two marshmallows).
Some children were better-able to exercise self-control than others, resisting the temptation
to take the available treat and waiting for the better one. Following up with these preschoolers
ten years later, the researchers found that the children who were able to wait longer in the
experiment for the second marshmallow (vs. those who more quickly ate the single
marshmallow) performed better academically and socially, and had better psychological

224

Motives and Goals

coping skills as adolescents.

Self-Control as a Limited Resource
Beyond personal characteristics, the ability to
exercise self-control can fluctuate from one
context to the next. In particular, previous
exertion of self-control (e.g., choosing not to eat
a donut) drains individuals of the limited
physiological

and

psychological

resources

required to continue the pursuit of a goal (e.g.,
later in the day, again resisting a sugary treat).
Ego-depletion refers to this exhaustion of
resources from resisting a temptation. That is,
just like bicycling for two hours would exhaust
someone before a basketball game, exerting selfcontrol reduces individuals’ capacity to exert
more self-control in a consequent task—whether
that task is in the same domain (e.g., resisting a
donut and then continuing to eat healthy) or a
different one (e.g., resisting a donut and then
continuing

to

be

financially

responsible;

Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven, & Tice, 1998;

Willpower is limited. Trying to resist temptation now
takes energy and may leave you feeling like it's harder

Vohs & Heatherton, 2000). For example, in a

to be disciplined later. You can only eat so many radishes

study by Baumeister et al. (1998), research

. . . [Photo: ghbrett]

participants who forced themselves to eat
radishes instead of tempting chocolates were subsequently less persistent (i.e., gave up
sooner) at attempting an unsolvable puzzle task compared to the participants who had not
exerted self-control to resist the chocolates.

A Prerequisite to Self-Control: Identification
Although factors such as resources and personal characteristics contribute to the successful
exercise of self-control, identifying the self-control conflict inherent to a particular situation
is an important—and often overlooked—prerequisite. For example, if you have a long-term
goal of getting better sleep but don’t perceive that staying up late on a Friday night is
inconsistent with this goal, you won’t have a self-control conflict. The successful pursuit of a
goal in the face of temptation requires that individuals first identify they are having impulses

225

Motives and Goals

that need to be controlled. However, individuals often fail to identify self-control conflicts
because many everyday temptations seem to have very minimal negative consequences: one
bowl of ice cream is unlikely to destroy a person’s health, but what about 200 bowls of ice
cream over the course of a few months?
People are more likely to identify a self-control conflict, and exercise self-control, when they
think of a choice as part of a broader pattern of repeated behavior rather than as an isolated
choice. For example, rather than seeing one bowl of ice cream as an isolated behavioral
decision, the person should try to recognize that this “one bowl of ice cream” is actually part
of a nightly routine. Indeed, when considering broader decision patterns, consistent
temptations become more problematic for long-term interests (Rachlin, 2000; Read,
Loewenstein, & Kalyanaraman, 1999). Moreover, conflict identification is more likely if people
see their current choices as similar to their future choices.

Self-Control Processes: Counteracting Temptation
The protection of a valued goal involves several cognitive and behavioral strategies ultimately
aimed at “counteracting” the pull of temptations and pushing oneself toward goal-related
alternatives (Fishbach & Trope, 2007). One such cognitive process involves decreasing the
value of temptations and increasing the value of goal-consistent objects or actions. For
example, health-conscious individuals might tell themselves a sugary treat is less appealing
than a piece of fruit in order to direct their choice toward the latter. Other behavioral strategies
include a precommitment to pursue goals and forgo temptation (e.g., leaving one’s credit card
at home before going to the mall), establishing rewards for goals and penalties for temptations,
or physically approaching goals and distancing oneself from temptations (e.g., pushing away
a dessert plate). These self-control processes can benefit individuals’ long-term interests,
either consciously or without conscious awareness. Thus, at times, individuals automatically
activate goal-related thoughts in response to temptation, and inhibit temptation-related
thoughts in the presence of goal cues (Fishbach, Friedman, & Kruglanski, 2003).

Conclusion
People often make New Year’s resolutions with the idea that attaining one’s goals is simple:
“I just have to choose to eat healthier, right?” However, after going through this module and
learning a social-cognitive approach to the main theories and findings on goals and motivation,
we see that even the most basic decisions take place within a much larger and more complex
mental framework. From the principles of goal priming and how goals influence perceptions,
feelings, and actions, to the factors of self-regulation and self-control, we have learned the

Motives and Goals

226

phases, orientations, and fluctuations involved in the course of everyday goal pursuit. Looking
back on prior goal failures, it may seem impossible to achieve some of our desires. But, through
understanding our own mental representation of our goals (i.e., the values and expectancies
behind them), we can help cognitively modify our behavior to achieve our dreams. If you do,
who knows?—maybe you will be the first person to step on Mars.

227

Motives and Goals

Discussion Questions
1. What is the difference between goal and motivation?
2. What is the difference between self-regulation and self-control?
3. How do positive and negative feelings inform goal pursuit in a cybernetic self-regulation
process?
4. Describe the characteristics of the deliberative mindset that allows individuals to decide
between different goals. How might these characteristics hinder the implemental phase
of self-regulation?
5. You just read a module on “Goals and Motivation,” and you believe it is a sign of commitment
to the goal of learning about social psychology. Define commitment in this context. How
would interpreting your efforts as a sign of commitment influence your motivation to read
more about social psychology? By contrast, how would interpreting your efforts as a sign
of progress influence your motivation to read more?
6. Mel and Alex are friends. Mel has a prevention focus self-regulatory orientation, whereas
Alex has a promotion focus. They are both training for a marathon and are looking for
motivational posters to hang in their respective apartments. While shopping, they find a
poster with the following Confucius quote: “The will to win, the desire to succeed, the urge
to reach your full potential ... . These are the keys that will unlock the door to personal
excellence.” Who is this poster more likely to help stay motivated for the marathon (Mel
or Alex)? Why? Find or write a quote that might help the other friend.
7. Give an example in which an individual fails to exercise self-control. What are some factors
that can cause such a self-control failure?

228

Motives and Goals

Vocabulary
Balancing between goals
Shifting between a focal goal and other goals or temptations by putting less effort into the
focal goal—usually with the intention of coming back to the focal goal at a later point in time.
Commitment
The sense that a goal is both valuable and attainable
Conscious goal activation
When a person is fully aware of contextual influences and resulting goal-directed behavior.
Deliberative phase
The first of the two basic stages of self-regulation in which individuals decide which of many
potential goals to pursue at a given point in time.
Ego-depletion
The exhaustion of physiological and/or psychological resources following the completion of
effortful self-control tasks, which subsequently leads to reduction in the capacity to exert
more self-control.
Extrinsic motivation
Motivation stemming from the benefits associated with achieving a goal such as obtaining a
monetary reward.
Goal
The cognitive representation of a desired state (outcome).
Goal priming
The activation of a goal following exposure to cues in the immediate environment related to
the goal or its corresponding means (e.g., images, words, sounds).
Highlighting a goal
Prioritizing a focal goal over other goals or temptations by putting more effort into the focal
goal.
Implemental phase
The second of the two basic stages of self-regulation in which individuals plan specific actions

Motives and Goals

229

related to their selected goal.
Intrinsic motivation
Motivation stemming from the benefits associated with the process of pursuing a goal such
as having a fulfilling experience.
Means
Activities or objects that contribute to goal attainment.
Motivation
The psychological driving force that enables action in the course of goal pursuit.
Nonconscious goal activation
When activation occurs outside a person’s awareness, such that the person is unaware of the
reasons behind her goal-directed thoughts and behaviors.
Prevention focus
One of two self-regulatory orientations emphasizing safety, responsibility, and security needs,
and viewing goals as “oughts.” This self-regulatory focus seeks to avoid losses (the presence
of negatives) and approach non-losses (the absence of negatives).
Progress
The perception of reducing the discrepancy between one’s current state and one’s desired
state in goal pursuit.
Promotion focus
One of two self-regulatory orientations emphasizing hopes, accomplishments, and
advancement needs, and viewing goals as “ideals.” This self-regulatory focus seeks to approach
gains (the presence of positives) and avoid non-gains (the absence of positives).
Self-control
The capacity to control impulses, emotions, desires, and actions in order to resist a temptation
and adhere to a valued goal.
Self-regulation
The processes through which individuals alter their emotions, desires, and actions in the
course of pursuing a goal.

230

Motives and Goals

References
Balcetis, E., & Dunning, D. (2006). See what you want to see: Motivational influences on visual
perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91(4), 612–625.
Bargh, J. A. (1990). Conditional automaticity. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 28(6), 486–486.
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999). The unbearable automaticity of being. American
Psychologist, 54(7), 462–479.
Bargh, J. A., Gollwitzer, P. M., Lee-Chai, A., Barndollar, K., & Trotschel, R. (2001). The automated
will: Nonconscious activation and pursuit of behavioral goals. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 81(6), 1014–1027.
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice, D. M. (1998). Ego depletion: Is the active
self a limited resource? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(5), 1252–1265.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1998). On the self-regulation of behavior. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press
Custers, R., Aarts, H., Oikawa, M., & Elliot, A. (2009). The nonconscious road to perceptions of
performance: Achievement priming augments outcome expectancies and experienced
self-agency. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45(6), 1200–1208.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). The general causality orientations scale–Self-determination
in personality. Journal of Research in Personality, 19(2), 109–134.
Ferguson, M. J., & Bargh, J. A. (2004). Liking is for doing: The effects of goal pursuit on automatic
evaluation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(5), 557–572.
Fishbach, A., & Converse, B. A. (2010). Identifying and battling temptation. In K. D. Vohs & R.
F. Baumeister (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation: Research, theory, and applications (2nd ed.,
pp. 244–260). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Fishbach, A., & Ferguson, M. F. (2007). The goal construct in social psychology. In A. W.
Kruglanski & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 490–
515). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Fishbach, A., Friedman, R. S., & Kruglanski, A. W. (2003). Leading us not unto temptation:
Momentary allurements elicit overriding goal activation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 84(2), 296–309.
Fishbach, A. & Trope, Y., (2007). Implicit and explicit mechanisms of counteractive self-control.
In J. Shah and W. Gardner (Eds.), Handbook of motivation science (pp. 281–294). New York,
NY: Guilford Press.
Fishbach, A., Zhang, Y., & Koo, M. (2009). The dynamics of self-regulation. European Review of

Motives and Goals

231

Social Psychology, 20, 15–344.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1974). Attitudes toward objects as predictors of single and multiple
behavioral criteria. Psychological Review, 81(1), 59–74.
Förster, J., Liberman, N., & Friedman, R. S. (2007). Seven principles of goal activation: A
systematic approach to distinguishing goal priming from priming of non-goal constructs.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11(3), 211–233.
Gollwitzer, P. M., Heckhausen, H., & Steller, B. (1990). Deliberative and implemental mindsets–
Cognitive tuning toward congruous thoughts and information. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 59(6), 1119–1127.
Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain. American Psychologist, 52(12), 1280–1300.
Koo, M., & Fishbach, A. (2008). Dynamics of self-regulation: How (un)accomplished goal actions
affect motivation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94(2), 183–195.
Kruglanski, A. W. (1996). Goals as knowledge structures. In P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.),
The psychology of action: Linking cognition and motivation to behavior (pp. 599–618). New
York, NY: Guilford Press.
Kruglanski, A. W., Shah, J. Y., Fishbach, A., Friedman, R., Chun, W. Y., & Sleeth-Keppler, D. (2002).
A theory of goal systems. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 34, 331–378.
Kruglanski, A. W., Thompson, E. P., Higgins, E. T., Atash, M. N., Pierro, A., Shah, J. Y., … et al.
(2000). To “do the right thing” or to “just do it”: Locomotion and assessment as distinct selfregulatory imperatives. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(5), 793–815.
Lewin, K. (1935). A dynamic theory of personality: Selected papers (D. E. Adams & K. E. Zener,
Trans). New York, NY: McGraw Hill.
Liberman, N., & Förster, J. (2008). Expectancy, value and psychological distance: A new look
at goal gradients. Social Cognition, 26(5), 515–533.
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K. H. (1960). Plans and the structure of behavior. New York,
NY: Henry Holt.
Mischel, W., & Baker, N. (1975). Cognitive appraisals and transformations in delay behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31(2), 254
Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay of gratification in children. Science, 244
(4907), 933–938.
Powers, W. T. (1973). Behavior: The control of perception. Oxford, UK: Aldine.
Rachlin, H. (2000). The science of self-control. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Read, D., Loewenstein, G., & Kalyanaraman, S. (1999). Mixing virtue and vice: Combining the

Motives and Goals

232

immediacy effect and the diversification heuristic. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 12
(4), 257–273.
Read, D., Loewenstein, G., & Rabin, M. (1999). Choice bracketing. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty,
19(1-3), 171–197.
Srull, T. K., & Wyer, R. S. (1979). Role of category accessibility in the interpretation of information
about persons—Some determinants and implications. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 37(10), 1660–1672.
Thaler, R. H., & Shefrin, H. M. (1981). An economic-theory of self-control. Journal of Political
Economy, 89(2), 392–406.
Vohs, K. D., & Heatherton, T. F. (2000). Self-regulatory failure: A resource-depletion approach.
Psychological Science, 11(3), 249–254.

Chapter 9: Stress & Health

13
The Healthy Life
Emily Hooker & Sarah Pressman

Our emotions, thoughts, and behaviors play an important role in our health. Not only do they
influence our day-to-day health practices, but they can also influence how our body functions.
This module provides an overview of health psychology, which is a field devoted to
understanding the connections between psychology and health. Discussed here are examples
of topics a health psychologist might study, including stress, psychosocial factors related to
health and disease, how to use psychology to improve health, and the role of psychology in
medicine.

Learning Objectives

•
•

Describe basic terminology used in the field of health psychology.
Explain theoretical models of health, as well as the role of psychological stress in the
development of disease.

•
•

Describe psychological factors that contribute to resilience and improved health.
Defend the relevance and importance of psychology to the field of medicine.

What Is Health Psychology?
Today, we face more chronic disease than ever before because we are living longer lives while
also frequently behaving in unhealthy ways. One example of a chronic disease is coronary
heart disease (CHD): It is the number one cause of death worldwide (World Health
Organization, 2013). CHD develops slowly over time and typically appears midlife, but related

235

The Healthy Life

heart problems can persist for years after the original diagnosis or cardiovascular event. In
managing illnesses that persist over time (other examples might include cancer, diabetes, and
long-term disability) many psychological factors will determine the progression of the ailment.
For example, do patients seek help when appropriate?

Do they follow doctor

recommendations? Do they develop negative psychological symptoms due to lasting illness
(e.g., depression)? Also important is that psychological factors can play a significant role in
who develops these diseases, the prognosis, and the nature of the symptoms related to the
illness. Health psychology is a relatively new, interdisciplinary field of study that focuses on
these very issues, or more specifically, the role of psychology in maintaining health, as well
as preventing and treating illness.
Consideration of how psychological
and social factors influence health is
especially important today because
many of the leading causes of illness
in developed countries are often
attributed

to

psychological

and

behavioral factors. In the case of CHD,
discussed above, psychosocial factors,
such as excessive stress, smoking,
unhealthy eating habits, and some
personality traits can also lead to
increased risk of disease and worse
health outcomes.

That being said,

many of these factors can be adjusted

Health psychologists are helping people to adapt behaviors to avoid
disease, reduce stress, and improve overall health. [Photo: Adelphi Lab
Center]

using psychological techniques. For
example, clinical health psychologists can improve health practices like poor dietary choices
and smoking, they can teach important stress reduction techniques, and they can help treat
psychological disorders tied to poor health. Health psychology considers how the choices we
make, the behaviors we engage in, and even the emotions that we feel, can play an important
role in our overall health (Cohen & Herbert, 1996; Taylor, 2012).
Health psychology relies on the Biopsychosocial Model of Health. This model posits that
biology, psychology, and social factors are just as important in the development of disease as
biological causes (e.g., germs, viruses), which is consistent with the World Health Organization
(1946) definition of health. This model replaces the older Biomedical Model of Health, which
primarily considers the physical, or pathogenic, factors contributing to illness. Thanks to
advances in medical technology, there is a growing understanding of the physiology underlying
the mind–body connection, and in particular, the role that different feelings can have on our

236

The Healthy Life

body’s function. Health psychology researchers working in the fields of psychosomatic
medicine and psychoneuroimmunology, for example, are interested in understanding how
psychological factors can “get under the skin” and influence our physiology in order to better
understand how factors like stress can make us sick.

Stress And Health
You probably know exactly what it’s like to feel stress, but what you may not know is that it
can objectively influence your health. Answers to questions like, “How stressed do you feel?”
or “How overwhelmed do you feel?” can predict your likelihood of developing both minor
illnesses as well as serious problems like future heart attack (Cohen, Janicki-Deverts, & Miller,
2007). (Want to measure your own stress level? Check out the links at the end of the module.)
To understand how health psychologists study these types of associations, we will describe
one famous example of a stress and health study. Imagine that you are a research subject
for a moment. After you check into a hotel room as part of the study, the researchers ask you
to report your general levels of stress. Not too surprising; however, what happens next is that
you receive droplets of cold virus into your nose! The researchers intentionally try to make
you sick by exposing you to an infectious illness. After they expose you to the virus, the
researchers will then evaluate you for several days by asking you questions about your

Figure 1: Adapted from Cohen et al. 1991

237

The Healthy Life

symptoms, monitoring how much mucus you are producing by weighing your used tissues,
and taking body fluid samples—all to see if you are objectively ill with a cold. Now, the
interesting thing is that not everyone who has drops of cold virus put in their nose develops
the illness. Studies like this one find that people who are less stressed and those who are
more positive at the beginning of the study are at a decreased risk of developing a cold (Cohen,
Tyrrell, & Smith, 1991; Cohen, Alper, Doyle, Treanor, & Turner, 2006) (see Figure 1 for an
example).
Importantly, it is not just major life stressors (e.g., a family death, a natural disaster) that
increase the likelihood of getting sick. Even small daily hassles like getting stuck in traffic or
fighting with your girlfriend can raise your blood pressure, alter your stress hormones, and
even suppress your immune system function (DeLongis, Folkman, & Lazarus, 1988; Twisk,
Snel, Kemper, & van Machelen, 1999).
It is clear that stress plays a major role in our mental and physical health, but what exactly is
it? The term stress was originally derived from the field of mechanics where it is used to
describe materials under pressure. The word was first used in a psychological manner by
researcher Hans Selye. He was examining the effect of an ovarian hormone that he thought
caused sickness in a sample of rats. Surprisingly, he noticed that almost any injected hormone
produced this same sickness. He smartly realized that it was not the hormone under
investigation that was causing these problems, but instead, the aversive experience of being
handled and injected by researchers that led to high physiological arousal and, eventually, to
health problems like ulcers. Selye (1946) coined the term stressor to label a stimulus that had
this effect on the body and developed a model of the stress response called the General
Adaptation Syndrome. Since then, psychologists have studied stress in a myriad of ways,
including stress as negative events (e.g., natural disasters or major life changes like dropping
out of school), as chronically difficult situations (e.g., taking care of a loved one with
Alzheimer’s), as short-term hassles, as a biological fight-or-flight response, and even as clinical
illness like post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). It continues to be one of the most important
and well-studied psychological correlates of illness, because excessive stress causes
potentially damaging wear and tear on the body and can influence almost any imaginable
disease process.

Protecting Our Health
An important question that health psychologists ask is: What keeps us protected from disease
and alive longer? When considering this issue of resilience (Rutter, 1985), five factors are
often studied in terms of their ability to protect (or sometimes harm) health. They are:

238

The Healthy Life

1. Coping
2. Control and Self-Efficacy
3. Social Relationships
4. Dispositions and Emotions
5. Stress Management

Coping Strategies
How individuals cope with the stressors they face can have a significant impact on health.
Coping is often classified into two categories: problem-focused coping or emotion-focused
coping (Carver, Scheier, & Weintraub, 1989). Problem-focused coping is thought of as actively
addressing the event that is causing stress in an effort to solve the issue at hand. For example,
say you have an important exam coming up next week. A problem-focused strategy might
be to spend additional time over the weekend studying to make sure you understand all of
the material. Emotion-focused coping, on the other hand, regulates the emotions that come
with stress. In the above examination example, this might mean watching a funny movie to
take your mind off the anxiety you are feeling. In the short term, emotion-focused coping
might reduce feelings of stress, but problem-focused coping seems to have the greatest impact
on mental wellness (Billings & Moos, 1981; Herman-Stabl, Stemmler, & Petersen, 1995). That
being said, when events are uncontrollable (e.g., the death of a loved one), emotion-focused
coping directed at managing your feelings, at first, might be the better strategy. Therefore, it
is always important to consider the match of the stressor to the coping strategy when
evaluating its plausible benefits.

Control and Self-Efficacy
Another factor tied to better health outcomes and an improved ability to cope with stress is
having the belief that you have control over a situation. For example, in one study where
participants were forced to listen to unpleasant (stressful) noise, those who were led to believe
that they had control over the noise performed much better on proofreading tasks afterwards
(Glass & Singer, 1972). In other words, even though participants did not have actual control
over the noise, the control belief aided them in completing the task. In similar studies,
perceived control benefited immune system functioning (Sieber et al., 1992). Outside of the
laboratory, studies have shown that older residents in assisted living facilities, which are
notorious for low control, lived longer and showed better health outcomes when given control
over something as simple as watering a plant or choosing when student volunteers came to

239

The Healthy Life

visit (Rodin & Langer, 1977; Schulz & Hanusa,
1978).

In addition, feeling in control of a

threatening situation can actually change stress
hormone levels (Dickerson & Kemeny, 2004).
Believing that you have control over your own
behaviors can also have a positive influence on
important outcomes like smoking cessation,
contraception use, and weight management
(Wallston & Wallston, 1978). When individuals
do not believe they have control, they do not try
to change. Self-efficacy is closely related to
control, in that people with high levels of this
trait believe they can complete tasks and reach
their goals. Just as feeling in control can reduce
stress and improve health, higher self-efficacy
can

reduce

stress

and

negative

health

behaviors, and is associated with better health
(O’Leary, 1985).
Feeling a sense of control in one's life is important.
Something as simple as having control over the care of a

Social Relationships

houseplant has been shown to improve health and
longevity. [Photo: Vicburton]

Research has shown that the impact of social
isolation on our risk for disease and death is

similar in magnitude to the risk associated with smoking regularly (Holt-Lunstad, Smith, &
Layton, 2010; House, Landis, & Umberson, 1988). In fact, the importance of social relationships
for our health is so significant that some scientists believe our body has developed a
physiological system that encourages us to seek out our relationships, especially in times of
stress (Taylor et al., 2000). Social integration is the concept used to describe the number of
social roles that you have (Cohen & Wills, 1985), as well as the lack of isolation. For example,
you might be a daughter, a basketball team member, a Humane Society volunteer, a coworker,
and a student. Maintaining these different roles can improve your health via encouragement
from those around you to maintain a healthy lifestyle. Those in your social network might
also provide you with social support (e.g., when you are under stress). This support might
include emotional help (e.g., a hug when you need it), tangible help (e.g., lending you money),
or advice. By helping to improve health behaviors and reduce stress, social relationships can
have a powerful, protective impact on health, and in some cases, might even help people with
serious illnesses stay alive longer (Spiegel, Kraemer, Bloom, & Gottheil, 1989).

240

The Healthy Life

Dispositions and Emotions: What’s Risky and What’s Protective?
Negative dispositions and personality traits have been strongly tied to an array of health risks.
One of the earliest negative trait-to-health connections was discovered in the 1950s by two
cardiologists. They made the interesting discovery that there were common behavioral and
psychological patterns among their heart patients that were not present in other patient
samples. This pattern included being competitive, impatient, hostile, and time urgent. They
labeled it Type A Behavior. Importantly, it was found to be associated with double the risk of
heart disease as compared with Type B Behavior (Friedman & Rosenman, 1959). Since the
1950s, researchers have discovered that it is the hostility and competitiveness components
of Type A that are especially harmful to heart health (Iribarren et al., 2000; Matthews, Glass,
Rosenman, & Bortner, 1977; Miller, Smith, Turner, Guijarro, & Hallet, 1996). Hostile individuals
are quick to get upset, and this angry arousal can damage the arteries of the heart. In addition,
given their negative personality style, hostile people often lack a heath-protective supportive
social network.
Positive traits and states, on the other hand, are often health protective. For example,
characteristics like positive emotions (e.g., feeling happy or excited) have been tied to a wide
range of benefits such as increased longevity, a reduced likelihood of developing some
illnesses, and better outcomes once you are diagnosed with certain diseases (e.g., heart
disease, HIV) (Pressman & Cohen, 2005). Across the world, even in the most poor and
underdeveloped nations, positive emotions are consistently tied to better health (Pressman,
Gallagher, & Lopez, 2013). Positive emotions can also serve as the “antidote” to stress,
protecting us against some of its damaging effects (Fredrickson, 2001; Pressman & Cohen,
2005; see Figure 2). Similarly, looking on the bright side can also improve health. Optimism
has been shown to improve coping, reduce stress, and predict better disease outcomes like
recovering from a heart attack more rapidly (Kubzansky, Sparrow, Vokonas, & Kawachi, 2001;
Nes & Segerstrom, 2006; Scheier & Carver, 1985; Segerstrom, Taylor, Kemeny, & Fahey, 1998).

Stress Management
About 20 percent of Americans report having stress, with 18–33 year-olds reporting the highest
levels (American Psychological Association, 2012). Given that the sources of our stress are
often difficult to change (e.g., personal finances, current job), a number of interventions have
been designed to help reduce the aversive responses to duress. For example, relaxation
activities and forms of meditation are techniques that allow individuals to reduce their stress
via breathing exercises, muscle relaxation, and mental imagery. Physiological arousal from
stress can also be reduced via biofeedback, a technique where the individual is shown bodily

241

The Healthy Life

information

that

is

not

normally

available to them (e.g., heart rate), and
then taught strategies to alter this signal.
This type of intervention has even shown
promise in reducing heart and hypertension
risk, as well as other serious conditions
(e.g., Moravec, 2008; Patel, Marmot, &
Terry, 1981). But reducing stress does not
have to be complicated! For example,
exercise is a great stress reduction
activity (Salmon, 2001) that has a myriad
of health benefits.

The Importance Of Good
Health Practices
As a student, you probably strive to
maintain good grades, to have an active

Figure 2. This figure illustrates one possible way that positive affect
protects individuals against disease. Positive affect can reduce
stress perceptions (a), thereby improving health behaviors (b) and

social life, and to stay healthy (e.g., by

lowering physiological stress responses (c) (e.g., decreased

getting enough sleep), but there is a

cardiovascular reactivity, lower stress hormones, non-suppressed

popular joke about what it’s like to be in

immune activity). As a result, there is likely to be less incidence of

college: you can only pick two of these

disease (d, e). (Adapted from Pressman & Cohen, 2005)

things (see Figure 3 for an example). The
busy life of a college student doesn’t always allow you to maintain all three areas of your life,
especially during test-taking periods. In one study, researchers found that students taking
exams were more stressed and, thus, smoked more, drank more caffeine, had less physical
activity, and had worse sleep habits (Oaten & Chang, 2005), all of which could have detrimental
effects on their health. Positive health practices are especially important in times of stress
when your immune system is compromised due to high stress and the elevated frequency of
exposure to the illnesses of your fellow students in lecture halls, cafeterias, and dorms.
Psychologists study both health behaviors and health habits. The former are behaviors that
can improve or harm your health. Some examples include regular exercise, flossing, and
wearing sunscreen, versus negative behaviors like drunk driving, pulling all-nighters, or
smoking. These behaviors become habits when they are firmly established and performed
automatically. For example, do you have to think about putting your seatbelt on or do you
do it automatically? Habits are often developed early in life thanks to parental encouragement
or the influence of our peer group.

242

The Healthy Life

Figure 3: A popular joke about how difficult it is to stay balanced and healthy during college.

While these behaviors sound minor, studies have shown that those who engaged in more of
these protective habits (e.g., getting 7–8 hours of sleep regularly, not smoking or drinking
excessively, exercising) had fewer illnesses, felt better, and were less likely to die over a 9–12year follow-up period (Belloc & Breslow 1972; Breslow & Enstrom 1980). For college students,
health behaviors can even influence academic performance. For example, poor sleep quality
and quantity are related to weaker learning capacity and academic performance (Curcio,
Ferrara, & De Gennaro, 2006). Due to the effects that health behaviors can have, much effort
is put forward by psychologists to understand how to change unhealthy behaviors, and to
understand why individuals fail to act in healthy ways. Health promotion involves enabling
individuals to improve health by focusing on behaviors that pose a risk for future illness, as
well as spreading knowledge on existing risk factors. These might be genetic risks you are
born with, or something you developed over time like obesity, which puts you at risk for Type
2 diabetes and heart disease, among other illnesses.

Psychology And Medicine
There are many psychological factors that influence medical treatment outcomes. For
example, older individuals, (Meara, White, & Cutler, 2004), women (Briscoe, 1987), and those
from higher socioeconomic backgrounds (Adamson, Ben-Shlomo, Chaturvedi, & Donovan,
2008) are all more likely to seek medical care. On the other hand, some individuals who need

243

The Healthy Life

care might avoid it due to
financial obstacles or preconceived
notions about medical practitioners
or the illness. Thanks to the
growing amount of medical
information online, many people
now use the Internet for health
information and 38% percent
report that this influences their
decision to see a doctor (Fox &
Jones, 2009).

Unfortunately,

this is not always a good thing
While the internet has increased the amount of medical information available
to the public and created greater access there are real concerns about how
people are making decisions about their health based on that information.

because individuals tend to do
a

poor

job

assessing

the

credibility of health information.

[Photo: jfcherry]

For example, college-student
participants reading online articles about HIV and syphilis rated a physician’s article and a
college student’s article as equally credible if the participants said they were familiar with the
health topic (Eastin, 2001). Credibility of health information often means how accurate or
trustworthy the information is, and it can be influenced by irrelevant factors, such as the
website’s design, logos, or the organization’s contact information (Freeman & Spyridakis,
2004). Similarly, many people post health questions on online, unmoderated forums where
anyone can respond, which allows for the possibility of inaccurate information being provided
for serious medical conditions by unqualified individuals.
After individuals decide to seek care, there is also variability in the information they give their
medical provider. Poor communication (e.g., due to embarrassment or feeling rushed) can
influence the accuracy of the diagnosis and the effectiveness of the prescribed treatment.
Similarly, there is variation following a visit to the doctor. While most individuals are tasked
with a health recommendation (e.g., buying and using a medication appropriately, losing
weight, going to another expert), not everyone adheres to medical recommendations (DunbarJacob & Mortimer-Stephens, 2010).

For example, many individuals take medications

inappropriately (e.g., stopping early, not filling prescriptions) or fail to change their behaviors
(e.g., quitting smoking). Unfortunately, getting patients to follow medical orders is not as easy
as one would think. For example, in one study, over one third of diabetic patients failed to
get proper medical care that would prevent or slow down diabetes-related blindness
(Schoenfeld, Greene, Wu, & Leske, 2001)! Fortunately, as mobile technology improves,
physicians now have the ability to monitor adherence and work to improve it (e.g., with pill
bottles that monitor if they are opened at the right time). Even text messages are useful for

244

The Healthy Life

improving treatment adherence and outcomes in depression, smoking cessation, and weight
loss (Cole-Lewis, & Kershaw, 2010).

Being A Health Psychologist
Training as a clinical health psychologist provides a variety of possible career options. Clinical
health psychologists often work on teams of physicians, social workers, allied health
professionals, and religious leaders.

These teams may be formed in locations like

rehabilitation centers, hospitals, primary care offices, emergency care centers, or in chronic
illness clinics. Work in each of these settings will pose unique challenges in patient care, but
the primary responsibility will be the same. Clinical health psychologists will evaluate physical,
personal, and environmental factors contributing to illness and preventing improved health.
In doing so, they will then help create a treatment strategy that takes into account all
dimensions of a person’s life and health, which maximizes its potential for success. Those
who specialize in health psychology can also conduct research to discover new health
predictors and risk factors, or develop interventions to prevent and treat illness. Researchers
studying health psychology work in numerous locations, such as universities, public health
departments, hospitals, and private organizations. In the related field of behavioral medicine,
careers focus on the application of this type of research. Occupations in this area might
include jobs in occupational therapy, rehabilitation, or preventative medicine. Training as a
health psychologist provides a wide skill set applicable in a number of different professional
settings and career paths.

The Future Of Health Psychology
Much of the past medical research literature provides an incomplete picture of human health.
“Health care” is often “illness care.” That is, it focuses on the management of symptoms and
illnesses as they arise. As a result, in many developed countries, we are faced with several
health epidemics that are difficult and costly to treat. These include obesity, diabetes, and
cardiovascular disease, to name a few. The National Institutes of Health have called for
researchers to use the knowledge we have about risk factors to design effective interventions
to reduce the prevalence of preventable illness. Additionally, there are a growing number of
individuals across developed countries with multiple chronic illnesses and/or lasting
disabilities, especially with older age. Addressing their needs and maintaining their quality
of life will require skilled individuals who understand how to properly treat these populations.
Health psychologists will be on the forefront of work in these areas.
With this focus on prevention, it is important that health psychologists move beyond studying

The Healthy Life

245

risk (e.g., depression, stress, hostility, low socioeconomic status) in isolation, and move toward
studying factors that confer resilience and protection from disease. There is, fortunately, a
growing interest in studying the positive factors that protect our health (e.g., Diener & Chan,
2011; Pressman & Cohen, 2005; Richman, Kubzansky, Maselko, Kawachi, Choo, & Bauer, 2005)
with evidence strongly indicating that people with higher positivity live longer, suffer fewer
illnesses, and generally feel better. Seligman (2008) has even proposed a field of “Positive
Health” to specifically study those who exhibit “above average” health—something we do not
think about enough. By shifting some of the research focus to identifying and understanding
these health-promoting factors, we may capitalize on this information to improve public
health.
Innovative interventions to improve health are already in use and continue to be studied.
With recent advances in technology, we are starting to see great strides made to improve
health with the aid of computational tools. For example, there are hundreds of simple
applications (apps) that use email and text messages to send reminders to take medication,
as well as mobile apps that allow us to monitor our exercise levels and food intake (in the
growing mobile-health, or m-health, field). These m-health applications can be used to raise
health awareness, support treatment and compliance, and remotely collect data on a variety
of outcomes. Also exciting are devices that allow us to monitor physiology in real time; for
example, to better understand the stressful situations that raise blood pressure or heart rate.
With advances like these, health psychologists will be able to serve the population better,
learn more about health and health behavior, and develop excellent health-improving
strategies that could be specifically targeted to certain populations or individuals. These leaps
in equipment development, partnered with growing health psychology knowledge and
exciting advances in neuroscience and genetic research, will lead health researchers and
practitioners into an exciting new time where, hopefully, we will understand more and more
about how to keep people healthy.

246

The Healthy Life

Outside Resources
App: 30 iPhone apps to monitor your health
http://www.hongkiat.com/blog/iphone-health-app/
Quiz: Hostility
http://www.mhhe.com/socscience/hhp/fahey7e/wellness_worksheets/wellness_worksheet_090.html
Self-assessment: Perceived Stress Scale
http://www.ncsu.edu/assessment/resources/perceived_stress_scale.pdf
Self-assessment: What’s your real age (based on your health practices and risk factors)?
http://www.realage.com
Video: Try out a guided meditation exercise to reduce your stress
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dEzbdLn2bJc
Web: American Psychosomatic Society
http://www.psychosomatic.org/home/index.cfm
Web: APA Division 38, Health Psychology
http://www.health-psych.org
Web: Society of Behavioral Medicine
http://www.sbm.org

Discussion Questions
1. What psychological factors contribute to health?
2. Which psychosocial constructs and behaviors might help protect us from the damaging
effects of stress?
3. What kinds of interventions might help to improve resilience? Who will these interventions
help the most?
4. How should doctors use research in health psychology when meeting with patients?
5. Why do clinical health psychologists play a critical role in improving public health?

247

The Healthy Life

Vocabulary
Adherence
In health, it is the ability of a patient to maintain a health behavior prescribed by a physician.
This might include taking medication as prescribed, exercising more, or eating less high-fat
food.
Behavioral medicine
A field similar to health psychology that integrates psychological factors (e.g., emotion,
behavior, cognition, and social factors) in the treatment of disease. This applied field includes
clinical areas of study, such as occupational therapy, hypnosis, rehabilitation or medicine, and
preventative medicine.
Biofeedback
The process by which physiological signals, not normally available to human perception, are
transformed into easy-to-understand graphs or numbers. Individuals can then use this
information to try to change bodily functioning (e.g., lower blood pressure, reduce muscle
tension).
Biomedical Model of Health
A reductionist model that posits that ill health is a result of a deviation from normal function,
which is explained by the presence of pathogens, injury, or genetic abnormality.
Biopsychosocial Model of Health
An approach to studying health and human function that posits the importance of biological,
psychological, and social (or environmental) processes.
Chronic disease
A health condition that persists over time, typically for periods longer than three months (e.
g., HIV, asthma, diabetes).
Control
Feeling like you have the power to change your environment or behavior if you need or want
to.
Daily hassles
Irritations in daily life that are not necessarily traumatic, but that cause difficulties and
repeated stress.

The Healthy Life

248

Emotion-focused coping
Coping strategy aimed at reducing the negative emotions associated with a stressful event.
General Adaptation Syndrome
A three-phase model of stress, which includes a mobilization of physiological resources phase,
a coping phase, and an exhaustion phase (i.e., when an organism fails to cope with the stress
adequately and depletes its resources).
Health
According to the World Health Organization, it is a complete state of physical, mental, and
social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.
Health behavior
Any behavior that is related to health—either good or bad.
Hostility
An experience or trait with cognitive, behavioral, and emotional components. It often includes
cynical thoughts, feelings of emotion, and aggressive behavior.
Mind–body connection
The idea that our emotions and thoughts can affect how our body functions.
Problem-focused coping
A set of coping strategies aimed at improving or changing stressful situations.
Psychoneuroimmunology
A field of study examining the relationship among psychology, brain function, and immune
function.
Psychosomatic medicine
An interdisciplinary field of study that focuses on how biological, psychological, and social
processes contribute to physiological changes in the body and health over time.
Resilience
The ability to “bounce back” from negative situations (e.g., illness, stress) to normal functioning
or to simply not show poor outcomes in the face of adversity. In some cases, resilience may
lead to better functioning following the negative experience (e.g., post-traumatic growth).
Self-efficacy

The Healthy Life

249

The belief that one can perform adequately in a specific situation.
Social integration
The size of your social network, or number of social roles (e.g., son, sister, student, employee,
team member).
Social support
The perception or actuality that we have a social network that can help us in times of need
and provide us with a variety of useful resources (e.g., advice, love, money).
Stress
A pattern of physical and psychological responses in an organism after it perceives a
threatening event that disturbs its homeostasis and taxes its abilities to cope with the event.
Stressor
An event or stimulus that induces feelings of stress.
Type A Behavior
Type A behavior is characterized by impatience, competitiveness, neuroticism, hostility, and
anger.
Type B Behavior
Type B behavior reflects the absence of Type A characteristics and is represented by less
competitive, aggressive, and hostile behavior patterns.

250

The Healthy Life

References
Adamson, J., Ben-Shlomo, Y., Chaturvedi, N., & Donovan, J. (2008). Ethnicity, socio-economic
position and gender—do they affect reported health—care seeking behaviour? Social
Science & Medicine, 57, 895–904.
American Psychological Association (2012). Stress in American 2012 [Press release]. Retrieved
from http://www.apa.org/news/press/releases/stress/2012/generations.aspx
Belloc, N. B., & Breslow, L. (1972). Relationship of physical health status and health practices.
Preventive Medicine, 1, 409–421.
Billings, A. G., & Moos, R. H. (1981). The role of coping responses and social resources in
attenuating the stress of life events. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 4, 139–157.
Breslow, L., & Enstrom, J. E. (1980). Persistence of health habits and their relationship to
mortality. Preventive Medicine, 9, 469–483.
Briscoe, M. E. (1987). Why do people go to the doctor? Sex differences in the correlates of GP
consultation. Social Science & Medicine, 25, 507–513.
Carver, C. S., Scheier, M. F., & Weintraub, J. K. (1989). Assessing coping strategies: A theoretically
based approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 267–283.
Cohen, S., & Herbert, T. B. (1996). Health psychology: Psychological factors and physical disease
from the perspective of human psychoneuroimmunology. Annual Review of Psychology, 47,
113–142.
Cohen, S., & Wills, T. A. (1985). Stress, social support, and the buffering hypothesis. Psychological
Bulletin, 98, 310–357.
Cohen, S., Alper, C. M., Doyle, W. J., Treanor, J. J., & Turner, R. B. (2006). Positive emotional style
predicts resistance to illness after experimental exposure to rhinovirus or influenza A virus.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 68, 809–815.
Cohen, S., Janicki-Deverts, D., & Miller, G. E. (2007). Psychological stress and disease. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 298, 1685–1687.
Cohen, S., Tyrrell, D. A., & Smith, A. P. (1991). Psychological stress and susceptibility to the
common cold. New England Journal of Medicine, 325, 606–612.
Cole-Lewis, H., & Kershaw, T. (2010). Text messaging as a tool for behavior change in disease
prevention and management. Epidemiologic Reviews, 32, 56–69.
Curcio, G., Ferrara, M., & De Gennaro, L. (2006). Sleep loss, learning capacity and academic
performance. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 10, 323–337.
DeLongis, A., Folkman, S., & Lazarus, R. S. (1988). The impact of daily stress on health and

The Healthy Life

251

mood: Psychological and social resources as mediators. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 54, 486–495.
Dickerson, S. S., & Kemeny, M. E. (2004). Acute stressors and cortisol responses: a theoretical
integration and synthesis of laboratory research. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 355–391.
Dunbar-Jacob, J., & Mortimer-Stephens, M. (2001). Treatment adherence in chronic disease.
Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 54(12), S57–S60
Eastin, M. S. (2001). Credibility assessments of online health information: The effects of source
expertise and knowledge of content. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 6.
Fox, S. & Jones, S. (2009). The social life of health information. Pew Internet and American Life
Project, California HealthCare Foundation. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/Rep­
orts/2009/8-The-Social-Life-of-Health-Information.aspx
Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive psychology: The broadenand-build theory of positive emotions. American Psychologist, 56, 218–226.
Freeman, K. S., & Spyridakis, J. H. (2004). An examination of factors that affect the credibility
of online health information. Technical Communication, 51, 239–263.
Friedman, M., & Rosenman, R. (1959). Association of specific overt behaviour pattern with
blood and cardiovascular findings. Journal of the American Medical Association, 169, 1286–
1296.
Glass, D. C., & Singer, J. E. (1972). Behavioral aftereffects of unpredictable and uncontrollable
aversive events: Although subjects were able to adapt to loud noise and other stressors in
laboratory experiments, they clearly demonstrated adverse aftereffects. American Scientist,
60, 457–465.
Herman-Stabl, M. A., Stemmler, M., & Petersen, A. C. (1995). Approach and avoidant coping:
Implications for adolescent mental health. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 24, 649–665.
Holt-Lunstad, J., Smith, T. B., & Layton, J. B. (2010). Social relationships and mortality risk: a
meta-analytic review. PLoS Medicine, 7(7), e1000316.
House, J. S., Landis, K. R., & Umberson, D. (1988). Social relationships and health. Science, 241,
540–545.
Iribarren, C., Sidney, S., Bild, D. E., Liu, K., Markovitz, J. H., Roseman, J. M., & Matthews, K. (2000).
Association of hostility with coronary artery calcification in young adults. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 283, 2546–2551.
Kubzansky, L. D., Sparrow, D., Vokonas, P., & Kawachi, I. (2001). Is the glass half empty or half
full? A prospective study of optimism and coronary heart disease in the normative aging
study. Psychosomatic Medicine, 63, 910–916.

The Healthy Life

252

Matthews, K. A., Glass, D. C., Rosenman, R. H., & Bortner, R. W. (1977). Competitive drive,
pattern A, and coronary heart disease: A further analysis of some data from the Western
Collaborative Group Study. Journal of Chronic Diseases, 30, 489–498.
Meara, E., White, C., & Cutler, D. M. (2004). Trends in medical spending by age, 1963–2000.
Health Affairs, 23, 176–183.
Miller, T. Q., Smith, T. W., Turner, C. W., Guijarro, M. L., & Hallet, A. J. (1996). Meta-analytic review
of research on hostility and physical health. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 322–348.
Moravec, C. S. (2008). Biofeedback therapy in cardiovascular disease: rationale and research
overview. Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine, 75, S35–S38.
Nes, L. S., & Segerstrom, S. C. (2006). Dispositional optimism and coping: A meta-analytic
review. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10, 235–251.
Oaten, M., & Cheng, K. (2005). Academic examination stress impairs self–control. Journal of
Social and Clinical Psychology, 24, 254–279.
O’Leary, A. (1985). Self-efficacy and health. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 23, 437–451.
Patel, C., Marmot, M. G., & Terry, D. J. (1981). Controlled trial of biofeedback-aided behavioural
methods in reducing mild hypertension. British Medical Journal (Clinical research ed.), 282,
2005–2008.
Pressman, S. D., & Cohen, S. (2005). Does positive affect influence health? Psychological Bulletin,
131, 925–971.
Pressman, S. D., Gallagher, M. W., & Lopez, S. J. (2013). Is the emotion-health connection a
“first-world problem”? Psychological Science, 24, 544–549.
Richman, L. S., Kubzansky, L., Maselko, J., Kawachi, I., Choo, P., & Bauer, M. (2005). Positive
emotion and health: Going beyond the negative. Health Psychology, 24, 422–429.
Rodin, J., & Langer, E. J. (1977). Long-term effects of a control-relevant intervention with the
institutionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 897–902.
Rutter, M. (1985). Resilience in the face of adversity. British Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 598–611.
Salmon, P. (2001). Effects of physical exercise on anxiety, depression, and sensitivity to stress:
A unifying theory. Clinical Psychology Review, 21(1), 33–61.
Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1985). Optimism, coping, and health: assessment and
implications of generalized outcome expectancies. Health Psychology, 4, 219–247.
Schoenfeld, E. R., Greene, J. M., Wu, S. Y., & Leske, M. C. (2001). Patterns of adherence to
diabetes vision care guidelines: Baseline findings from the Diabetic Retinopathy Awareness
Program. Ophthalmology, 108, 563–571.

The Healthy Life

253

Schulz, R., & Hanusa, B.H. (1978). Long-term effects of control and predictability-enhancing
interventions: Findings and ethical issues. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36,
1194–1202.
Segerstrom, S. C., Taylor, S. E., Kemeny, M. E., & Fahey, J. L. (1998). Optimism is associated with
mood, coping, and immune change in response to stress. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 1646–1655.
Seligman, M. E. P. (2008). Positive health. Applied Psychology, 57, 3–18.
Selye, H. (1946). The general adaptation syndrome and the diseases of adaptation. Journal of
Clinical Endocrinology, 6, 117–230.
Sieber, W. J., Rodin, J., Larson, L., Ortega, S., Cummings, N., Levy, S., ... Herberman, R. (1992).
Modulation of human natural killer cell activity by exposure to uncontrollable stress. Brain,
Behavior, and Immunity, 6, 141–156.
Spiegel, D., Kraemer, H., Bloom, J., & Gottheil, E. (1989). Effect of psychosocial treatment on
survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer. The Lancet, 334, 888–891.
Taylor, S. E. (2012) Health psychology (8th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Taylor, S. E., Klein, L. C., Lewis, B. P., Gruenewald, T. L., Gurung, R. A., & Updegraff, J. A. (2000).
Biobehavioral responses to stress in females: Tend-and-befriend, not fight-or-flight.
Psychological Review, 107, 411–429.
Twisk, J. W., Snel, J., Kemper, H. C., & van Mechelen, W. (1999). Changes in daily hassles and
life events and the relationship with coronary heart disease risk factors: A 2-year
longitudinal study in 27–29-year-old males and females. Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
46, 229–240.
Wallston, B. S., & Wallston, K. A. (1978). Locus of control and health: a review of the literature.
Health Education & Behavior, 6, 107–117.
World Health Organization (2013). Cardiovascular diseases. Retrieved from
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs317/en/index.html
World Health Organization. (1946). Preamble to the Constitution of the World Health Organization.
Retrieved from http://www.who.int/about/definition/en/print.html

Chapter 10: Cognition: Thinking,
Language, and Intelligence

14
Intelligence
Robert Biswas-Diener

Intelligence is among the oldest and longest studied topics in all of psychology. The
development of assessments to measure this concept is at the core of the development of
psychological science itself. This module introduces key historical figures, major theories of
intelligence, and common assessment strategies related to intelligence. This module will also
discuss controversies related to the study of group differences in intelligence.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•

List at least two common strategies for measuring intelligence.
Name at least one “type” of intelligence.
Define intelligence in simple terms.
Explain the controversy relating to differences in intelligence between groups.

Introduction
Every year hundreds of grade school students converge on Washington, D.C., for the annual
Scripps National Spelling Bee. The “bee” is an elite event in which children as young as 8 square
off to spell words like “cymotrichous” and “appoggiatura.” Most people who watch the bee
think of these kids as being “smart” and you likely agree with this description.
What makes a person intelligent? Is it heredity (two of the 2014 contestants in the bee have
siblings who have previously won)(National Spelling Bee, 2014a)? Is it interest (the most

256

Intelligence

frequently listed favorite subject among
spelling bee competitors is math)(NSB,
2014b)? In this unit we will cover these and
other fascinating aspects of intelligence.
By the end of the unit you should be able
to define intelligence and discuss some
common strategies for measuring intelligence.
In addition, we will tackle the politically
thorny issue of whether there are
differences
A participant in the Scripps National Spelling Bee. [Photo:

in

intelligence

between

groups such as men and women.

ScrippsBee]

Defining and Measuring Intelligence
When you think of “smart people” you likely have an intuitive sense of the qualities that make
them intelligent. Maybe you think they have a good memory, or that they can think quickly,
or that they simply know a whole lot of information. Indeed, people who exhibit such qualities
appear very intelligent. That said, it seems that intelligence must be more than simply knowing
facts and being able to remember them. One point in favor of this argument is the idea of
animal intelligence. It will come as no surprise to you that a dog, which can learn commands
and tricks seems smarter than a snake that cannot. In fact, researchers and lay people
generally agree with one another that primates—monkeys and apes (including humans)—are
among the most intelligent animals. Apes such as chimpanzees are capable of complex
problem solving and sophisticated communication (Kohler, 1924).
Scientists point to the social nature of primates as one evolutionary source of their intelligence.
Primates live together in troops or family groups and are, therefore, highly social creatures.
As such, primates tend to have brains that are better developed for communication and long
term thinking than most other animals. For instance, the complex social environment has led
primates to develop deception, altruism, numerical concepts, and “theory of mind” (a sense
of the self as a unique individual separate from others in the group; Gallup, 1982; Hauser,
MacNeilage & Ware, 1996).[Also see Noba unit Theory of Mind http://noba.to/a8wpytg3]
The question of what constitutes human intelligence is one of the oldest inquiries in
psychology. When we talk about intelligence we typically mean intellectual ability. This broadly
encompasses the ability to learn, remember and use new information, to solve problems and
to adapt to novel situations. An early scholar of intelligence, Charles Spearman, proposed the
idea that intelligence was one thing, a “general factor” sometimes known as simply “g.” He

257

Intelligence

based this conclusion on the observation that people who perform well in one intellectual
area such as verbal ability also tend to perform well in other areas such as logic and reasoning
(Spearman, 1904).
A contemporary of Spearman’s named Francis Galton—himself a cousin of Charles Darwin-was among those who pioneered psychological measurement (Hunt, 2009). For three pence
Galton would measure various physical characteristics such as grip strength but also some
psychological attributes such as the ability to judge distance or discriminate between colors.
This is an example of one of the earliest systematic measures of individual ability. Galton was
particularly interested in intelligence, which he thought was heritable in much the same way
that height and eye color are. He conceived of several rudimentary methods for assessing
whether his hypothesis was true. For example, he carefully tracked the family tree of the topscoring Cambridge students over the previous 40 years. Although he found specific families
disproportionately produced top scholars, intellectual achievement could still be the product
of economic status, family culture or other non-genetic factors. Galton was also, possibly, the
first to popularize the idea that the heritability of psychological traits could be studied by
looking at identical and fraternal twins. Although his methods were crude by modern
standards, Galton established intelligence as a variable that could be measured (Hunt, 2009).
The person best known for formally pioneering the
measurement of intellectual ability is Alfred Binet. Like
Galton, Binet was fascinated by individual differences in
intelligence. For instance, he blindfolded chess players and
saw that some of them had the ability to continue playing
using only their memory to keep the many positions of the
pieces in mind (Binet, 1894). Binet was particularly
interested in the development of intelligence, a fascination
that led him to observe children carefully in the classroom
setting.
Along with his colleague Theodore Simon, Binet created a
test of children’s intellectual capacity. They created
individual test items that should be answerable by children

Intelligence research pioneer Alfred Binet

of given ages. For instance, a child who is three should be

[Photo: wikimedia commons]

able to point to her mouth and eyes, a child who is nine
should be able to name the months of the year in order, and a twelve year old ought to be
able to name sixty words in three minutes. Their assessment became the first “IQ test.”
“IQ” or “intelligence quotient” is a name given to the score of the Binet-Simon test. The score

258

Intelligence

Table 1: Examples of the types of items you might see on an intelligence test.

is derived by dividing a child’s mental age (the score from the test) by their chronological age
to create an overall quotient. These days, the phrase “IQ” does not apply specifically to the
Binet-Simon test and is used to generally denote intelligence or a score on any intelligence
test. In the early 1900s the Binet-Simon test was adapted by a Stanford professor named

Intelligence

259

Lewis Terman to create what is, perhaps, the most famous intelligence test in the world, the
Stanford-Binet (Terman, 1916). The major advantage of this new test was that it was
standardized. Based on a large sample of children Terman was able to plot the scores in a
normal distribution, shaped like a “bell curve” (see Fig. 1). To understand a normal distribution
think about the height of people. Most people are average in height with relatively fewer being
tall or short, and fewer still being extremely tall or extremely short. Terman (1916) laid out
intelligence scores in exactly the same way, allowing for easy and reliable categorizations and
comparisons between individuals.

Figure 1: Bell Curve - Normal Distribution IQ

Looking at another modern intelligence test—the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS)—
can provide clues to a definition of intelligence itself. Motivated by several criticisms of the
Stanford-Binet test, psychologist David Wechsler sought to create a superior measure of
intelligence. He was critical of the way that the Stanford-Binet relied so heavily on verbal ability
and was also suspicious of using a single score to capture all of intelligence. To address these
issues Wechsler created a test that tapped a wide range of intellectual abilities. This
understanding of intelligence—that it is made up of a pool of specific abilities—is a notable
departure from Spearman’s concept of general intelligence. The WAIS assesses people's ability
to remember, compute, understand language, reason well, and process information quickly
(Wechsler, 1955).

260

Intelligence

One interesting by-product of measuring intelligence for so many years is that we can chart
changes over time. It might seem strange to you that intelligence can change over the decades
but that appears to have happened over the last 80 years we have been measuring this topic.
Here’s how we know: IQ tests have an average score of 100. When new waves of people are
asked to take older tests they tend to outperform the original sample from years ago on which
the test was normed. This gain is known as the “Flynn Effect,” named after James Flynn, the
researcher who first identified it (Flynn, 1987). Several hypotheses have been put forth to
explain the Flynn Effect including better nutrition (healthier brains!), greater familiarity with
testing in general, and more exposure to visual stimuli. Today, there is no perfect agreement
among psychological researchers with regards to the causes of increases in average scores
on intelligence tests. Perhaps if you choose a career in psychology you will be the one to
discover the answer!

Types of Intelligence
David Wechsler’s approach to testing intellectual ability was based on the fundamental idea
that there are, in essence, many aspects to intelligence. Other scholars have echoed this idea
by going so far as to suggest that there are actually even different types of intelligence. You
likely have heard distinctions made between “street smarts” and “book learning.” The former
refers to practical wisdom accumulated through experience while the latter indicates formal
education. A person high in street smarts might have a superior ability to catch a person in a
lie, to persuade others, or to think quickly under pressure. A person high in book learning, by
contrast, might have a large vocabulary and be able to remember a large number of references
to classic novels. Although psychologists don’t use street smarts or book smarts as
professional terms they do believe that intelligence comes in different types.
There are many ways to parse apart the concept of intelligence. Many scholars believe that
Carroll ‘s (1993) review of more than 400 data sets provides the best currently existing single
source for organizing various concepts related to intelligence. Carroll divided intelligence into
three levels, or strata, descending from the most abstract down to the most specific (see Fig.
2). To understand this way of categorizing simply think of a “car.” Car is a general word that
denotes all types of motorized vehicles. At the more specific level under “car” might be various
types of cars such as sedans, sports cars, SUVs, pick-up trucks, station wagons, and so forth.
More specific still would be certain models of each such as a Honda Civic or Ferrari Enzo. In
the same manner, Carroll called the highest level (stratum III) the general intelligence factor
“g.” Under this were more specific stratum II categories such as fluid intelligence and visual
perception and processing speed. Each of these, in turn, can be sub-divided into very specific
components such as spatial scanning, reaction time, and word fluency.

261

Intelligence

Thinking of intelligence as Carroll (1993) does, as a collection of specific mental abilities, has
helped researchers conceptualize this topic in new ways. For example, Horn and Cattell (1966)
distinguish between “fluid” and “crystalized” intelligence, both of which show up on stratum
II of Carroll’s model. Fluid intelligence is the ability to “think on your feet;” that is, to solve
problems. Crystalized intelligence, on the other hand, is the ability to use language, skills and
experience to address problems. The former is associated more with youth while the latter
increases with age. You may have noticed the way in which younger people can adapt to new
situations and use trial and error to quickly figure out solutions. By contrast, older people
tend to rely on their relatively superior store of knowledge to solve problems.

Figure 2: Caroll's Model of Intelligence

Harvard professor Howard Gardner is another figure in psychology who is well-known for
championing the notion that there are different types of intelligence. Gardner’s theory is
appropriately, called “multiple intelligences.” Gardner’s theory is based on the idea that people
process information through different “channels” and these are relatively independent of one
another. He has identified 8 common intelligences including 1) logic-math, 2) visual-spatial,
3) music-rhythm, 4) verbal-linguistic, 5) bodily-kinesthetic, 6) interpersonal, 7) intrapersonal,
and 8) naturalistic (Gardner, 1985). Many people are attracted to Gardner’s theory because it
suggests that people each learn in unique ways. There are now many Gardner- influenced

262

Intelligence

schools in the world.
Another type of intelligence is Emotional intelligence. Unlike traditional models of intelligence
that emphasize cognition (thinking) the idea of emotional intelligence emphasizes the
experience and expression of emotion. Some researchers argue that emotional intelligence
is a set of skills in which an individual can accurately understand the emotions of others, can
identify and label their own emotions, and can use emotions. (Mayer & Salovey, 1997). Other
researchers believe that emotional intelligence is a mixture of abilities, such as stress
management, and personality, such as a person’s predisposition for certain moods (Bar-On,
2006). Regardless of the specific definition of emotional intelligence, studies have shown a
link between this concept and job performance (Lopes, Grewal, Kadis, Gall, & Salovey, 2006).
In fact, emotional intelligence is similar to more traditional notions of cognitive intelligence
with regards to workplace benefits. Schmidt and Hunter (1998), for example, reviewed
research on intelligence in the workplace context and show that intelligence is the single best
predictor of doing well in job training programs, of learning on the job. They also report that
general intelligence is moderately correlated with all types of jobs but especially with
managerial and complex, technical jobs.
There is one last point that is important to bear in mind about intelligence. It turns out that
the way an individual thinks about his or her own intelligence is also important because it
predicts performance. Researcher Carol Dweck has made a career out of looking at the
differences between high IQ children who perform well and those who do not, so-called “under
achievers.” Among her most interesting findings is that it is not gender or social class that sets
apart the high and low performers. Instead, it is their mindset. The children who believe that
their abilities in general—and their intelligence specifically—is a fixed trait tend to
underperform. By contrast, kids who believe that intelligence is changeable and evolving tend
to handle failure better and perform better (Dweck, 1986). Dweck refers to this as a person’s
“mindset” and having a growth mindset appears to be healthier.

Correlates of Intelligence
The research on mindset is interesting but there can also be a temptation to interpret it as
suggesting that every human has an unlimited potential for intelligence and that becoming
smarter is only a matter of positive thinking. There is some evidence that genetics is an
important factor in the intelligence equation. For instance, a number of studies on genetics
in adults have yielded the result that intelligence is largely, but not totally, inherited
(Bouchard,2004).Having a healthy attitude about the nature of smarts and working hard can
both definitely help intellectual performance but it also helps to have the genetic leaning

263

Intelligence

toward intelligence.
Carol Dweck’s research on the mindset of children also brings one of the most interesting and
controversial issues surrounding intelligence research to the fore: group differences. From
the very beginning of the study of intelligence researchers have wondered about differences
between groups of people such as men and women. With regards to potential differences
between the sexes some people have noticed that women are under-represented in certain
fields. In 1976, for example, women comprised just 1% of all faculty members in engineering
(Ceci, Williams & Barnett, 2009).
Even today women make up between
3% and 15% of all faculty in mathintensive

fields

at

the

50

top

universities. This phenomenon could
be explained in many ways: it might
be the result of inequalities in the
educational system, it might be due to
differences in socialization wherein
young girls are encouraged to develop
other interests, it might be the result
of that women are—on average—
responsible for a larger portion of
childcare obligations and therefore
make different types of professional

Women account for a disproportionately small percentage of those
employed in math-intensive career fields such as engineering. [Photo:
Argonne National Laboratory]

decisions, or it might be due to innate
differences between these groups, to name just a few possibilities. The possibility of innate
differences is the most controversial because many people see it as either the product of or
the foundation for sexism. In today’s political landscape it is easy to see that asking certain
questions such as “are men smarter than women?” would be inflammatory. In a
comprehensive review of research on intellectual abilities and sex Ceci and colleagues (2009)
argue against the hypothesis that biological and genetic differences account for much of the
sex differences in intellectual ability. Instead, they believe that a complex web of influences
ranging from societal expectations to test taking strategies to individual interests account for
many of the sex differences found in math and similar intellectual abilities.
A more interesting question, and perhaps a more sensitive one, might be to inquire in which
ways men and women might differ in intellectual ability, if at all. That is, researchers should
not seek to prove that one group or another is better but might examine the ways that they
might differ and offer explanations for any differences that are found. Researchers have

264

Intelligence

investigated sex differences in intellectual ability. In a review of the research literature Halpern
(1997) found that women appear, on average, superior to men on measures of fine motor
skill, acquired knowledge, reading comprehension, decoding non-verbal expression, and
generally have higher grades in school. Men, by contrast, appear, on average, superior to
women on measures of fluid reasoning related to math and science, perceptual tasks that
involve moving objects, and tasks that require transformations in working memory such as
mental rotations of physical spaces. Halpern also notes that men are disproportionately
represented on the low end of cognitive functioning including in mental retardation, dyslexia,
and attention deficit disorders (Halpern, 1997).
Other researchers have examined various explanatory hypotheses for why sex differences in
intellectual ability occur. Some studies have provided mixed evidence for genetic factors while
others point to evidence for social factors (Neisser, et al, 1996; Nisbett, et al., 2012). One
interesting phenomenon that has received research scrutiny is the idea of stereotype threat.
Stereotype threat is the idea that mental access to a particular stereotype can have real-world
impact on a member of the stereotyped group. In one study (Spencer, Steele, & Quinn, 1999),
for example, women who were informed that women tend to fare poorly on math exams just
before taking a math test actually performed worse relative to a control group who did not
hear the stereotype. One possible antidote to stereotype threat, at least in the case of women,
is to make a self-affirmation (such as listing positive personal qualities) before the threat
occurs. In one study, for instance, Martens and her colleagues (2006) had women write about
personal qualities that they valued before taking a math test. The affirmation largely erased
the effect of stereotype by improving math scores for women relative to a control group but
similar affirmations had little effect for men (Martens, Johns, Greenberg, & Schimel, 2006).
These types of controversies compel many lay people to wonder if there might be a problem
with intelligence measures. It is natural to wonder if they are somehow biased against certain
groups. Psychologists typically answer such questions by pointing out that bias in the testing
sense of the word is different than how people use the word in everyday speech. Common
use of bias denotes a prejudice based on group membership. Scientific bias, on the other
hand, is related to the psychometric properties of the test such as validity and reliability.
Validity is the idea that an assessment measures what it claims to measure and that it can
predict future behaviors or performance. To this end, intelligence tests are not biased because
they are fairly accurate measures and predictors. There are, however, real biases, prejudices,
and inequalities in the social world that might benefit some advantaged group while hindering
some disadvantaged others.

Conclusion

Intelligence

265

Although you might not be able to spell “esquamulose” or “staphylococci” – indeed, you might
not even know what they mean—you don’t need to count yourself out in the intelligence
department. Now that we have examined intelligence in depth we can return to our intuitive
view of those students who compete in the National Spelling Bee. Are they smart? Certainly,
they seem to have high verbal intelligence. There is also the possibility that they benefit from
either a genetic boost in intelligence, a supportive social environment, or both. Watching them
spell difficult words there is also much we do not know about them. We cannot tell, for instance,
how emotionally intelligent they are or how they might use bodily-kinesthetic intelligence.
This highlights the fact that intelligence is a complicated issue. Fortunately, psychologists
continue to research this fascinating topic and their studies continue to yield new insights.

266

Intelligence

Vocabulary
G
Short for “general factor” and is often used to be synonymous with intelligence itself.
Intelligence
An individual’s cognitive capability. This includes the ability to acquire, process, recall and
apply information.
IQ
Short for “intelligence quotient.” This is a score, typically obtained from a widely used measure
of intelligence that is meant to rank a person’s intellectual ability against that of others.
Norm
Assessments are given to a representative sample of a population to determine the range of
scores for that population. These “norms” are then used to place an individual who takes that
assessment on a range of scores in which he or she is compared to the population at large.
Standardize
Assessments that are given in the exact same manner to all people . With regards to intelligence
tests standardized scores are individual scores that are computed to be referenced against
normative scores for a population (see “norm”).
Stereotype threat
The phenomenon in which people are concerned that they will conform to a stereotype or
that their performance does conform to that stereotype, especially in instances in which the
stereotype is brought to their conscious awareness.

267

Intelligence

References
Bar-On, R. (2006). The Bar-On model of emotional-social intelligence (ESI). Psicometha, 18
(Suppl.), 13–25.
Binet, A. (1894). Psychologie des grands calculateurs et joueurs d'échecs. Paris: Librairie Hachette.
Bouchard, T.J. (2004). Genetic influence on human psychological traits - A survey. Current
Directions in Psychological Science 13(4), 148–151.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor-analytic studies. Cambridge,
England:Cambridge University Press.
Carroll, J. B. (1993). Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor-analytic studies. Cambridge,
England:Cambridge University Press.
Ceci, S. J., Williams, W. & Barnett, S. M. (2009). Women’s underrepresentation in science: socio
cultural and biological considerations. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 218-261.
Dweck, C. S. (1986). Motivational processes affecting learning. American psychologist, 41(10),
1040-1048.
Flynn J. R. (1987). "Massive IQ gains in 14 nations: What IQ tests really measure". Psychological
Bulletin 101, 171–191.
Gallup, G. G. (1982). Self‐awareness and the emergence of mind in primates. American Journal
of Primatology, 2(3), 237-248.
Gardner, H. (1985). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. New York: Basic Books.
Halpern, D. F. (1997). Sex differences in intelligence: Implications for education. American
Psychologist, 52(10), 1091-1102.
Halpern, D. F. (1997). Sex differences in intelligence: Implications for education. American
Psychologist, 52(10), 1091-1102.
Hauser, M. D., MacNeilage, P., & Ware, M. (1996). Numerical representations in primates.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 93(4), 1514-1517.
Horn, J. L., & Cattell, R. B. (1966). Refinement and test of the theory of fluid and crystallized
general intelligences. Journal of Educational Psychology, 57(5), 253-270.
Hunt, M. (2009). The story of psychology. New York: Random House, LLC.
Hunt, M. (2009). The story of psychology. New York: Random House, LLC.
Kohler, W. (1924). The mentality of apes. Oxford: Harcourt, Brace.
Lopes, P. N., Grewal, D., Kadis, J., Gall, M., & Salovey, P. (2006). Evidence that emotional
intelligence is related to job performance and affect and attitudes at work. Psicothema, 18

268

Intelligence

(Suppl.), 132–138.
Martens, A., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., & Schimel, J. (2006). Combating stereotype threat: The
effect of self-affirmation on women’s intellectual performance. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 42(2), 236-243.
Martens, A., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., & Schimel, J. (2006). Combating stereotype threat: The
effect of self-affirmation on women’s intellectual performance. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 42(2), 236-243.
Mayer, J. D., & Salovey, P. (1997). What is emotional intelligence? In P. Salovey & D. J. Sluyter
(Eds.), Emotional development and emotional intelligence: Educational implications (pp. 3–34).
New York: Basic.
National Spelling Bee. (2014a). Statistics. Retrieved from: http://www.spellingbee.com/statistics
National

Spelling

Bee.

(2014b).

Get

to

Know

the

Competition.

Retrieved

from:

http://www.spellingbee.com/UserFiles/topblog----good2341418.html
Neisser, U., Boodoo, G., Bouchard, Jr., T.J., Boykin, A. W., Brody, N., Ceci, S., Halpern, D., Loehlin,
J. C., Perloff, R., Sternberg, R. J. & Urbina, S. (1996). Intelligence: Knowns and unknowns.
American Psychologist, 51, 77-101.
Nisbett, R. E., Aronson, J., Blair, C., Dickens, W., Flynn, J., Halpern, D. F., & Turkheimer, E. (2012).
Intelligence: new findings and theoretical developments. American Psychologist, 67(2),
130-160.
Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1998). The validity and utility of selection methods in personnel
psychology: Practical and theoretical implications of 85 years of research findings.
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 262–274
Spearman, C. (1904). " General Intelligence," Objectively Determined and Measured. The
American Journal of Psychology, 15(2), 201-292.
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M., & Quinn, D. M. (1999). Stereotype threat and women's math
performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35(1), 4-28.
Terman, L. M. (1916). The measurement of intelligence: An explanation of and a complete guide
for the use of the Stanford revision and extension of the Binet-Simon Intelligence Scale. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Terman, L. M. (1916). The measurement of intelligence: An explanation of and a complete guide
for the use of the Stanford revision and extension of the Binet-Simon Intelligence Scale. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Wechsler, D. (1955). Manual for the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale. Oxford: Psychological
Corporation.

15
Judgment and Decision Making
Max H. Bazerman

Humans are not perfect decision makers. Not only are we not perfect, but we depart from
perfection or rationality in systematic and predictable ways. The understanding of these
systematic and predictable departures is core to the field of judgment and decision making.
By understanding these limitations, we can also identify strategies for making better and more
effective decisions.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•

Understand the systematic biases that affect our judgment and decision making.
Develop strategies for making better decisions.
Experience some of the biases through sample decisions.

Introduction
Every day you have the opportunity to make countless decisions: should you eat dessert,
cheat on a test, or attend a sports event with your friends. If you reflect on your own history
of choices you will realize that they vary in quality; some are rational and some are not. This
module provides an overview of decision making and includes discussion of many of the
common biases involved in this process.
In his Nobel Prize–winning work, psychologist Herbert Simon (1957; March & Simon, 1958)
argued that our decisions are bounded in their rationality. According to the bounded

270

Judgment and Decision Making

rationality framework, human beings try to make rational decisions (such as weighing the
costs and benefits of a choice) but our cognitive limitations prevent us from being fully rational.
Time and cost constraints limit the quantity and quality of the information that is available to
us. Moreover, we only retain a relatively small amount of information in our usable memory.
And limitations on intelligence and perceptions constrain the ability of even very bright
decision makers to accurately make the best choice based on the information that is available.
About 15 years after the publication of Simon’s
seminal work, Tversky and Kahneman (1973,
1974; Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) produced
their own Nobel Prize–winning research, which
provided critical information about specific
systematic and predictable biases, or mistakes,
that influence judgment (Kahneman received
the prize after Tversky’s death). The work of

People are subject to systematic and predictable biases

Simon, Tversky, and Kahneman paved the way

that influence judgment. In many instances this results

to our modern understanding of judgment and

in poor decision-making. [Photo: koocbor]

decision making. And their two Nobel prizes
signaled the broad acceptance of the field of behavioral decision research as a mature area
of intellectual study.

What Would a Rational Decision Look Like?
Imagine that during your senior year in college, you apply to a number of doctoral programs,
law schools, or business schools (or another set of programs in whatever field most interests
you). The good news is that you receive many acceptance letters. So, how should you decide
where to go? Bazerman and Moore (2013) outline the following six steps that you should take
to make a rational decision: (1) define the problem (i.e., selecting the right graduate program),
(2) identify the criteria necessary to judge the multiple options (location, prestige, faculty, etc.),
(3) weight the criteria (rank them in terms of importance to you), (4) generate alternatives (the
schools that admitted you), (5) rate each alternative on each criterion (rate each school on
each criteria that you identified, and (6) compute the optimal decision. Acting rationally would
require that you follow these six steps in a fully rational manner.
I strongly advise people to think through important decisions such as this in a manner similar
to this process. Unfortunately, we often don’t. Many of us rely on our intuitions far more than
we should. And when we do try to think systematically, the way we enter data into such formal
decision-making processes is often biased.

271

Judgment and Decision Making

Fortunately, psychologists have learned a
great deal about the biases that affect our
thinking. This knowledge about the systematic
and predictable mistakes that even the best
and the brightest make can help you identify
flaws in your thought processes and reach
better decisions.

Biases in Our Decision Process
Simon’s concept of bounded rationality
taught us that judgment deviates from
rationality, but it did not tell us how judgment
is biased. Tversky and Kahneman’s (1974)
People often have to use incomplete information to make
decisions about risk [Photo: beanhead4529]

research helped to diagnose the specific
systematic, directional biases that affect
human judgment. These biases are created

by the tendency to short-circuit a rational decision process by relying on a number of
simplifying strategies, or rules of thumb, known as heuristics. Heuristics allow us to cope with
the complex environment surrounding our decisions. Unfortunately, they also lead to
systematic and predictable biases.
To highlight some of these biases please answer the following three quiz items:

Problem 1 (adapted from Alpert & Raiffa, 1969):
Listed below are 10 uncertain quantities. Do not look up any information on these items. For
each, write down your best estimate of the quantity. Next, put a lower and upper bound
around your estimate, such that you are 98 percent confident that your range surrounds the
actual quantity. Respond to each of these items even if you admit to knowing very little about
these quantities.
1. The first year the Nobel Peace Prize was awarded
2. The date the French celebrate "Bastille Day"
3. The distance from the Earth to the Moon
4. The height of the Leaning Tower of Pisa

Judgment and Decision Making

272

5. Number of students attending Oxford University (as of 2014)
6. Number of people who have traveled to space (as of 2013)
7. 2012-2013 annual budget for the University of Pennsylvania
8. Average life expectancy in Bangladesh (as of 2012)
9. World record for pull-ups in a 24-hour period
10. Number of colleges and universities in the Boston metropolitan area

Problem 2 (adapted from Joyce & Biddle, 1981):
We know that executive fraud occurs and that it has been associated with many recent financial
scandals. And, we know that many cases of management fraud go undetected even when
annual audits are performed. Do you think that the incidence of significant executive-level
management fraud is more than 10 in 1,000 firms (that is, 1 percent) audited by Big Four
accounting firms?
1. Yes, more than 10 in 1,000 Big Four clients have significant executive-level management
fraud.
2. No, fewer than 10 in 1,000 Big Four clients have significant executive-level management
fraud.
What is your estimate of the number of Big Four clients per 1,000 that have significant
executive-level management fraud? (Fill in the blank below with the appropriate number.)
________ in 1,000 Big Four clients have significant executive-level management fraud.

Problem 3 (adapted from Tversky & Kahneman, 1981):
Imagine that the United States is preparing for the outbreak of an unusual avian disease that
is expected to kill 600 people. Two alternative programs to combat the disease have been
proposed. Assume that the exact scientific estimates of the consequences of the programs
are as follows.
1. Program A: If Program A is adopted, 200 people will be saved.
2. Program B: If Program B is adopted, there is a one-third probability that 600 people will be
saved and a two-thirds probability that no people will be saved.

273

Judgment and Decision Making

Which of the two programs would you favor?

Overconfidence
On the first problem, if you set your ranges so that you were justifiably 98 percent confident,
you should expect that approximately 9.8, or nine to 10, of your ranges would include the
actual value. So, let’s look at the correct answers:
1. 1901
2. 14th of July
3. 384,403 km (238,857 mi)
4. 56.67 m (183 ft)
5. 22,384 (as of 2014)
6. 536 people (as of 2013)
7. $6.007 billion
8. 70.3 years (as of 2012)
9. 4,321
10. 52

Overconfidence is a natural part of most people's decision-making
process and this can get us into trouble. Is it possible to overcome our
faulty thinking? Perhaps. See the "Fixing Our Decisions" section below.

Count the number of your 98% ranges

[Photo: Kimli]

that actually surrounded the true
quantities. If you surrounded nine to 10, you were appropriately confident in your judgments.
But most readers surround only between three (30%) and seven (70%) of the correct answers,
despite claiming 98% confidence that each range would surround the true value. As this
problem shows, humans tend to be overconfident in their judgments.

Anchoring
Regarding the second problem, people vary a great deal in their final assessment of the level
of executive-level management fraud, but most think that 10 out of 1,000 is too low. When I
run this exercise in class, half of the students respond to the question that I asked you to
answer. The other half receive a similar problem, but instead are asked whether the correct
answer is higher or lower than 200 rather than 10. Most people think that 200 is high. But,
again, most people claim that this “anchor” does not affect their final estimate. Yet, on average,
people who are presented with the question that focuses on the number 10 (out of 1,000)

274

Judgment and Decision Making

give answers that are about one-half the size of the estimates of those facing questions that
use an anchor of 200. When we are making decisions, any initial anchor that we face is likely
to influence our judgments, even if the anchor is arbitrary. That is, we insufficiently adjust our
judgments away from the anchor.

Framing
Turning to Problem 3, most people choose Program A, which saves 200 lives for sure, over
Program B. But, again, if I was in front of a classroom, only half of my students would receive
this problem. The other half would have received the same set-up, but with the following two
options:
1. Program C: If Program C is adopted, 400 people will die.
2. Program D: If Program D is adopted, there is a one-third probability that no one will die
and a two-thirds probability that 600 people will die.
Which of the two programs would you favor?
Careful review of the two versions of this problem clarifies that they are objectively the same.
Saving 200 people (Program A) means losing 400 people (Program C), and Programs B and D
are also objectively identical. Yet, in one of the most famous problems in judgment and
decision making, most individuals choose Program A in the first set and Program D in the
second set (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). People respond very differently to saving versus
losing lives—even when the difference is based just on the “framing” of the choices.
The problem that I asked you to respond to was framed in terms of saving lives, and the
implied reference point was the worst outcome of 600 deaths. Most of us, when we make
decisions that concern gains, are risk averse; as a consequence, we lock in the possibility of
saving 200 lives for sure. In the alternative version, the problem is framed in terms of losses.
Now the implicit reference point is the best outcome of no deaths due to the Asian disease.
And in this case, most people are risk seeking when making decisions regarding losses.
These are just three of the many biases that affect even the smartest among us. Other research
shows that we are biased in favor of information that is easy for our minds to retrieve, are
insensitive to the importance of base rates and sample sizes when we are making inferences,
assume that random events will always look random, search for information that confirms
our expectations even when disconfirming information would be more informative, claim a
priori knowledge that didn’t exist due to the hindsight bias, and are subject to a host of other

275

Judgment and Decision Making

effects that continue to be developed in the literature (Bazerman & Moore, 2013).

Contemporary Developments
Bounded rationality served as the integrating concept
of the field of behavioral decision research for 40
years. Then, in 2000, Thaler (2000) suggested that
decision making is bounded in two ways not precisely
captured by the concept of bounded rationality. First,
he argued that our willpower is bounded and that, as
a consequence, we give greater weight to present
concerns than to future concerns. Our immediate
motivations are often inconsistent with our long-term
interests in a variety of ways, such as the common
failure to save adequately for retirement or the
difficulty many people have staying on a diet. Second,
Thaler suggested that our self-interest is bounded
such that we care about the outcomes of others.
Sometimes we positively value the outcomes of
others—giving them more of a commodity than is
necessary out of a desire to be fair, for example. And,
The concept of bounded willpower may explain

in unfortunate contexts, we sometimes are willing to

why many of us are better shoppers than savers.

forgo our own benefits out of a desire to harm others.

[Photo: Tinou Bao]

My colleagues and I have recently added two other
important bounds to the list. Chugh, Banaji, and Bazerman (2005) and Banaji and Bhaskar
(2000) introduced the concept of bounded ethicality, which refers to the notion that our ethics
are limited in ways we are not even aware of ourselves. Second, Chugh and Bazerman (2007)
developed the concept of bounded awareness to refer to the broad array of focusing failures
that affect our judgment, specifically the many ways in which we fail to notice obvious and
important information that is available to us.
A final development is the application of judgment and decision-making research to the areas
of behavioral economics, behavioral finance, and behavioral marketing, among others. In
each case, these fields have been transformed by applying and extending research from the
judgment and decision-making literature.

Fixing Our Decisions

Judgment and Decision Making

276

Ample evidence documents that even smart people are routinely impaired by biases. Early
research demonstrated, unfortunately, that awareness of these problems does little to reduce
bias (Fischhoff, 1982). The good news is that more recent research documents interventions
that do help us overcome our faulty thinking (Bazerman & Moore, 2013).
One critical path to fixing our biases is provided in Stanovich and West’s (2000) distinction
between System 1 and System 2 decision making. System 1 processing is our intuitive system,
which is typically fast, automatic, effortless, implicit, and emotional. System 2 refers to decision
making that is slower, conscious, effortful, explicit, and logical. The six logical steps of decision
making outlined earlier describe a System 2 process.
Clearly, a complete System 2 process is not required for every decision we make. In most
situations, our System 1 thinking is quite sufficient; it would be impractical, for example, to
logically reason through every choice we make while shopping for groceries. But, preferably,
System 2 logic should influence our most important decisions. Nonetheless, we use our
System 1 processes for most decisions in life, relying on it even when making important
decisions.
The key to reducing the effects of bias and improving our decisions is to transition from trusting
our intuitive System 1 thinking toward engaging more in deliberative System 2 thought.
Unfortunately, the busier and more rushed people are, the more they have on their minds,
and the more likely they are to rely on System 1 thinking (Chugh, 2004). The frantic pace of
professional life suggests that executives often rely on System 1 thinking (Chugh, 2004).
Fortunately, it is possible to identify conditions where we rely on intuition at our peril and
substitute more deliberative thought. One fascinating example of this substitution comes
from journalist Michael Lewis’ (2003) account of how Billy Beane, the general manager of the
Oakland Athletics, improved the outcomes of the failing baseball team after recognizing that
the intuition of baseball executives was limited and systematically biased and that their
intuitions had been incorporated into important decisions in ways that created enormous
mistakes. Lewis (2003) documents that baseball professionals tend to overgeneralize from
their personal experiences, be overly influenced by players’ very recent performances, and
overweigh what they see with their own eyes, despite the fact that players’ multiyear records
provide far better data. By substituting valid predictors of future performance (System 2
thinking), the Athletics were able to outperform expectations given their very limited payroll.
Another important direction for improving decisions comes from Thaler and Sunstein’s (2008)
book Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and Happiness. Rather than setting out
to debias human judgment, Thaler and Sunstein outline a strategy for how “decision architects”

277

Judgment and Decision Making

can change environments in ways that account for
human bias and trigger better decisions as a result. For
example, Beshears, Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2008)
have shown that simple changes to defaults can
dramatically improve people’s decisions. They tackle the
failure of many people to save for retirement and show
that a simple change can significantly influence
enrollment in 401(k) programs. In most companies, when
you start your job, you need to proactively sign up to join
the company’s retirement savings plan. Many people
take years before getting around to doing so. When,
instead, companies automatically enroll their employees
in 401(k) programs and give them the opportunity to “opt
out,” the net enrollment rate rises significantly. By
changing defaults, we can counteract the human
Nudges can be used to help people make

tendency to live with the status quo.

better decisions about saving for retirement.
[Photo: aag photos]

Similarly, Johnson and Goldstein’s (2003) cross-European

organ donation study reveals that countries that have opt-in organ donation policies, where
the default is not to harvest people’s organs without their prior consent, sacrifice thousands
of lives in comparison to opt-out policies, where the default is to harvest organs. The United
States and too many other countries require that citizens opt in to organ donation through a
proactive effort; as a consequence, consent rates range between 4.25%–44% across these
countries. In contrast, changing the decision architecture to an opt-out policy improves
consent rates to 85.9% to 99.98%. Designing the donation system with knowledge of the power
of defaults can dramatically change donation rates without changing the options available to
citizens. In contrast, a more intuitive strategy, such as the one in place in the United States,
inspires defaults that result in many unnecessary deaths.

Concluding Thoughts
Our days are filled with decisions ranging from the small (what should I wear today?) to the
important (should we get married?). Many have real world consequences on our health,
finances and relationships. Simon, Kahneman, and Tversky created a field that highlights the
surprising and predictable deficiencies of the human mind when making decisions. As we
understand more about our own biases and thinking shortcomings we can begin to take them
into account or to avoid them. Only now have we reached the frontier of using this knowledge
to help people make better decisions.

278

Judgment and Decision Making

Outside Resources
Book: Bazerman, M. H., & Moore, D. (2013). Judgment in managerial decision making (8th ed.).
John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Book: Kahneman, D. (2011) Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Book: Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health,
Wealth, and Happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Discussion Questions
1. Are the biases in this module a problem in the real world?
2. How would you use this module to be a better decision maker?
3. Can you see any biases in today’s newspaper?

279

Judgment and Decision Making

Vocabulary
Anchoring
The bias to be affected by an initial anchor, even if the anchor is arbitrary, and to insufficiently
adjust our judgments away from that anchor.
Biases
The systematic and predictable mistakes that influence the judgment of even very talented
human beings.
Bounded awareness
The systematic ways in which we fail to notice obvious and important information that is
available to us.
Bounded ethicality
The systematic ways in which our ethics are limited in ways we are not even aware of ourselves.
Bounded rationality
Model of human behavior that suggests that humans try to make rational decisions but are
bounded due to cognitive limitations.
Bounded self-interest
The systematic and predictable ways in which we care about the outcomes of others.
Bounded willpower
The tendency to place greater weight on present concerns rather than future concerns.
Framing
The bias to be systematically affected by the way in which information is presented, while
holding the objective information constant.
Heuristics
cognitive (or thinking) strategies that simplify decision making by using mental short-cuts
Overconfident
The bias to have greater confidence in your judgment than is warranted based on a rational
assessment.

Judgment and Decision Making

280

System 1
Our intuitive decision-making system, which is typically fast, automatic, effortless, implicit,
and emotional.
System 2
Our more deliberative decision-making system, which is slower, conscious, effortful, explicit,
and logical.

281

Judgment and Decision Making

References
Alpert, M., & Raiffa, H. (1969). A progress report on the training of probability assessors.
Unpublished Report.
Banaji, M. R., & Bhaskar, R. (2000). Implicit stereotypes and memory: The bounded rationality
of social beliefs. In D. L. Schacter & E. Scarry (Eds.), Memory, brain, and belief (pp. 139–175).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bazerman, M. H., & Moore, D. (2013). Judgment in managerial decision making (8th ed.). John
Wiley & Sons Inc.
Beshears, J., Choi, J. J., Laibson, D., & Madrian, B. C. (2008). The importance of default options
for retirement saving outcomes: Evidence from the United States. In S. J. Kay & T. Sinha
(Eds.), Lessons from pension reform in the Americas (pp. 59–87). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Chugh, D. (2004). Societal and managerial implications of implicit social cognition: Why
milliseconds matter. Social Justice Research, 17(2), 203–222.
Chugh, D., & Bazerman, M. H. (2007). Bounded awareness: What you fail to see can hurt you.
Mind & Society, 6(1), 1–18.
Chugh, D., Banaji, M. R., & Bazerman, M. H. (2005). Bounded ethicality as a psychological barrier
to recognizing conflicts of interest. In D. Moore, D. M. Cain, G. Loewenstein, & M. H.
Bazerman (Eds.), Conflicts of Interest (pp. 74–95). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Fischhoff, B. (1982). Debiasing. In D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, & A. Tversky (Eds.), Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases (pp. 422–444). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, E. J., & Goldstein, D. (2003). Do defaults save lives? Science 302(5649), 1338–1339.
Joyce, E. J., & Biddle, G. C. (1981). Are auditors’ judgments sufficiently regressive? Journal of
Accounting Research, 19(2), 323–349.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica, 47(2), 263–292.
Lewis, M. (2003). Moneyball: The art of winning an unfair game. New York, NY: W.W. Norton &
Company Ltd.
March, J. G., & Simon, H. A. (1958). Organizations. Oxford: Wiley.
Simon, H. A. (1957). Models of man, social and rational: Mathematical essays on rational human
behavior in a social setting. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual differences in reasoning: Implications for the
rationality debate? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645–726.

Judgment and Decision Making

282

Thaler, R. H. (2000). From homo economicus to homo sapiens. Journal of Economics
Perspectives, 14, 133–141.
Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and
happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice.
Science, New Series, 211(4481), 453–458.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science,
New Series, 185(4157), 1124–1131.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A heuristic for judging frequency and
probability. Cognitive Psychology, 5(2), 207–232.

16
Language and Language Use
Yoshihisa Kashima

Humans have the capacity to use complex language, far more than any other species on Earth.
We cooperate with each other to use language for communication; language is often used to
communicate about and even construct and maintain our social world. Language use and
human sociality are inseparable parts of Homo sapiens as a biological species.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•

Define basic terms used to describe language use.
Describe the process by which people can share new information by using language.
Characterize the typical content of conversation and its social implications.
Characterize psychological consequences of language use and give an example.

Introduction
Imagine two men of 30-something age, Adam and Ben, walking down the corridor. Judging
from their clothing, they are young businessmen, taking a break from work. They then have
this exchange.
Adam: “You know, Gary bought a ring.”
Ben: "Oh yeah? For Mary, isn't it?" (Adam nods.)

284

Language and Language Use

If you are watching this scene and hearing their conversation, what can you guess from this?
First of all, you’d guess that Gary bought a ring for Mary, whoever Gary and Mary might be.
Perhaps you would infer that Gary is getting married to Mary. What else can you guess?
Perhaps that Adam and Ben are fairly close colleagues, and both of them know Gary and Mary
reasonably well. In other words, you can guess the social relationships surrounding the people
who are engaging in the conversation and the people whom they are talking about.
Language is used in our everyday lives. If
psychology is a science of behavior, scientific
investigation of language use must be one of
the most central topics—this is because
language use is ubiquitous. Every human
group has a language; human infants (except
those who have unfortunate disabilities) learn
at least one language without being taught
explicitly. Even when children who don’t have
much language to begin with are brought
Language is an essential tool that enables us to live the kind
of lives we do. Much of contemporary human civilization
wouldn’t have been possible without it. [Photo: Marc
Wathieu]

together, they can begin to develop and use
their own language. There is at least one
known instance where children who had had
little language were brought together and

developed their own language spontaneously with minimum input from adults. In Nicaragua
in the 1980s, deaf children who were separately raised in various locations were brought
together to schools for the first time. Teachers tried to teach them Spanish with little success.
However, they began to notice that the children were using their hands and gestures,
apparently to communicate with each other. Linguists were brought in to find out what was
happening—it turned out the children had developed their own sign language by themselves.
That was the birth of a new language, Nicaraguan Sign Language (Kegl, Senghas, & Coppola,
1999). Language is ubiquitous, and we humans are born to use it.

How Do We Use Language?
If language is so ubiquitous, how do we actually use it? To be sure, some of us use it to write
diaries and poetry, but the primary form of language use is interpersonal. That’s how we learn
language, and that’s how we use it. Just like Adam and Ben, we exchange words and utterances
to communicate with each other. Let’s consider the simplest case of two people, Adam and
Ben, talking with each other. According to Clark (1996), in order for them to carry out a
conversation, they must keep track of common ground. Common ground is a set of knowledge

285

Language and Language Use

that the speaker and listener share and they think, assume, or otherwise take for granted that
they share. So, when Adam says, “Gary bought a ring,” he takes for granted that Ben knows
the meaning of the words he is using, whom Gary is, and what buying a ring means. When
Ben says, “For Mary, isn’t it?” he takes for granted that Adam knows the meaning of these
words, who Mary is, and what buying a ring for someone means. All these are part of their
common ground.
Note

that,

when

Adam

presents

the

information about Gary’s purchase of a ring,
Ben responds by presenting his inference
about who the recipient of the ring might be,
namely, Mary. In conversational terms, Ben’s
utterance

acts

as

evidence

for

his

comprehension of Adam’s utterance—“Yes, I
understood that Gary bought a ring”—and
Adam’s nod acts as evidence that he now has
understood what Ben has said too—“Yes, I
The "common ground" in a conversation helps people

understood that you understood that Gary

coordinate their language use. And as conversations progress

has bought a ring for Mary.” This new

common ground shifts and changes as the participants add

information is now added to the initial

new information and cooperate to help one another

common

understand. [Photo: boellstiftung]

utterances by Adam and Ben (called an
adjacency

ground.
pair)

Thus,

together

the
with

pair

of

Adam’s

affirmative nod jointly completes one proposition, “Gary bought a ring for Mary,” and adds
this information to their common ground. This way, common ground changes as we talk,
gathering new information that we agree on and have evidence that we share. It evolves as
people take turns to assume the roles of speaker and listener, and actively engage in the
exchange of meaning.
Common ground helps people coordinate their language use. For instance, when a speaker
says something to a listener, he or she takes into account their common ground, that is, what
the speaker thinks the listener knows. Adam said what he did because he knew Ben would
know who Gary was. He’d have said, “A friend of mine is getting married,” to another colleague
who wouldn’t know Gary. This is called audience design (Fussell & Krauss, 1992); speakers
design their utterances for their audiences by taking into account the audiences’ knowledge.
If their audiences are seen to be knowledgeable about an object (such as Ben about Gary),
they tend to use a brief label of the object (i.e., Gary); for a less knowledgeable audience, they
use more descriptive words (e.g., “a friend of mine”) to help the audience understand their
utterances (Box 1).

286

Language and Language Use

So, language use is a cooperative
activity, but how do we coordinate
our language use in a conversational
setting? To be sure, we have a
conversation in small groups. The
number of people engaging in a
conversation at a time is rarely more
than four. By some counts (e.g.,
Dunbar, Duncan, & Nettle, 1995;
James, 1953), more than 90 percent
of conversations happen in a group
of four individuals or less. Certainly,
coordinating conversation among
four is not as difficult as coordinating
conversation among 10. But, even
among only four people, if you think
about it, everyday conversation is an
almost miraculous achievement. We
typically have a conversation by
rapidly

exchanging

words

and

utterances in real time in a noisy environment. Think about your conversation at home in the
morning, at a bus stop, in a shopping mall. How can we keep track of our common ground
under such circumstances?
Pickering and Garrod (2004) argue that we achieve our conversational coordination by virtue
of our ability to interactively align each other’s actions at different levels of language use:
lexicon (i.e., words and expressions), syntax (i.e., grammatical rules for arranging words and
expressions together), as well as speech rate and accent. For instance, when one person uses
a certain expression to refer to an object in a conversation, others tend to use the same
expression (e.g., Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). Furthermore, if someone says “the cowboy
offered a banana to the robber,” rather than “the cowboy offered the robber a banana,” others
are more likely to use the same syntactic structure (e.g., “the girl gave a book to the boy” rather
than “the girl gave the boy a book”) even if different words are involved (Branigan, Pickering,
& Cleland, 2000). Finally, people in conversation tend to exhibit similar accents and rates of
speech, and they are often associated with people’s social identity (Giles, Coupland, &
Coupland, 1991). So, if you have lived in different places where people have somewhat
different accents (e.g., United States and United Kingdom), you might have noticed that you
speak with Americans with an American accent, but speak with Britons with a British accent.

287

Language and Language Use

Pickering and Garrod (2004) suggest that these interpersonal alignments at different levels
of language use can activate similar situation models in the minds of those who are engaged
in a conversation. Situation models are representations about the topic of a conversation. So,
if you are talking about Gary and Mary with your friends, you might have a situation model
of Gary giving Mary a ring in your mind. Pickering and Garrod’s theory is that as you describe
this situation using language, others in the conversation begin to use similar words and
grammar, and many other aspects of language use converge. As you all do so, similar situation
models begin to be built in everyone’s mind through the mechanism known as priming.
Priming occurs when your thinking about one concept (e.g., “ring”) reminds you about other
related concepts (e.g., “marriage”, “wedding ceremony”). So, if everyone in the conversation
knows about Gary, Mary, and the usual course of events associated with a ring—engagement,
wedding, marriage, etc.— everyone is likely to construct a shared situation model about Gary
and Mary. Thus, making use of our highly developed interpersonal ability to imitate (i.e.,
executing the same action as another person) and cognitive ability to infer (i.e., one idea
leading to other ideas), we humans coordinate our common ground, share situation models,
and communicate with each other.

What Do We Talk About?
What are humans doing when we are talking?
Surely, we can communicate about mundane
things such as what to have for dinner, but
also more complex and abstract things such
as the meaning of life and death, liberty,
equality, and fraternity, and many other
philosophical thoughts. Well, when naturally
occurring

conversations

were

actually

observed (Dunbar, Marriott, & Duncan,
1997), a staggering 60%–70% of everyday
conversation, for both men and women,
turned out to be gossip—people talk about
themselves and others whom they know. Just
like Adam and Ben, more often than not,
Studies show that people love to gossip. By gossiping, humans
can communicate and share their representations about their
social world—who their friends and enemies are, what the

people use language to communicate about
their social world.

right thing to do is under what circumstances, and so on.
[Photo: Bindaas Madhav]

Gossip may sound trivial and seem to belittle
our noble ability for language—surely one of

Language and Language Use

288

the most remarkable human abilities of all that distinguish us from other animals. Au contraire,
some have argued that gossip—activities to think and communicate about our social world
—is one of the most critical uses to which language has been put. Dunbar (1996) conjectured
that gossiping is the human equivalent of grooming, monkeys and primates attending and
tending to each other by cleaning each other’s fur. He argues that it is an act of socializing,
signaling the importance of one’s partner. Furthermore, by gossiping, humans can
communicate and share their representations about their social world—who their friends
and enemies are, what the right thing to do is under what circumstances, and so on. In so
doing, they can regulate their social world—making more friends and enlarging one’s own
group (often called the ingroup, the group to which one belongs) against other groups
(outgroups) that are more likely to be one’s enemies. Dunbar has argued that it is these social
effects that have given humans an evolutionary advantage and larger brains, which, in turn,
help humans to think more complex and abstract thoughts and, more important, maintain
larger ingroups. Dunbar (1993) estimated an equation that predicts average group size of
nonhuman primate genera from their average neocortex size (the part of the brain that
supports higher order cognition). In line with his social brain hypothesis, Dunbar showed
that those primate genera that have larger brains tend to live in larger groups. Furthermore,
using the same equation, he was able to estimate the group size that human brains can
support, which turned out to be about 150—approximately the size of modern huntergatherer communities. Dunbar’s argument is that language, brain, and human group living
have co-evolved—language and human sociality are inseparable.
Dunbar’s hypothesis is controversial. Nonetheless, whether or not he is right, our everyday
language use often ends up maintaining the existing structure of intergroup relationships.
Language use can have implications for how we construe our social world. For one thing,
there are subtle cues that people use to convey the extent to which someone’s action is just
a special case in a particular context or a pattern that occurs across many contexts and more
like a character trait of the person. According to Semin and Fiedler (1988), someone’s action
can be described by an action verb that describes a concrete action (e.g., he runs), a state
verb that describes the actor’s psychological state (e.g., he likes running), an adjective that
describes the actor’s personality (e.g., he is athletic), or a noun that describes the actor’s role
(e.g., he is an athlete). Depending on whether a verb or an adjective (or noun) is used, speakers
can convey the permanency and stability of an actor’s tendency to act in a certain way—verbs
convey particularity, whereas adjectives convey permanency. Intriguingly, people tend to
describe positive actions of their ingroup members using adjectives (e.g., he is generous)
rather than verbs (e.g., he gave a blind man some change), and negative actions of outgroup
members using adjectives (e.g., he is cruel) rather than verbs (e.g., he kicked a dog). Maass,
Salvi, Arcuri, and Semin (1989) called this a linguistic intergroup bias, which can produce and
reproduce the representation of intergroup relationships by painting a picture favoring the

289

Language and Language Use

ingroup. That is, ingroup members are typically good, and if they do anything bad, that’s more
an exception in special circumstances; in contrast, outgroup members are typically bad, and
if they do anything good, that’s more an exception.
In addition, when people exchange
their gossip, it can spread through
broader social networks. If gossip is
transmitted from one person to
another, the second person can
transmit it to a third person, who then
in turn transmits it to a fourth, and so
on through a chain of communication.
This often happens for emotive stories
(Box 2). If gossip is repeatedly
transmitted and spread, it can reach a
large number of people. When stories
travel through communication chains,
they tend to become conventionalized
(Bartlett, 1932). A Native American tale
of the “War of the Ghosts” recounts a
warrior’s

encounter

with

ghosts

traveling in canoes and his involvement
with their ghostly battle. He is shot by
an arrow but doesn’t die, returning
home to tell the tale. After his narration, however, he becomes still, a black thing comes out
of his mouth, and he eventually dies. When it was told to a student in England in the 1920s
and retold from memory to another person, who, in turn, retold it to another and so on in a
communication chain, the mythic tale became a story of a young warrior going to a battlefield,
in which canoes became boats, and the black thing that came out of his mouth became simply
his spirit (Bartlett, 1932). In other words, information transmitted multiple times was
transformed to something that was easily understood by many, that is, information was
assimilated into the common ground shared by most people in the linguistic community. More
recently, Kashima (2000) conducted a similar experiment using a story that contained
sequence of events that described a young couple’s interaction that included both
stereotypical and counter-stereotypical actions (e.g., a man watching sports on TV on Sunday
vs. a man vacuuming the house). After the retelling of this story, much of the counterstereotypical information was dropped, and stereotypical information was more likely to be
retained. Because stereotypes are part of the common ground shared by the community, this
finding too suggests that conversational retellings are likely to reproduce conventional

290

Language and Language Use

content.

Psychological Consequences of Language Use
What are the psychological consequences of language use? When people use language to
describe an experience, their thoughts and feelings are profoundly shaped by the linguistic
representation that they have produced rather than the original experience per se (Holtgraves
& Kashima, 2008). For example, Halberstadt (2003) showed a picture of a person displaying
an ambiguous emotion and examined how people evaluated the displayed emotion. When
people verbally explained why the target person was expressing a particular emotion, they
tended to remember the person as feeling that emotion more intensely than when they simply
labeled the emotion.
Thus, constructing a linguistic representation of
another person’s emotion apparently biased the
speaker’s memory of that person’s emotion.
Furthermore, linguistically labeling one’s own
emotional experience appears to alter the speaker’s
neural processes. When people linguistically
labeled negative images, the amygdala—a brain
structure that is critically involved in the processing
of negative emotions such as fear—was activated
less than when they were not given a chance to label
them (Lieberman et al., 2007). Potentially because
of

these

effects

of

verbalizing

emotional

experiences, linguistic reconstructions of negative
life events can have some therapeutic effects on
those who suffer from the traumatic experiences
(Pennebaker & Seagal, 1999). Lyubomirsky, Sousa,
and Dickerhoof (2006) found that writing and
talking about negative past life events improved
people’s psychological well-being, but just thinking

By verbalizing our own emotional experiences - such

about them worsened it. There are many other

as in a conversation with a close friend - we can

examples of effects of language use on memory and

improve our psychological well-being.

decision making (Holtgraves & Kashima, 2008).
Furthermore, if a certain type of language use (linguistic practice) (Holtgraves & Kashima,
2008) is repeated by a large number of people in a community, it can potentially have a

291

Language and Language Use

significant effect on their thoughts and
action. This notion is often called SapirWhorf hypothesis (Sapir, 1921; Whorf,
1956; Box 3). For instance, if you are
given a description of a man, Steven, as
having greater than average experience
of the world (e.g., well-traveled, varied
job

experience),

a

strong

family

orientation, and well-developed social
skills, how do you describe Steven? Do
you think you can remember Steven’s
personality five days later? It will
probably be difficult. But if you know
Chinese and are reading about Steven
in Chinese, as Hoffman, Lau, and
Johnson (1986) showed, the chances
are that you can remember him well.
This is because English does not have a
word

to

describe

this

kind

of

personality, whereas Chinese does (shì
gù). This way, language you use can
influence your cognition. In its strong
form, it has been argued that language
determines thought, but this is probably
wrong. Language does not completely
determine our thoughts—our thoughts
are far too flexible for that—but
habitual uses of language can influence
our habit of thought and action. For
instance,

some

linguistic

practice

seems to be associated even with
cultural values and social institution.
Pronoun drop is the case in point.
Pronouns such as “I” and “you” are used
to represent the speaker and listener of
a speech in English. In an English
sentence, these pronouns cannot be
dropped if they are used as the subject of a sentence. So, for instance, “I went to the movie
last night” is fine, but “Went to the movie last night” is not in standard English. However, in

292

Language and Language Use

other languages such as Japanese, pronouns can be, and in fact often are, dropped from
sentences. It turned out that people living in those countries where pronoun drop languages
are spoken tend to have more collectivistic values (e.g., employees having greater loyalty
toward their employers) than those who use non–pronoun drop languages such as English
(Kashima & Kashima, 1998). It was argued that the explicit reference to “you” and “I” may
remind speakers the distinction between the self and other, and the differentiation between
individuals. Such a linguistic practice may act as a constant reminder of the cultural value,
which, in turn, may encourage people to perform the linguistic practice.

Conclusion
Language and language use constitute a central ingredient of human psychology. Language
is an essential tool that enables us to live the kind of life we do. Can you imagine a world in
which machines are built, farms are cultivated, and goods and services are transported to our
household without language? Is it possible for us to make laws and regulations, negotiate
contracts, and enforce agreements and settle disputes without talking? Much of contemporary
human civilization wouldn’t have been possible without the human ability to develop and use
language. Like the Tower of Babel, language can divide humanity, and yet, the core of humanity
includes the innate ability for language use. Whether we can use it wisely is a task before us
in this globalized world.

293

Language and Language Use

Discussion Questions
1. In what sense is language use innate and learned?
2. Is language a tool for thought or a tool for communication?
3. What sorts of unintended consequences can language use bring to your psychological
processes?

294

Language and Language Use

Vocabulary
Audience design
Constructing utterances to suit the audience’s knowledge.
Common ground
Information that is shared by people who engage in a conversation.
Ingroup
Group to which a person belongs.
Lexicon
Words and expressions.
Linguistic intergroup bias
A tendency for people to characterize positive things about their ingroup using more abstract
expressions, but negative things about their outgroups using more abstract expressions.
Outgroup
Group to which a person does not belong.
Priming
A stimulus presented to a person reminds him or her about other ideas associated with the
stimulus.
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis
The hypothesis that the language that people use determines their thoughts.
Situation model
A mental representation of an event, object, or situation constructed at the time of
comprehending a linguistic description.
Social brain hypothesis
The hypothesis that the human brain has evolved, so that humans can maintain larger
ingroups.
Social networks
Networks of social relationships among individuals through which information can travel.

Language and Language Use

Syntax
Rules by which words are strung together to form sentences.

295

296

Language and Language Use

References
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., & Cleland, A. A. (2000). Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue.
Cognition, 75, B13–25.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1–39.
Dunbar, R. (1996). Grooming, gossip, and the evolution of language. Boston, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1993). Coevolution of neorcortical size, group size and language in humans.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 681–735.
Dunbar, R. I. M., Duncan, N. D. C., & Nettle, D. (1995). Size and structure of freely forming
conversational groups. Human Nature, 6, 67–78.
Dunbar, R. I. M., Marriott, A., & Duncan, N. D. C. (1997). Human conversational behaviour.
Human Nature, 8, 231–246.
Fussell, S. R., & Krauss, R. M. (1992). Coordination of knowledge in communication: Effects of
speakers’ assumptions about what others know. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
62, 378–391.
Giles, H., Coupland, N., & Coupland, J. (1991) Accommodation theory: Communication, context,
and consequence. In H. Giles, J. Coupland, & N. Coupland (Eds.), Contexts of accommodation:
Developments in applied sociolinguistics (pp. 1–68). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Halberstadt, J. (2003). The paradox of emotion attribution: Explanation biases perceptual
memory for emotional expressions. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 12, 197–201.
Hoffman, C., Lau, I., & Johnson, D. R. (1986). The linguistic relativity of person cognition: An
English-Chinese comparison. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1097–1105.
Holtgraves, T. M., & Kashima, Y. (2008). Language, meaning, and social cognition. Personality
and Social Psychology Review, 12, 73–94.
James, J. (1953). The distribution of free-forming small group size. American Sociological Review,
18, 569–570.
Kashima, E., & Kashima, Y. (1998). Culture and language: The case of cultural dimensions and
personal pronoun use. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 29, 461–486.

Language and Language Use

297

Kashima, Y. (2000). Maintaining cultural stereotypes in the serial reproduction of narratives.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 594–604.
Kegl, J., Senghas, A., & Coppola, M. (1999). Creation through contact: Sign language emergence
and sign language change in Nicaragua. In M. DeGraff (Ed.), Language creation and language
change Creolization, diachrony, and development (pp. 179–237). Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Lieberman, M., Eisenberger, N. I., Crockett, M. J., Tom, S. M., Pfeifer, J. H., & Way, B. W. (2007).
Putting feelings into words. Psychological Science, 18, 421–428.
Lyubomirsky, S., Sousa, L., & Dickerhoof, R. (2006). The costs and benefits of writing, talking,
and thinking about life’s triumphs and defeats. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
90, 692–708.
Maass, A., Salvi, D., Arcuri, L., & Semin, G. (1989). Language use in intergroup contexts: The
linguistic intergroup bias. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 981–993.
Pennebaker, J. W., & Seagal, J. (1999). Forming a story: The health benefits of narrative. Journal
of Clinical Psychology, 55, 1243–1254.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 27, 169–226.
Sapir, E. (1921). Language: An introduction to the study of speech. New York, NY: Harcourt Brace.
Semin, G., & Fiedler, K. (1988). The cognitive functions of linguistic categories in describing
persons: Social cognition and language. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 558–
568.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). Language, thought, and reality (J. B. Carroll, Ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Chapter 11: Human Development

17
Attachment Through the Life Course
R. Chris Fraley

The purpose of this module is to provide a brief review of attachment theory—a theory
designed to explain the significance of the close, emotional bonds that children develop with
their caregivers and the implications of those bonds for understanding personality
development. The module discusses the origins of the theory, research on individual
differences in attachment security in infancy and childhood, and the role of attachment in
adult relationships.

Learning Objectives

•
•

Explain the way the attachment system works and its evolutionary significance.
Identify three commonly studied attachment patterns and what is known about the
development of those patterns.

•

Describe what is known about the consequences of secure versus insecure attachment in
adult relationships.

Introduction
Some of the most rewarding experiences in people’s lives involve the development and
maintenance of close relationships. For example, some of the greatest sources of joy involve
falling in love, starting a family, being reunited with distant loved ones, and sharing experiences
with close others. And, not surprisingly, some of the most painful experiences in people’s lives
involve the disruption of important social bonds, such as separation from a spouse, losing a

300

Attachment Through the Life Course

parent, or being abandoned by a loved one.
Why do close relationships play such a
profound

role

in

human

experience?

Attachment theory is one approach to
understanding the nature of close relationships.
In this module, we review the origins of the
theory, the core theoretical principles, and
some ways in which attachment influences
human behavior, thoughts, and feelings
across the life course.

Attachment Theory: A Brief
History and Core Concepts
Attachment theory was originally developed
in the 1940s by John Bowlby, a British
Relationships are the fabric of society, and are integral to the

psychoanalyst

who

was

attempting

to

maintenance of our species. [Image: Percy Sledge Agbunag

understand the intense distress experienced

Carballo]

by infants who had been separated from their
parents. Bowlby (1969) observed that infants

would go to extraordinary lengths to prevent separation from their parents or to reestablish
proximity to a missing parent. For example, he noted that children who had been separated
from their parents would often cry, call for their parents, refuse to eat or play, and stand at
the door in desperate anticipation of their parents’ return. At the time of Bowlby’s initial
writings, psychoanalytic writers held that these expressions were manifestations of immature
defense mechanisms that were operating to repress emotional pain. However, Bowlby
observed that such expressions are common to a wide variety of mammalian species and
speculated that these responses to separation may serve an evolutionary function (see Box 1).
Drawing on evolutionary theory, Bowlby (1969) argued that these behaviors are adaptive
responses to separation from a primary attachment figure—a caregiver who provides
support, protection, and care. Because human infants, like other mammalian infants, cannot
feed or protect themselves, they are dependent upon the care and protection of “older and
wiser” adults for survival. Bowlby argued that, over the course of evolutionary history, infants
who were able to maintain proximity to an attachment figure would be more likely to survive
to a reproductive age.

Attachment Through the Life Course

301

According to Bowlby, a motivational system, what he called the attachment behavioral
system, was gradually “designed” by natural selection to regulate proximity to an attachment
figure. The attachment system functions much like a thermostat that continuously monitors
the ambient temperature of a room, comparing that temperature against a desired state and
adjusting behavior (e.g., activating the furnace) accordingly. In the case of the attachment
system, Bowlby argued that the system continuously monitors the accessibility of the primary
attachment figure. If the child perceives the attachment figure to be nearby, accessible, and
attentive, then the child feels loved, secure, and confident and, behaviorally, is likely to explore
his or her environment, play with others, and be sociable. If, however, the child perceives the
attachment figure to be inaccessible, the child experiences anxiety and, behaviorally, is likely
to exhibit attachment behaviors ranging from simple visual searching on the low extreme to
active searching, following, and vocal signaling on the other. These attachment behaviors

302

Attachment Through the Life Course

continue either until the child is able
to reestablish a desirable level of
physical or psychological proximity
to the attachment figure or until the
child exhausts himself or herself or
gives up, as may happen in the
context of a prolonged separation or
loss.

Individual Differences in
Think of your earliest memory, does it involve just you, or does it include

Infant Attachment

your loved ones, your family and caretakers? [Image: Harsha K R]

Although

Bowlby

believed

that

these basic dynamics captured the way the attachment system works in most children, he
recognized that there are individual differences in the way children appraise the accessibility
of the attachment figure and how they regulate their attachment behavior in response to
threats. However, it was not until his colleague, Mary Ainsworth, began to systematically study
infant–parent separations that a formal understanding of these individual differences
emerged. Ainsworth and her students developed a technique called the strange situation—
a laboratory task for studying infant–parent attachment (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, & Wall,
1978). In the strange situation, 12-month-old infants and their parents are brought to the
laboratory and, over a period of approximately 20 minutes, are systematically separated from
and reunited with one another. In the strange situation, most children (about 60%) behave in
the way implied by Bowlby’s normative theory. Specifically, they become upset when the
parent leaves the room, but, when he or she returns, they actively seek the parent and are
easily comforted by him or her. Children who exhibit this pattern of behavior are often called
secure. Other children (about 20% or less) are ill at ease initially and, upon separation, become
extremely distressed. Importantly, when reunited with their parents, these children have a
difficult time being soothed and often exhibit conflicting behaviors that suggest they want to
be comforted, but that they also want to “punish” the parent for leaving. These children are
often called anxious-resistant. The third pattern of attachment that Ainsworth and her
colleagues documented is often labeled avoidant. Avoidant children (about 20%) do not
consistently behave as if they are stressed by the separation but, upon reunion, actively avoid
seeking contact with their parent, sometimes turning their attention to play objects on the
laboratory floor.
Ainsworth’s work was important for at least three reasons. First, she provided one of the first
empirical demonstrations of how attachment behavior is organized in unfamiliar contexts.

303

Attachment Through the Life Course

Second, she provided the first empirical taxonomy of individual differences in infant
attachment patterns. According to her research, at least three types of children exist: those
who are secure in their relationship with their parents, those who are anxious-resistant, and
those who are anxious-avoidant. Finally, she demonstrated that these individual differences
were correlated with infant–parent interactions in the home during the first year of life.
Children who appear secure in the strange situation, for example, tend to have parents who
are responsive to their needs. Children who appear insecure in the strange situation (i.e.,
anxious-resistant or avoidant) often have parents who are insensitive to their needs, or
inconsistent or rejecting in the care they provide.

Antecedents of Attachment Patterns
In the years that have followed
Ainsworth’s ground-breaking re­
search, researchers have investigated
a variety of factors that may help
determine
develop

whether

secure

or

children
insecure

relationships with their primary
attachment figures. As mentioned
above, one of the key determinants
of attachment patterns is the
history of sensitive and responsive
interactions between the caregiver
and the child. In short, when the

Is attachment style multi-generational? How does one person’s childhood

child is uncertain or stressed, the

attachment style translate to the way they interact with their own children?

ability of the caregiver to provide

[Image: Kamau Akabueze]

support to the child is critical for
his or her psychological development. It is assumed that such supportive interactions help
the child learn to regulate his or her emotions, give the child the confidence to explore the
environment, and provide the child with a safe haven during stressful circumstances.
Evidence for the role of sensitive caregiving in shaping attachment patterns comes from
longitudinal and experimental studies. For example, Grossmann, Grossmann, Spangler,
Suess, and Unzner (1985) studied parent–child interactions in the homes of 54 families, up to
three times during the first year of the child’s life. At 12 months of age, infants and their
mothers participated in the strange situation. Grossmann and her colleagues found that
children who were classified as secure in the strange situation at 12 months of age were more

304

Attachment Through the Life Course

likely than children classified as insecure to have mothers who provided responsive care to
their children in the home environment.
Van den Boom (1994) developed an intervention that was designed to enhance maternal
sensitive responsiveness. When the infants were 9 months of age, the mothers in the
intervention group were rated as more responsive and attentive in their interaction with their
infants compared to mothers in the control group. In addition, their infants were rated as
more sociable, self-soothing, and more likely to explore the environment. At 12 months of
age, children in the intervention group were more likely to be classified as secure than insecure
in the strange situation.

Attachment Patterns and Child Outcomes
Attachment researchers have studied the association between children’s attachment patterns
and their adaptation over time. Researchers have learned, for example, that children who are
classified as secure in the strange situation are more likely to have high functioning
relationships with peers, to be evaluated favorably by teachers, and to persist with more
diligence in challenging tasks. In contrast, insecure-avoidant children are more likely to be
construed as “bullies” or to have a difficult time building and maintaining friendships
(Weinfield, Sroufe, Egeland, & Carlson, 2008).

Attachment in Adulthood
Although Bowlby was primarily focused on understanding the nature of the infant–caregiver
relationship, he believed that attachment characterized human experience across the life
course. It was not until the mid-1980s, however, that researchers began to take seriously the
possibility that attachment processes may be relevant to adulthood. Hazan and Shaver (1987)
were two of the first researchers to explore Bowlby’s ideas in the context of romantic
relationships. According to Hazan and Shaver, the emotional bond that develops between
adult romantic partners is partly a function of the same motivational system—the attachment
behavioral system—that gives rise to the emotional bond between infants and their
caregivers. Hazan and Shaver noted that in both kinds of relationship, people (a) feel safe and
secure when the other person is present; (b) turn to the other person during times of sickness,
distress, or fear; (c) use the other person as a “secure base” from which to explore the world;
and (d) speak to one another in a unique language, often called “motherese” or “baby talk.”
(See Box 2)
On the basis of these parallels, Hazan and Shaver (1987) argued that adult romantic

Attachment Through the Life Course

305

relationships, such as infant–caregiver relationships, are attachments. According to Hazan
and Shaver, individuals gradually transfer attachment-related functions from parents to peers
as they develop. Thus, although young children tend to use their parents as their primary
attachment figures, as they reach adolescence and young adulthood, they come to rely more
upon close friends and/or romantic partners for basic attachment-related functions. Thus,
although a young child may turn to his or her mother for comfort, support, and guidance
when distressed, scared, or ill, young adults may be more likely to turn to their romantic
partners for these purposes under similar situations.
Hazan and Shaver (1987) asked a diverse sample of adults to read the three paragraphs below
and indicate which paragraph best characterized the way they think, feel, and behave in close
relationships:
1. I am somewhat uncomfortable being close to others; I find it difficult to trust them
completely, difficult to allow myself to depend on them. I am nervous when anyone gets
too close, and often, others want me to be more intimate than I feel comfortable being.

306

Attachment Through the Life Course

2. I find it relatively easy to get close to others and am comfortable depending on them and
having them depend on me. I don’t worry about being abandoned or about someone
getting too close to me.
3. I find that others are reluctant to get as close as I would like. I often worry that my partner
doesn’t really love me or won’t want to stay with me. I want to get very close to my partner,
and this sometimes scares people away.
Conceptually, these descriptions were designed to represent what Hazan and Shaver
considered to be adult analogues of the kinds of attachment patterns Ainsworth described
in the strange situation (avoidant, secure, and anxious, respectively). Hazan and Shaver (1987)
found that the distribution of the three patterns was similar to that observed in infancy. In
other words, about 60% of adults classified themselves as secure (paragraph B), about 20%
described themselves as avoidant (paragraph A), and about 20% described themselves as
anxious-resistant (paragraph C). Moreover, they found that people who described themselves
as secure, for example, were more likely to report having had warm and trusting relationships
with their parents when they were growing up. In addition, they were more likely to have
positive views of romantic relationships. Based on these findings, Hazan and Shaver (1987)
concluded that the same kinds of individual differences that exist in infant attachment also
exist in adulthood.

Research on Attachment in Adulthood
Attachment theory has inspired a large amount of literature in social, personality, and clinical
psychology. In the sections below, I provide a brief overview of some of the major research
questions and what researchers have learned about attachment in adulthood.

Who Ends Up with Whom?
When people are asked what kinds of psychological or behavioral qualities they are seeking
in a romantic partner, a large majority of people indicate that they are seeking someone who
is kind, caring, trustworthy, and understanding—the kinds of attributes that characterize a
“secure” caregiver (Chappell & Davis, 1998). But we know that people do not always end up
with others who meet their ideals. Are secure people more likely to end up with secure partners
—and, vice versa, are insecure people more likely to end up with insecure partners? The
majority of the research that has been conducted to date suggests that the answer is “yes.”
Frazier, Byer, Fischer, Wright, and DeBord (1996), for example, studied the attachment
patterns of more than 83 heterosexual couples and found that, if the man was relatively

307

Attachment Through the Life Course

secure, the woman was also likely to be secure.
One important question is whether these findings
exist because (a) secure people are more likely to
be attracted to other secure people, (b) secure
people are likely to create security in their partners
over time, or (c) some combination of these
possibilities. Existing empirical research strongly
supports the first alternative. For example, when
people have the opportunity to interact with
individuals who vary in security in a speed-dating
context, they express a greater interest in those
who are higher in security than those who are
more insecure (McClure, Lydon, Baccus, & Baldwin,
2010). However, there is also some evidence that
people’s attachment styles mutually shape one
another in close relationships. For example, in a
longitudinal study, Hudson, Fraley, Vicary, and
People who had relatively secure attachments as

Brumbaugh (2012) found that, if one person in a

children go on to have more secure romantic

relationship experienced a change in security, his

attachments. [Image: Nicolas Fuentes]

or her partner was likely to experience a change in
the same direction.

Relationship Functioning
Research has consistently demonstrated that individuals who are relatively secure are more
likely than insecure individuals to have high functioning relationships—relationships that are
more satisfying, more enduring, and less characterized by conflict. For example, Feeney and
Noller (1992) found that insecure individuals were more likely than secure individuals to
experience a breakup of their relationship. In addition, secure individuals are more likely to
report satisfying relationships (e.g., Collins & Read, 1990) and are more likely to provide
support to their partners when their partners were feeling distressed (Simpson, Rholes, &
Nelligan, 1992).

Do Early Experiences Shape Adult Attachment?
The majority of research on this issue is retrospective—that is, it relies on adults’ reports of
what they recall about their childhood experiences. This kind of work suggests that secure

308

Attachment Through the Life Course

adults are more likely to
describe their early childhood
experiences

with

their

parents as being supportive,
loving, and kind (Hazan &
Shaver, 1987). A number
of longitudinal studies are
emerging that demonstrate
prospective associations
between early attachment
experiences

and

adult

attachment styles and/or
Sharing food, celebrations and traditions are some of the ways we establish secure

interpersonal functioning

attachments with our loved ones from an early age. [Image: skeeze]

in adulthood. For example,
Fraley, Roisman, Booth-

LaForce, Owen, and Holland (2013) found in a sample of more than 700 individuals studied
from infancy to adulthood that maternal sensitivity across development prospectively
predicted security at age 18. Simpson, Collins, Tran, and Haydon (2007) found that attachment
security, assessed in infancy in the strange situation, predicted peer competence in grades 1
to 3, which, in turn, predicted the quality of friendship relationships at age 16, which, in turn,
predicted the expression of positive and negative emotions in their adult romantic
relationships at ages 20 to 23.
It is easy to come away from such findings with the mistaken assumption that early experiences
“determine” later outcomes. To be clear: Attachment theorists assume that the relationship
between early experiences and subsequent outcomes is probabilistic, not deterministic.
Having supportive and responsive experiences with caregivers early in life is assumed to set
the stage for positive social development. But that does not mean that attachment patterns
are set in stone. In short, even if an individual has far from optimal experiences in early life,
attachment theory suggests that it is possible for that individual to develop well-functioning
adult relationships through a number of corrective experiences—including relationships with
siblings, other family members, teachers, and close friends. Security is best viewed as a
culmination of a person’s attachment history rather than a reflection of his or her early
experiences alone. Those early experiences are considered important not because they
determine a person’s fate, but because they provide the foundation for subsequent
experiences.

309

Attachment Through the Life Course

Outside Resources
Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. (1987). Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment process.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 511-524. Retrieved from:
http://www2.psych.ubc.ca/~schaller/Psyc591Readings/HazanShaver1987.pdf
Hofer, M. A. (2006). Psychobiological roots of early attachment. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 15, 84-88. doi:10.1111/j.0963-7214.2006.00412.x
http://cdp.sagepub.com/content/15/2/84.short
Strange Situation Video
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DH1m_ZMO7GU
Survey: Learn more about your attachment patterns via this online survey
http://www.yourpersonality.net/relstructures/
Video on Harry Harlow’s Research with Rhesus Monkeys
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=weXEaTKckzY

Discussion Questions
1. What kind of relationship did you have with your parents or primary caregivers when you
were young? Do you think that had any bearing on the way you related to others (e.g.,
friends, relationship partners) as you grew older?
2. There is variation across cultures in the extent to which people value independence. Do
you think this might have implications for the development of attachment patterns?
3. As parents age, it is not uncommon for them to have to depend on their adult children.
Do you think that people’s history of experiences in their relationships with their parents
might shape people’s willingness to provide care for their aging parents? In other words,
are secure adults more likely to provide responsive care to their aging parents?
4. Some people, despite reporting insecure relationships with their parents, report secure,
well-functioning relationships with their spouses. What kinds of experiences do you think
might enable someone to develop a secure relationship with their partners despite having
an insecure relationship with other central figures in their lives?
5. Most attachment research on adults focuses on attachment to peers (e.g., romantic

Attachment Through the Life Course

310

partners). What other kinds of things may serve as attachment figures? Do you think
siblings, pets, or gods can serve as attachment figures?

311

Attachment Through the Life Course

Vocabulary
Attachment behavioral system
A motivational system selected over the course of evolution to maintain proximity between
a young child and his or her primary attachment figure.
Attachment behaviors
Behaviors and signals that attract the attention of a primary attachment figure and function
to prevent separation from that individual or to reestablish proximity to that individual (e.g.,
crying, clinging).
Attachment figure
Someone who functions as the primary safe haven and secure base for an individual. In
childhood, an individual’s attachment figure is often a parent. In adulthood, an individual’s
attachment figure is often a romantic partner.
Attachment patterns
(also called “attachment styles” or “attachment orientations”) Individual differences in how
securely (vs. insecurely) people think, feel, and behave in attachment relationships.
Strange situation
A laboratory task that involves briefly separating and reuniting infants and their primary
caregivers as a way of studying individual differences in attachment behavior.

312

Attachment Through the Life Course

References
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of attachment. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York, NY: Basic Books
Chappell, K. D., & Davis, K. E. (1998). Attachment, partner choice, and perception of romantic
partners: An experimental test of the attachment-security hypothesis. Personal
Relationships, 5, 327–342.
Collins, N., & Read, S. (1990). Adult attachment, working models and relationship quality in
dating couples. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 644-663.
Feeney, J. A., & Noller, P. (1992). Attachment style and romantic love: Relationship dissolution.
Australian Journal of Psychology, 44, 69–74.
Fraley, R. C., Roisman, G. I., Booth-LaForce, C., Owen, M. T., & Holland, A. S. (2013). Interpersonal
and genetic origins of adult attachment styles: A longitudinal study from infancy to early
adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 8817-838.
Frazier, P. A, Byer, A. L., Fischer, A. R., Wright, D. M., & DeBord, K. A. (1996). Adult attachment
style and partner choice: Correlational and experimental findings. Personal Relationships,
3, 117–136.
Grossmann, K., Grossmann, K. E., Spangler, G., Suess, G., & Unzner, L. (1985). Maternal
sensitivity and newborns orientation responses as related to quality of attachment in
northern Germany. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 50(1-2),
233–256.
Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. R. (1987). Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment process.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 511-524.
Hudson, N. W., Fraley, R. C., Vicary, A. M., & Brumbaugh, C. C. (2012). Attachment coregulation:
A longitudinal investigation of the coordination in romantic partners’ attachment styles.
Manuscript under review.
McClure, M. J., Lydon., J. E., Baccus, J., & Baldwin, M. W. (2010). A signal detection analysis of
the anxiously attached at speed-dating: Being unpopular is only the first part of the
problem. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36, 1024–1036.
Simpson, J. A., Collins, W. A., Tran, S., & Haydon, K. C. (2007). Attachment and the experience
and expression of emotions in adult romantic relationships: A developmental perspective.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 355–367.
Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., & Nelligan, J. S. (1992). Support seeking and support giving within

Attachment Through the Life Course

313

couples in an anxiety-provoking situation. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62,
434–446.
Weinfield, N. S., Sroufe, L. A., Egeland, B., Carlson, E. A. (2008). Individual differences in infantcaregiver attachment: Conceptual and empirical aspects of security. In J. Cassidy & P. R.
Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications (2nd ed.,
pp. 78–101). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
van den Boom, D. C. (1994). The influence of temperament and mothering on attachment and
exploration: An experimental manipulation of sensitive responsiveness among lower-class
mothers with irritable infants. Child Development, 65, 1457–1477.

18
Cognitive Development in Childhood
Robert Siegler

This module examines what cognitive development is, major theories about how it occurs,
the roles of nature and nurture, whether it is continuous or discontinuous, and how research
in the area is being used to improve education.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•

Be able to identify and describe the main areas of cognitive development.
Be able to describe major theories of cognitive development and what distinguishes them.
Understand how nature and nurture work together to produce cognitive development.
Understand why cognitive development is sometimes viewed as discontinuous and
sometimes as continuous.

•

Know some ways in which research on cognitive development is being used to improve
education.

Introduction
By the time you reach adulthood you have learned a few things about how the world works.
You know, for instance, that you can’t walk through walls or leap into the tops of trees. You
know you that although you cannot see your car keys they’ve got to be around here someplace.
What’s more, you know that if you want to communicate complex ideas like ordering a tripleshot soy vanilla latte with chocolate sprinkles it’s better to use words with meanings attached
to them rather than simply gesturing and grunting. People accumulate all this useful

315

Cognitive Development in Childhood

knowledge through the process of cognitive development, which involves a multitude of
factors, both inherent and learned.
Cognitive development refers to the development
of thinking across the lifespan. Defining thinking
can be problematic, because no clear boundaries
separate thinking from other mental activities.
Thinking obviously involves the higher mental
processes: problem solving, reasoning, creating,
conceptualizing, categorizing, remembering, planning,
and so on. However, thinking also involves other
mental processes that seem more basic and at
which

even

toddlers

are

skilled—such

as

perceiving objects and events in the environment,
acting skillfully on objects to obtain goals, and
understanding and producing language. Yet other
areas of human development that involve thinking
are

not

usually

associated

with

cognitive

development, because thinking isn’t a prominent
feature

of

them—such

as

personality

and

temperament.

Cognitive development in childhood is about change.
From birth to adolescence a young person's mind

As the name suggests, cognitive development is
about change. Children’s thinking changes in

changes dramatically in many important ways.
[Photo: Kayusa]

dramatic and surprising ways. Consider DeVries’s (1969) study of whether young children
understand the difference between appearance and reality. To find out, she brought an
unusually even-tempered cat named Maynard to a psychology laboratory and allowed the 3to 6-year-old participants in the study to pet and play with him. DeVries then put a mask of a
fierce dog on Maynard’s head, and asked the children what Maynard was. Despite all of the
children having identified Maynard previously as a cat, now most 3-year-olds said that he was
a dog and claimed that he had a dog’s bones and a dog’s stomach. In contrast, the 6-year-olds
weren’t fooled; they had no doubt that Maynard remained a cat. Understanding how children’s
thinking changes so dramatically in just a few years is one of the fascinating challenges in
studying cognitive development.
There are several main types of theories of child development. Stage theories, such as Piaget’s
stage theory, focus on whether children progress through qualitatively different stages of
development. Sociocultural theories, such as that of Lev Vygotsky, emphasize how other
people and the attitudes, values, and beliefs of the surrounding culture, influence children’s

316

Cognitive Development in Childhood

development. Information processing theories, such as that of David Klahr, examine the
mental processes that produce thinking at any one time and the transition processes that
lead to growth in that thinking.
At the heart of all of these theories, and indeed of all research on cognitive development, are
two main questions: (1) How do nature and nurture interact to produce cognitive
development? (2) Does cognitive development progress through qualitatively distinct stages?
In the remainder of this module, we examine the answers that are emerging regarding these
questions, as well as ways in which cognitive developmental research is being used to improve
education.

Nature and Nurture
The most basic question about child development is how nature and nurture together shape
development. Nature refers to our biological endowment, the genes we receive from our
parents. Nurture refers to the environments, social as well as physical, that influence our
development, everything from the womb in which we develop before birth to the homes in
which we grow up, the schools we attend, and the many people with whom we interact.
The nature-nurture issue is often presented as an either-or question: Is our intelligence (for
example) due to our genes or to the environments in which we live? In fact, however, every
aspect of development is produced by the interaction of genes and environment. At the most
basic level, without genes, there would be no child, and without an environment to provide
nurture, there also would be no child.
The way in which nature and nurture work together can be seen in findings on visual
development. Many people view vision as something that people either are born with or that
is purely a matter of biological maturation, but it also depends on the right kind of experience
at the right time. For example, development of depth perception, the ability to actively
perceive the distance from oneself of objects in the environment, depends on seeing patterned
light and having normal brain activity in response to the patterned light, in infancy (Held,
1993). If no patterned light is received, for example when a baby has severe cataracts or
blindness that is not surgically corrected until later in development, depth perception remains
abnormal even after the surgery.
Adding to the complexity of the nature-nurture interaction, children’s genes lead to their
eliciting different treatment from other people, which influences their cognitive development.
For example, infants’ physical attractiveness and temperament are influenced considerably

317

Cognitive Development in Childhood

by their genetic inheritance, but it is also the
case that parents provide more sensitive
and affectionate care to easygoing and
attractive infants than to difficult and less
attractive ones, which can contribute to the
infants’ later cognitive development (Langlois
et al., 1995; van den Boom & Hoeksma,
1994).
Also contributing to the complex interplay

A child that is perceived to be attractive and calm may receive

of nature and nurture is the role of children

a different sort of care and attention from adults and as a result

in shaping their own cognitive development.

enjoy a developmental advantage. [Photo: tarotastic]

From the first days out of the womb, children
actively choose to attend more to some things and less to others. For example, even 1-montholds choose to look at their mother’s face more than at the faces of other women of the same
age and general level of attractiveness (Bartrip, Morton, & de Schonen, 2001). Children’s
contributions to their own cognitive development grow larger as they grow older (Scarr &
McCartney, 1983). When children are young, their parents largely determine their experiences:
whether they will attend day care, the children with whom they will have play dates, the books
to which they have access, and so on. In contrast, older children and adolescents choose their
environments to a larger degree. Their parents’ preferences largely determine how 5-yearolds spend time, but 15-year-olds’ own preferences largely determine when, if ever, they set
foot in a library. Children’s choices often have large consequences. To cite one example, the
more that children choose to read, the more that their reading improves in future years (Baker,
Dreher, & Guthrie, 2000). Thus, the issue is not whether cognitive development is a product
of nature or nurture; rather, the issue is how nature and nurture work together to produce
cognitive development.

Does Cognitive Development Progress Through Distinct Stages?
Some aspects of the development of living organisms, such as the growth of the width of a
pine tree, involve quantitative changes, with the tree getting a little wider each year. Other
changes, such as the life cycle of a ladybug, involve qualitative changes, with the creature
becoming a totally different type of entity after a transition than before (Figure 1). The existence
of both gradual, quantitative changes and relatively sudden, qualitative changes in the world
has led researchers who study cognitive development to ask whether changes in children’s
thinking are gradual and continuous or sudden and discontinuous.

Cognitive Development in Childhood

318

Figure 1: Continuous and discontinuous development. Some researchers see development as a
continuous gradual process, much like a maple tree growing steadily in height and cross-sectional area.
Other researchers see development as a progression of discontinuous stages, involving rapid
discontinuous changes, such as those in the life cycle of a ladybug, separated by longer periods of slow,
gradual change.

The great Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget proposed that children’s thinking progresses through
a series of four discrete stages. By “stages,” he meant periods during which children reasoned
similarly about many superficially different problems, with the stages occurring in a fixed
order and the thinking within different stages differing in fundamental ways. The four stages
that Piaget hypothesized were the sensorimotor stage (birth to 2 years), the preoperational
reasoning stage (2 to 6 or 7 years), the concrete operational reasoning stage (6 or 7 to 11
or 12 years), and the formal operational reasoning stage (11 or 12 years and throughout the
rest of life).
During the sensorimotor stage, children’s thinking is largely realized through their perceptions
of the world and their physical interactions with it. Their mental representations are very
limited. Consider Piaget’s object permanence task, which is one of his most famous problems.
If an infant younger than 9 months of age is playing with a favorite toy, and another person
removes the toy from view, for example by putting it under an opaque cover and not letting
the infant immediately reach for it, the infant is very likely to make no effort to retrieve it and
to show no emotional distress (Piaget, 1954). This is not due to their being uninterested in
the toy or unable to reach for it; if the same toy is put under a clear cover, infants below 9
months readily retrieve it (Munakata, McClelland, Johnson, & Siegler, 1997). Instead, Piaget
claimed that infants less than 9 months do not understand that objects continue to exist even
when out of sight.
During the preoperational stage, according to Piaget, children can solve not only this simple

Cognitive Development in Childhood

319

problem (which they actually can solve after 9 months) but show a wide variety of other
symbolic-representation capabilities, such as those involved in drawing and using language.
However, such 2- to 7-year-olds tend to focus on a single dimension, even when solving
problems would require them to consider multiple dimensions. This is evident in Piaget’s
(1952) conservation problems. For example, if a glass of water is poured into a taller, thinner
glass, children below age 7 generally say that there now is more water than before. Similarly,
if a clay ball is reshaped into a long, thin sausage, they claim that there is now more clay, and
if a row of coins is spread out, they claim that there are now more coins. In all cases, the
children are focusing on one dimension, while ignoring the changes in other dimensions (for
example, the greater width of the glass and the clay ball).

Piaget's Sensorimotor and Pre-operational Reasoning stages

Children overcome this tendency to focus on a single dimension during the concrete
operations stage, and think logically in most situations. However, according to Piaget, they
still cannot think in systematic scientific ways, even when such thinking would be useful. Thus,
if asked to find out which variables influence the period that a pendulum takes to complete
its arc, and given weights that they can attach to strings in order to do experiments with the
pendulum to find out, most children younger than age 12, perform biased experiments from
which no conclusion can be drawn, and then conclude that whatever they originally believed

Cognitive Development in Childhood

320

is correct. For example, if a boy believed that weight was the only variable that mattered, he
might put the heaviest weight on the shortest string and push it the hardest, and then conclude
that just as he thought, weight is the only variable that matters (Inhelder & Piaget, 1958).
Finally, in the formal operations period, children attain the reasoning power of mature adults,
which allows them to solve the pendulum problem and a wide range of other problems.
However, this formal operations stage tends not to occur without exposure to formal
education in scientific reasoning, and appears to be largely or completely absent from some
societies that do not provide this type of education.
Although Piaget’s theory has been very influential, it has not gone unchallenged. Many more
recent researchers have obtained findings indicating that cognitive development is
considerably more continuous than Piaget claimed. For example, Diamond (1985) found that
on the object permanence task described above, infants show earlier knowledge if the waiting
period is shorter. At age 6 months, they retrieve the hidden object if the wait is no longer than
2 seconds; at 7 months, they retrieve it if the wait is no longer than 4 seconds; and so on. Even
earlier, at 3 or 4 months, infants show surprise in the form of longer looking times if objects
suddenly appear to vanish with no obvious cause (Baillargeon, 1987). Similarly, children’s
specific experiences can greatly influence when developmental changes occur. Children of
pottery makers in Mexican villages, for example, know that reshaping clay does not change

Piaget's Concrete and Formal Operations stages

321

Cognitive Development in Childhood

the amount of clay at much younger ages than children who do not have similar experiences
(Price-Williams, Gordon, & Ramirez, 1969).
So, is cognitive development fundamentally continuous or fundamentally discontinuous? A
reasonable answer seems to be, “It depends on how you look at it and how often you look.”
For example, under relatively facilitative circumstances, infants show early forms of object
permanence by 3 or 4 months, and they gradually extend the range of times for which they
can remember hidden objects as they grow older. However, on Piaget’s original object
permanence task, infants do quite quickly change toward the end of their first year from not
reaching for hidden toys to reaching for them, even after they’ve experienced a substantial
delay before being allowed to reach. Thus, the debate between those who emphasize
discontinuous, stage-like changes in cognitive development and those who emphasize gradual
continuous changes remains a lively one.

Applications to Education
Understanding how children think and learn has proven useful for improving education. One
example comes from the area of reading. Cognitive developmental research has shown that
phonemic awareness—that is, awareness of the component sounds within words—is a
crucial skill in learning to read. To measure awareness of the component sounds within words,
researchers ask children to decide whether two words rhyme, to decide whether the words
start with the same sound, to identify the component sounds within words, and to indicate
what would be left if a given sound were removed from a word. Kindergartners’ performance
on these tasks is the strongest
predictor of reading achievement
in third and fourth grade, even
stronger than IQ or social class
background (Nation, 2008). Moreover,
teaching these skills to randomly
chosen 4- and 5-year-olds results in
their being better readers years
later

(National

Reading

Panel,

2000).
Another educational application of
Activities like playing games that involve working with numbers and spatial

cognitive developmental research

relationships can give young children a developmental advantage over

involves the area of mathematics.

peers who have less exposure to the same concepts. [Photo: Ben Husmann]

Even before they enter kindergarten,

322

Cognitive Development in Childhood

the mathematical knowledge of children from low-income backgrounds lags far behind that
of children from more affluent backgrounds. Ramani and Siegler (2008) hypothesized that
this difference is due to the children in middle- and upper-income families engaging more
frequently in numerical activities, for example playing numerical board games such as Chutes
and Ladders. Chutes and Ladders is a game with a number in each square; children start at
the number one and spin a spinner or throw a dice to determine how far to move their token.
Playing this game seemed likely to teach children about numbers, because in it, larger numbers
are associated with greater values on a variety of dimensions. In particular, the higher the
number that a child’s token reaches, the greater the distance the token will have traveled from
the starting point, the greater the number of physical movements the child will have made in
moving the token from one square to another, the greater the number of number words the
child will have said and heard, and the more time will have passed since the beginning of the
game. These spatial, kinesthetic, verbal, and time-based cues provide a broad-based,
multisensory foundation for knowledge of numerical magnitudes (the sizes of numbers), a
type of knowledge that is closely related to mathematics achievement test scores (Booth &
Siegler, 2006).
Playing this numerical board game for roughly 1 hour, distributed over a 2-week period,
improved low-income children’s knowledge of numerical magnitudes, ability to read printed
numbers, and skill at learning novel arithmetic problems. The gains lasted for months after
the game-playing experience (Ramani & Siegler, 2008; Siegler & Ramani, 2009). An advantage
of this type of educational intervention is that it has minimal if any cost—a parent could just
draw a game on a piece of paper.
Understanding of cognitive development is advancing on many different fronts. One exciting
area is linking changes in brain activity to changes in children’s thinking (Nelson et al., 2006).
Although many people believe that brain maturation is something that occurs before birth,
the brain actually continues to change in large ways for many years thereafter. For example,
a part of the brain called the prefrontal cortex, which is located at the front of the brain and
is particularly involved with planning and flexible problem solving, continues to develop
throughout adolescence (Blakemore & Choudhury, 2006). Such new research domains, as
well as enduring issues such as nature and nurture, continuity and discontinuity, and how to
apply cognitive development research to education, insure that cognitive development will
continue to be an exciting area in the coming years.

Conclusion
Research into cognitive development has shown us that minds don’t just form according to a

Cognitive Development in Childhood

323

uniform blueprint or innate intellect, but through a combination of influencing factors. For
instance, if we want our kids to have a strong grasp of language we could concentrate on
phonemic awareness early on. If we want them to be good at math and science we could
engage them in numerical games and activities early on. Perhaps most importantly, we no
longer think of brains as empty vessels waiting to be filled up with knowledge but as adaptable
organs that develop all the way through early adulthood.

324

Cognitive Development in Childhood

Outside Resources
Book: Frye, D., Baroody, A., Burchinal, M., Carver, S. M., Jordan, N. C., & McDowell, J. (2013).
Teaching math to young children: A practice guide. Washington, DC: National Center for
Education Evaluation and Regional Assistance (NCEE), Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Education.
Book: Goswami, U. G. (2010). The Blackwell Handbook of Childhood Cognitive Development.
New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Book: Kuhn, D., & Siegler, R. S. (Vol. Eds.). (2006). Volume 2: Cognition, perception, and
language. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.), Handbook of child psychology (6th ed.).
Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Book: Miller, P. H. (2011). Theories of developmental psychology (5th ed.). New York: Worth.
Book: Siegler, R. S., & Alibali, M. W. (2004). Children's thinking (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Discussion Questions
1. Why are there different theories of cognitive development? Why don’t researchers agree
on which theory is the right one?
2. Do children’s natures differ, or do differences among children only reflect differences in
their experiences?
3. Do you see development as more continuous or more discontinuous?
4. Can you think of ways other than those described in the module in which research on
cognitive development could be used to improve education?

325

Cognitive Development in Childhood

Vocabulary
Chutes and Ladders
A numerical board game that seems to be useful for building numerical knowledge.
Concrete operations stage
Piagetian stage between ages 7 and 12 when children can think logically about concrete
situations but not engage in systematic scientific reasoning.
Conservation problems
Problems pioneered by Piaget in which physical transformation of an object or set of objects
changes a perceptually salient dimension but not the quantity that is being asked about.
Continuous development
Ways in which development occurs in a gradual incremental manner, rather than through
sudden jumps.
Depth perception
The ability to actively perceive the distance from oneself of objects in the environment.
Discontinuous development
Discontinuous development
Formal operations stage
Piagetian stage starting at age 12 years and continuing for the rest of life, in which adolescents
may gain the reasoning powers of educated adults.
Information processing theories
Theories that focus on describing the cognitive processes that underlie thinking at any one
age and cognitive growth over time.
Nature
The genes that children bring with them to life and that influence all aspects of their
development.
Numerical magnitudes
The sizes of numbers.

Cognitive Development in Childhood

326

Nurture
The environments, starting with the womb, that influence all aspects of children’s
development.
Object permanence task
The Piagetian task in which infants below about 9 months of age fail to search for an object
that is removed from their sight and, if not allowed to search immediately for the object, act
as if they do not know that it continues to exist.
Phonemic awareness
Awareness of the component sounds within words.
Piaget’s theory
Theory that development occurs through a sequence of discontinuous stages: the
sensorimotor, preoperational, concrete operational, and formal operational stages.
Preoperational reasoning stage
Period within Piagetian theory from age 2 to 7 years, in which children can represent objects
through drawing and language but cannot solve logical reasoning problems, such as the
conservation problems.
Qualitative changes
Large, fundamental change, as when a caterpillar changes into a butterfly; stage theories such
as Piaget’s posit that each stage reflects qualitative change relative to previous stages.
Quantitative changes
Gradual, incremental change, as in the growth of a pine tree’s girth.
Sensorimotor stage
Period within Piagetian theory from birth to age 2 years, during which children come to
represent the enduring reality of objects.
Sociocultural theories
Theory founded in large part by Lev Vygotsky that emphasizes how other people and the
attitudes, values, and beliefs of the surrounding culture influence children’s development.

327

Cognitive Development in Childhood

References
Baillargeon, R. (1987). Object permanence in 3 1/2- and 4 1/2-month-old infants. Developmental
Psychology, 23, 655–664.
Baker, L., Dreher, M. J., & Guthrie, J. T., (Eds.). (2000). Engaging young readers: Promoting
achievement and motivation. New York: Guilford.
Bartrip, J., Morton, J., & De Schonen, S. (2001). Responses to mother's face in 3-week to 5month old infants. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 19, 219–232
Blakemore, S.-J., & Choudhury, S. (2006). Development of the adolescent brain: Implications
for executive function and social cognition. Journal of Child Psychiatry and Psychology, 47,
296–312.
Booth, J. L., & Siegler, R. S. (2006). Developmental and individual differences in pure numerical
estimation. Developmental Psychology, 41, 189–201.
DeVries, R. (1969). Constancy of genetic identity in the years three to six. Monographs of the
Society for Research in Child Development, 34, 127.
Diamond, A. (1985). Development of the ability to use recall to guide action, as indicated by
infants' performance on AB. Child Development, 56, 868–883.
Held, R. (1993). What can rates of development tell us about underlying mechanisms? In C. E.
Granrud (Ed.), Visual perception and cognition in infancy (pp. 75–90). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Inhelder, B., & Piaget, J. (1958). The growth of logical thinking from childhood to adolescence. New
York: Basic Books.
Langlois, J. H., Ritter, J. M., Casey, R. J., & Sawin, D. B. (1995). Infant attractiveness predicts
maternal behaviors and attitudes. Developmental Psychology, 31, 464–472.
Munakata, Y., McClelland, J. L., Johnson, M. H., & Siegler, R. S. (1997). Rethinking infant
knowledge: Toward an adaptive process account of successes and failures in object
permanence tasks. Psychological Review, 104, 686 713.
Nation, K. (2008). Learning to read words. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
61, 1121 1133.
National Reading Panel (2000). Teaching children to read: An evidence-based assessment of the
scientific research literature on reading and its implications for reading instruction. Washington,
DC: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.
Nelson, C. A., Thomas, K. M., & de Haan, M. (2006). Neural bases of cognitive development.
In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Series Eds.) & D. Kuhn & R. S. Siegler (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of
child psychology: Volume 2: Cognition, perception, and language (6th ed., pp. 3–57). Hoboken,

Cognitive Development in Childhood

328

NJ: Wiley.
Piaget, J. (1954). The construction of reality in the child. New York: BasicBooks.
Piaget, J. (1952). The child’s concept of number. New York: W. W. Norton.
Price-Williams, D. R., Gordon, W., & Ramirez, M. (1969). Skill and conservation: A study of
pottery making children. Developmental Psychology, 1, 769.
Ramani, G. B., & Siegler, R. S. (2008). Promoting broad and stable improvements in low-income
children’s numerical knowledge through playing number board games. Child Development,
79, 375–394.
Scarr, S., & McCartney, K. (1983). How people make their own environments: A theory of
genotype-environment effects. Child Development, 54, 424–435.
Siegler, R. S., & Ramani, G. B. (2009). Playing linear number board games—but not circular
ones—improves low-income preschoolers’ numerical understanding. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 101, 545–560.
van den Boom, D. C., & Hoeksma, J. B. (1994). The effect of infant irritability on mother-infant
interaction: A growth curve analysis. Developmental Psychology, 30, 581–590.

19
Adolescent Development
Jennifer Lansford

Adolescence is a period that begins with puberty and ends with the transition to adulthood
(approximately ages 10–20). Physical changes associated with puberty are triggered by
hormones. Cognitive changes include improvements in complex and abstract thought, as well
as development that happens at different rates in distinct parts of the brain and increases
adolescents’ propensity for risky behavior because increases in sensation-seeking and reward
motivation precede increases in cognitive control. Adolescents’ relationships with parents go
through a period of redefinition in which adolescents become more autonomous, and aspects
of parenting, such as distal monitoring and psychological control, become more salient. Peer
relationships are important sources of support and companionship during adolescence yet
can also promote problem behaviors. Same-sex peer groups evolve into mixed-sex peer
groups, and adolescents’ romantic relationships tend to emerge from these groups. Identity
formation occurs as adolescents explore and commit to different roles and ideological
positions. Nationality, gender, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, religious background, sexual
orientation, and genetic factors shape how adolescents behave and how others respond to
them, and are sources of diversity in adolescence.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•

Describe major features of physical, cognitive, and social development during adolescence.
Understand why adolescence is a period of heightened risk taking.
Be able to explain sources of diversity in adolescent development.

Adolescence Defined

330

Adolescent Development

Adolescence is a developmental stage that has been defined as starting with puberty and
ending with the transition to adulthood (approximately ages 10–20). Adolescence has evolved
historically, with evidence indicating that this stage is lengthening as individuals start puberty
earlier and transition to adulthood later than in the past. Puberty today begins, on average,
at age 10–11 years for girls and 11–12 years for boys. This average age of onset has decreased
gradually over time since the 19th century by 3–4 months per decade, which has been
attributed to a range of factors including better nutrition, obesity, increased father absence,
and other environmental factors (Steinberg, 2013). Completion of formal education, financial
independence from parents, marriage, and parenthood have all been markers of the end of
adolescence and beginning of adulthood, and all of these transitions happen, on average,
later now than in the past. In fact, the prolonging of adolescence has prompted the
introduction of a new developmental period called emerging adulthood that captures these
developmental changes out of adolescence and into adulthood, occurring from approximately
ages 18 to 29 (Arnett, 2000).
This module will outline changes
that occur during adolescence in
three domains: physical, cognitive,
and social. Within the social
domain, changes in relationships
with parents, peers, and romantic
partners will be considered. Next,
the module turns to adolescents’
psychological and behavioral adj­
ustment, including identity formation,
aggression and antisocial behavior,
Adolescence is often characterized as a period of transformation, primarily,

anxiety

and

depression,

and

in terms of physical, cognitive, and social-relational change. [Image: Lorenia]

academic achievement. Finally,
the module summarizes sources

of diversity in adolescents’ experiences and development.

Physical Changes
Physical changes of puberty mark the onset of adolescence (Lerner & Steinberg, 2009). For
both boys and girls, these changes include a growth spurt in height, growth of pubic and
underarm hair, and skin changes (e.g., pimples). Boys also experience growth in facial hair
and a deepening of their voice. Girls experience breast development and begin menstruating.
These pubertal changes are driven by hormones, particularly an increase in testosterone for

331

Adolescent Development

boys and estrogen for girls.

Cognitive Changes
Major

changes

in

the

structure and functioning
of the brain occur during
adolescence and result in
cognitive and behavioral
developments (Steinberg,
2008). Cognitive changes
during adolescence include
a shift from concrete to

Although these boys are all of a similar age, you can see how the physical changes (e.

more abstract and complex

g., height, facial structure) happen differently for everyone. [Image: faungg's photos]

thinking. Such changes are
fostered by improvements during early adolescence in attention, memory, processing speed,
and metacognition (ability to think about thinking and therefore make better use of strategies
like mnemonic devices that can improve thinking). Early in adolescence, changes in the brain’s
dopaminergic system contribute to increases in adolescents’ sensation-seeking and reward
motivation. Later in adolescence, the brain’s cognitive control centers in the prefrontal cortex
develop, increasing adolescents’ self-regulation and future orientation. The difference in
timing of the development of these different regions of the brain contributes to more risk
taking during middle adolescence because adolescents are motivated to seek thrills that
sometimes come from risky behavior, such as reckless driving, smoking, or drinking, and have
not yet developed the cognitive control to resist impulses or focus equally on the potential
risks (Steinberg, 2008). One of the world’s leading experts on adolescent development,
Laurence Steinberg, likens this to engaging a powerful engine before the braking system is in
place. The result is that adolescents are more prone to risky behaviors than are children or
adults.

Social Changes
Parents
Although peers take on greater importance during adolescence, family relationships remain
important too. One of the key changes during adolescence involves a renegotiation of parent–
child relationships. As adolescents strive for more independence and autonomy during this

332

Adolescent Development

time, different aspects of
parenting become more salient.
For example, parents’ distal
supervision and monitoring
become more important as
adolescents

spend

more

time away from parents and
in the presence of peers.
Parental monitoring encom­
passes a wide range of
Dopamine is a neurotransmitter in the brain that produces feelings of pleasure.

behaviors such as parents’

During adolescence, people tend to do whatever activities produce the most

attempts to set rules and

dopamine, without fully considering the consequences of such actions. [Image:

know their adolescents’ friends,

Sebastian Bojara]

activities, and whereabouts,
in addition to adolescents’

willingness to disclose information to their parents (Stattin & Kerr, 2000). Psychological
control, which involves manipulation and intrusion into adolescents’ emotional and cognitive
world through invalidating adolescents’ feelings and pressuring them to think in particular
ways (Barber, 1996), is another aspect of parenting that becomes more salient during
adolescence and is related to more problematic adolescent adjustment.

Peers
As children become adolescents, they usually begin spending more time with their peers and
less time with their families, and these peer interactions are increasingly unsupervised by
adults. Children’s notions of friendship often focus on shared activities, whereas adolescents’
notions of friendship increasingly focus on intimate exchanges of thoughts and feelings.
During adolescence, peer groups evolve from primarily single-sex to mixed-sex. Adolescents
within a peer group tend to be similar to one another in behavior and attitudes, which has
been explained as being a function of homophily (adolescents who are similar to one another
choose to spend time together in a “birds of a feather flock together” way) and influence
(adolescents who spend time together shape each other’s behavior and attitudes). One of the
most widely studied aspects of adolescent peer influence is known as deviant peer contagion
(Dishion & Tipsord, 2011), which is the process by which peers reinforce problem behavior
by laughing or showing other signs of approval that then increase the likelihood of future
problem behavior.
Peers can serve both positive and negative functions during adolescence. Negative peer

333

Adolescent Development

pressure can lead adolescents to make riskier decisions or engage in more problematic
behavior than they would alone or in the presence of their family. For example, adolescents
are much more likely to drink alcohol, use drugs, and commit crimes when they are with their
friends than when they are alone or with their family. However, peers also serve as an
important source of social support and companionship during adolescence, and adolescents
with positive peer relationships are happier and better adjusted than those who are socially
isolated or have conflictual peer relationships.
Crowds are an emerging level
of

peer

relationships

in

adolescence. In contrast to
friendships (which are reciprocal
dyadic

relationships)

and

cliques (which refer to groups
of individuals who interact
frequently), crowds are char­
acterized more by shared
reputations or images than
actual interactions (Brown &
Crowds refer to different collections of people, like the “theater kids” or the

Larson, 2009). These crowds

“environmentalists.” In a way, they are kind of like clothing brands that label the

reflect different prototypic

people associated with that crowd. [Image: Garry Knight]

identities (such as jocks or
brains) and are often linked

with adolescents’ social status and peers’ perceptions of their values or behaviors.

Romantic relationships
Adolescence is the developmental period during which romantic relationships typically first
emerge. Initially, same-sex peer groups that were common during childhood expand into
mixed-sex peer groups that are more characteristic of adolescence. Romantic relationships
often form in the context of these mixed-sex peer groups (Connolly, Furman, & Konarski,
2000). Although romantic relationships during adolescence are often short-lived rather than
long-term committed partnerships, their importance should not be minimized. Adolescents
spend a great deal of time focused on romantic relationships, and their positive and negative
emotions are more tied to romantic relationships (or lack thereof) than to friendships, family
relationships, or school (Furman & Shaffer, 2003). Romantic relationships contribute to
adolescents’ identity formation, changes in family and peer relationships, and adolescents’
emotional and behavioral adjustment.

334

Adolescent Development

Furthermore, romantic relationships are centrally connected to adolescents’ emerging
sexuality. Parents, policymakers, and researchers have devoted a great deal of attention to
adolescents’ sexuality, in large part because of concerns related to sexual intercourse,
contraception, and preventing teen pregnancies. However, sexuality involves more than this
narrow focus. For example, adolescence is often when individuals who are lesbian, gay,
bisexual, or transgender come to perceive themselves as such (Russell, Clarke, & Clary, 2009).
Thus, romantic relationships are a domain in which adolescents experiment with new
behaviors and identities.

Behavioral and Psychological Adjustment
Identity formation
Theories of adolescent development often focus on identity formation as a central issue. For
example, in Erikson’s (1968) classic theory of developmental stages, identity formation was
highlighted as the primary indicator of successful development during adolescence (in
contrast to role confusion, which would be an indicator of not successfully meeting the task
of adolescence). Marcia (1966) described identify formation during adolescence as involving
both decision points and commitments with respect to ideologies (e.g., religion, politics) and
occupations. He described four identity statuses: foreclosure, identity diffusion, moratorium,
and identity achievement. Foreclosure occurs when an individual commits to an identity
without exploring options. Identity diffusion occurs when adolescents neither explore nor
commit to any identities. Moratorium is a state in which adolescents are actively exploring
options but have not yet made commitments. Identity achievement occurs when individuals
have explored different options and then made identity commitments. Building on this work,
other researchers have investigated more specific aspects of identity. For example, Phinney
(1989) proposed a model of ethnic identity development that included stages of unexplored
ethnic identity, ethnic identity search, and achieved ethnic identity.

Aggression and antisocial behavior
Several major theories of the development of antisocial behavior treat adolescence as an
important period. Patterson’s (1982) early versus late starter model of the development of
aggressive and antisocial behavior distinguishes youths whose antisocial behavior begins
during childhood (early starters) versus adolescence (late starters). According to the theory,
early starters are at greater risk for long-term antisocial behavior that extends into adulthood
than are late starters. Late starters who become antisocial during adolescence are theorized

335

Adolescent Development

to experience poor parental monitoring
and supervision, aspects of parenting
that become more salient during
adolescence. Poor monitoring and
lack of supervision contribute to
increasing involvement with deviant
peers,

which

in

turn

promotes

adolescents’ own antisocial behavior.
Late starters desist from antisocial
behavior

when

changes

in

the

environment make other options
more appealing.

Similarly, Moffitt’s

(1993) life-course persistent versus
adolescent-limited model distinguishes
between antisocial behavior that
begins in childhood versus adolescence.
Moffitt

regards

adolescent-limited

antisocial behavior as resulting from a

Early, antisocial behavior leads to befriending others who also engage
in antisocial behavior, which only perpetuates the downward cycle of
aggression and wrongful acts. [Image: Philippe Put]

“maturity gap” between adolescents’
dependence on and control by adults and their desire to demonstrate their freedom from
adult constraint. However, as they continue to develop, and legitimate adult roles and
privileges become available to them, there are fewer incentives to engage in antisocial
behavior, leading to desistance in these antisocial behaviors.

Anxiety and depression
Developmental models of anxiety and depression also treat adolescence as an important
period, especially in terms of the emergence of gender differences in prevalence rates that
persist through adulthood (Rudolph, 2009). Starting in early adolescence, compared with
males, females have rates of anxiety that are about twice as high and rates of depression that
are 1.5 to 3 times as high (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Although the rates vary
across specific anxiety and depression diagnoses, rates for some disorders are markedly
higher in adolescence than in childhood or adulthood. For example, prevalence rates for
specific phobias are about 5% in children and 3%–5% in adults but 16% in adolescents. Anxiety
and depression are particularly concerning because suicide is one of the leading causes of
death during adolescence. Developmental models focus on interpersonal contexts in both
childhood and adolescence that foster depression and anxiety (e.g., Rudolph, 2009). Family
adversity, such as abuse and parental psychopathology, during childhood sets the stage for

336

Adolescent Development

social and behavioral problems during adolescence. Adolescents with such problems generate
stress in their relationships (e.g., by resolving conflict poorly and excessively seeking
reassurance) and select into more maladaptive social contexts (e.g., “misery loves company”
scenarios in which depressed youths select other depressed youths as friends and then
frequently co-ruminate as they discuss their problems, exacerbating negative affect and
stress). These processes are intensified for girls compared with boys because girls have more
relationship-oriented goals related to intimacy and social approval, leaving them more
vulnerable to disruption in these relationships. Anxiety and depression then exacerbate
problems in social relationships, which in turn contribute to the stability of anxiety and
depression over time.

Academic achievement
Adolescents spend more waking time in school than in any other context (Eccles & Roeser,
2011). Academic achievement during adolescence
is predicted by interpersonal (e.g., parental
engagement in adolescents’ education), intrapersonal
(e.g., intrinsic motivation), and institutional (e.
g., school quality) factors. Academic achievement
is important in its own right as a marker of
positive adjustment during adolescence but
also because academic achievement sets the
stage for future educational and occupational
opportunities. The most serious consequence
of school failure, particularly dropping out of
school, is the high risk of unemployment or
underemployment in adulthood that follows.
High achievement can set the stage for college
or future vocational training and opportunities.

Diversity
Adolescent development does not necessarily
follow the same pathway for all individuals.
Although similar biological changes occur for all

Certain features of adolescence, particularly

adolescents as they enter puberty, these changes can

with respect to biological changes associated

differ significantly depending on one’s cultural, ethnic, and

with puberty and cognitive changes associated

societal factors. [Image: McGeorge BLSA]

with

brain

development,

are

relatively

337

Adolescent Development

universal. But other features of adolescence depend largely on circumstances that are more
environmentally variable. For example, adolescents growing up in one country might have
different opportunities for risk taking than adolescents in a different country, and supports
and sanctions for different behaviors in adolescence depend on laws and values that might
be specific to where adolescents live. Likewise, different cultural norms regarding family and
peer relationships shape adolescents’ experiences in these domains. For example, in some
countries, adolescents’ parents are expected to retain control over major decisions, whereas
in other countries, adolescents are expected to begin sharing in or taking control of decision
making.
Even within the same country, adolescents’ gender, ethnicity, immigrant status, religion, sexual
orientation, socioeconomic status, and personality can shape both how adolescents behave
and how others respond to them, creating diverse developmental contexts for different
adolescents. For example, early puberty (that occurs before most other peers have
experienced puberty) appears to be associated with worse outcomes for girls than boys, likely
in part because girls who enter puberty early tend to associate with older boys, which in turn
is associated with early sexual behavior and substance use. For adolescents who are ethnic
or sexual minorities, discrimination sometimes presents a set of challenges that nonminorities
do not face.
Finally, genetic variations contribute an additional source of diversity in adolescence. Current
approaches emphasize gene X environment interactions, which often follow a differential
susceptibility model (Belsky & Pluess, 2009). That is, particular genetic variations are
considered riskier than others, but genetic variations also can make adolescents more or less
susceptible to environmental factors. For example, the association between the
CHRM2genotype and adolescent externalizing behavior (aggression and delinquency)has
been found in adolescents whose parents are low in monitoring behaviors (Dick et al., 2011).
Thus, it is important to bear in mind that individual differences play an important role in
adolescent development.

Conclusions
Adolescent development is characterized by biological, cognitive, and social changes. Social
changes are particularly notable as adolescents become more autonomous from their
parents, spend more time with peers, and begin exploring romantic relationships and
sexuality. Adjustment during adolescence is reflected in identity formation, which often
involves a period of exploration followed by commitments to particular identities. Adolescence
is characterized by risky behavior, which is made more likely by changes in the brain in which

Adolescent Development

338

reward-processing centers develop more rapidly than cognitive control systems, making
adolescents more sensitive to rewards than to possible negative consequences. Despite these
generalizations, factors such as country of residence, gender, ethnicity, and sexual orientation
shape development in ways that lead to diversity of experiences across adolescence.

339

Adolescent Development

Outside Resources
Podcasts: Society for Research on Adolescence website with links to podcasts on a variety
of topics related to adolescent development
http://www.s-r-a.org/sra-news/podcasts
Study: Add Health website on one of the biggest longitudinal studies of adolescence to date
http://www.cpc.unc.edu/projects/addhealth
Video: A selection of TED talks on adolescent brain development
http://tinyurl.com/lku4a3k
Web: UNICEF website on adolescents around the world
http://www.unicef.org/adolescence/index.html

Discussion Questions
1. What can parents do to promote their adolescents’ positive adjustment?
2. In what ways do changes in brain development and cognition make adolescents particularly
susceptible to peer influence?
3. How could interventions designed to prevent or reduce adolescents’ problem behavior be
developed to take advantage of what we know about adolescent development?
4. Reflecting on your own adolescence, provide examples of times when you think your
experience was different from those of your peers as a function of something unique about
you.
5. In what ways was your experience of adolescence different from your parents’ experience
of adolescence? How do you think adolescence may be different 20 years from now?

340

Adolescent Development

Vocabulary
Crowds
Adolescent peer groups characterized by shared reputations or images.
Deviant peer contagion
The spread of problem behaviors within groups of adolescents.
Differential susceptibility
Genetic factors that make individuals more or less responsive to environmental experiences.
Foreclosure
Individuals commit to an identity without exploration of options.
Homophily
Adolescents tend to associate with peers who are similar to themselves.
Identity achievement
Individuals have explored different options and then made commitments.
Identity diffusion
Adolescents neither explore nor commit to any roles or ideologies.
Moratorium
State in which adolescents are actively exploring options but have not yet made identity
commitments.
Psychological control
Parents’ manipulation of and intrusion into adolescents’ emotional and cognitive world
through invalidating adolescents’ feelings and pressuring them to think in particular ways.

341

Adolescent Development

References
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.
Arnett, J. J. (2000). Emerging adulthood: A theory of development from the late teens through
the twenties. American Psychologist, 55, 469–480.
Barber, B. K. (1996). Parental psychological control: Revisiting a neglected construct. Child
Development, 67, 3296–3319.
Belsky, J., & Pluess, M. (2009). Beyond diathesis-stress: Differential susceptibility to
environmental influences. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 885–908.
Brown, B. B., & Larson, J. (2009). Peer relationships in adolescence. In R. M. Lerner & L. Steinberg
(Eds.), Handbook of adolescent psychology (pp. 74–103). New York, NY: Wiley.
Connolly, J., Furman, W., & Konarski, R. (2000). The role of peers in the emergence of
heterosexual romantic relationships in adolescence. Child Development, 71, 1395–1408.
Dick, D. M., Meyers, J. L., Latendresse, S. J., Creemers, H. E., Lansford, J. E., … Huizink, A. C.
(2011). CHRM2, parental monitoring, and adolescent externalizing behavior: Evidence for
gene-environment interaction. Psychological Science, 22, 481–489.
Dishion, T. J., & Tipsord, J. M. (2011). Peer contagion in child and adolescent social and emotional
development. Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 189–214.
Eccles, J. S., & Roeser, R. W. (2011). Schools as developmental contexts during adolescence.
Journal of Research on Adolescence, 21, 225–241.
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity, youth, and crisis. New York, NY: Norton.
Furman, W., & Shaffer, L. (2003). The role of romantic relationships in adolescent development.
In P. Florsheim (Ed.), Adolescent romantic relations and sexual behavior: Theory, research, and
practical implications (pp. 3–22). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lerner, R. M., & Steinberg, L. (Eds.). (2009). Handbook of adolescent psychology. New York, NY:
Wiley.
Marcia, J. E. (1966). Development and validation of ego identity status. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 3, 551–558.
Moffitt, T. E. (1993). Adolescence-limited and life course persistent antisocial behavior:
Developmental taxonomy. Psychological Review, 100, 674–701.
Patterson, G. R. (1982). Coercive family process. Eugene, OR: Castalia Press.
Phinney, J. (1989). Stages of ethnic identity in minority group adolescents. Journal of Early

Adolescent Development

342

Adolescence, 9, 34–49.
Rudolph, K. D. (2009). The interpersonal context of adolescent depression. In S. NolenHoeksema & L. M. Hilt (Eds.), Handbook of depression in adolescents (pp. 377–418). New
York, NY: Taylor and Francis.
Russell, S. T., Clarke, T. J., & Clary, J. (2009). Are teens “post-gay”? Contemporary adolescents’
sexual identity labels. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 38, 884–890.
Stattin, H., & Kerr, M. (2000). Parental monitoring: A reinterpretation. Child Development, 71,
1072–1085.
Steinberg, L. (2013). Adolescence (10th ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Steinberg, L. (2008). A social neuroscience perspective on adolescent risk-taking.
Developmental Review, 28, 78–106.

Chapter 12: Personality

20
Personality Traits
Edward Diener & Richard E. Lucas

Personality traits reflect people’s characteristic patterns of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors.
Personality traits imply consistency and stability—someone who scores high on a specific trait
like Extraversion is expected to be sociable in different situations and over time. Thus, trait
psychology rests on the idea that people differ from one another in terms of where they stand
on a set of basic trait dimensions that persist over time and across situations. The most widely
used system of traits is called the Five-Factor Model. This system includes five broad traits
that can be remembered with the acronym OCEAN: Openness, Conscientiousness,
Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism. Each of the major traits from the Big Five can
be divided into facets to give a more fine-grained analysis of someone's personality. In addition,
some trait theorists argue that there are other traits that cannot be completely captured by
the Five-Factor Model. Critics of the trait concept argue that people do not act consistently
from one situation to the next and that people are very influenced by situational forces. Thus,
one major debate in the field concerns the relative power of people’s traits versus the situations
in which they find themselves as predictors of their behavior.

Learning Objectives

•

List and describe the “Big Five” (“OCEAN”) personality traits that comprise the Five-Factor
Model of personality.

•
•
•
•
•

Describe how the facet approach extends broad personality traits.
Explain a critique of the personality-trait concept.
Describe in what ways personality traits may be manifested in everyday behavior.
Describe each of the Big Five personality traits, and the low and high end of the dimension.
Give examples of each of the Big Five personality traits, including both a low and high
example.

345

Personality Traits

•
•

Describe how traits and social learning combine to predict your social activities.
Describe your theory of how personality traits get refined by social learning.

Introduction
When we observe people around us, one of the first things that strikes us is how different
people are from one another. Some people are very talkative while others are very quiet.
Some are active whereas others are couch potatoes. Some worry a lot, others almost never
seem anxious. Each time we use one of these words, words like “talkative,” “quiet,” “active,”
or “anxious,” to describe those around us, we are talking about a person’s personality—the
characteristic ways that people differ from one another. Personality psychologists try to
describe and understand these differences.
Although there are many ways to think about
the personalities that people have, Gordon
Allport and other “personologists” claimed
that we can best understand the differences
between individuals by understanding their
personality traits. Personality traits reflect
basic dimensions on which people differ
(Matthews,

Deary,

&

Whiteman,

2003).

According to trait psychologists, there are a
limited

number

of

these

dimensions

(dimensions like Extraversion, Conscientiousness,
or Agreeableness), and each individual falls
somewhere on each dimension, meaning that
they could be low, medium, or high on any
specific trait.
An important feature of personality traits is
that they reflect continuous distributions
rather than distinct personality types. This
means that when personality psychologists
talk about Introverts and Extraverts, they are
not really talking about two distinct types of

Personality is made up of traits-- identifiable and relatively
stable characteristics-- that set each individual person apart
from others. [Images: laura dye]

346

Personality Traits

people who are completely and qualitatively different from one another. Instead, they are
talking about people who score relatively low or relatively high along a continuous distribution.
In fact, when personality psychologists measure traits like Extraversion, they typically find
that most people score somewhere in the middle, with smaller numbers showing more
extreme levels. The figure below shows the distribution of Extraversion scores from a survey
of thousands of people. As you can see, most people report being moderately, but not
extremely, extraverted, with fewer people reporting very high or very low scores.
There are three criteria that are
characterize personality traits: (1)
consistency, (2) stability, and (3)
individual differences.
1. To

have

individuals

a

personality

must

be

trait,

somewhat

consistent across situations in their
behaviors related to the trait. For
example, if they are talkative at
home, they tend also to be talkative
at work.
2. Individuals with a trait are also
somewhat

stable

over

time

in

behaviors related to the trait. If they
Figure 1. Distribution of Extraversion Scores in a Sample Higher bars
mean that more people have scores of that level. This figure shows that

are talkative, for example, at age 30,
they will also tend to be talkative at

most people score towards the middle of the extraversion scale, with

age 40.

fewer people who are highly extraverted or highly introverted.

3. People differ from one another on
behaviors related to the trait. Using

speech is not a personality trait and neither is walking on two feet—virtually all individuals
do these activities, and there are almost no individual differences. But people differ on
how frequently they talk and how active they are, and thus personality traits such as
Talkativeness and Activity Level do exist.
A challenge of the trait approach was to discover the major traits on which all people differ.
Scientists for many decades generated hundreds of new traits, so that it was soon difficult to
keep track and make sense of them. For instance, one psychologist might focus on individual
differences in “friendliness,” whereas another might focus on the highly related concept of
“sociability.” Scientists began seeking ways to reduce the number of traits in some systematic

347

Personality Traits

way and to discover the basic traits that describe most of the differences between people.
The way that Gordon Allport and his colleague Henry Odbert approached this was to search
the dictionary for all descriptors of personality (Allport & Odbert, 1936). Their approach was
guided by the lexical hypothesis, which states that all important personality characteristics
should be reflected in the language that we use to describe other people. Therefore, if we
want to understand the fundamental ways in which people differ from one another, we can
turn to the words that people use to describe one another. So if we want to know what words
people use to describe one another, where should we look? Allport and Odbert looked in the
most obvious place—the dictionary. Specifically, they took all the personality descriptors that
they could find in the dictionary (they started with almost 18,000 words but quickly reduced
that list to a more manageable number) and then used statistical techniques to determine
which words “went together.” In other words, if everyone who said that they were “friendly”
also said that they were “sociable,” then this might mean that personality psychologists would
only need a single trait to capture individual differences in these characteristics. Statistical
techniques were used to determine whether a small number of dimensions might underlie
all of the thousands of words we use to describe people.

The Five-Factor Model of Personality
Research that used the lexical approach showed that many of the personality descriptors
found in the dictionary do indeed overlap. In other words, many of the words that we use to
describe people are synonyms. Thus, if we want to know what a person is like, we do not
necessarily need to ask how sociable they are, how friendly they are, and how gregarious they
are. Instead, because sociable people tend to be friendly and gregarious, we can summarize
this personality dimension with a single term. Someone who is sociable, friendly, and
gregarious would typically be described as an “Extravert.” Once we know she is an extravert,
we can assume that she is sociable, friendly, and gregarious.
Statistical methods (specifically, a technique called factor analysis) helped to determine
whether a small number of dimensions underlie the diversity of words that people like Allport
and Odbert identified. The most widely accepted system to emerge from this approach was
“The Big Five” or “Five-Factor Model” (Goldberg, 1990; McCrae & John, 1992; McCrae & Costa,
1987). The Big Five comprises five major traits shown in the Figure 2 below. A way to remember
these five is with the acronym OCEAN (O is for Openness; C is for Conscientiousness; E is for
Extraversion; A is for Agreeableness; N is for Neuroticism). Figure 3 provides descriptions of
people who would score high and low on each of these traits.

Personality Traits

348

Figure 2. Descriptions of the Big Five Personality Traits

Scores on the Big Five traits are mostly independent. That means that a person’s standing on
one trait tells very little about their standing on the other traits of the Big Five. For example,
a person can be extremely high in Extraversion and be either high or low on Neuroticism.
Similarly, a person can be low in Agreeableness and be either high or low in Conscientiousness.
Thus, in the Five-Factor Model, you need five scores to describe most of an individual’s
personality.
In the Appendix to this module, we present a short scale to assess the Five-Factor Model of
personality (Donnellan, Oswald, Baird, & Lucas, 2006). You can take this test to see where you
stand in terms of your Big Five scores. John Johnson has also created a helpful website that
has personality scales that can be used and taken by the general public:
http://www.personal.psu.edu/j5j/IPIP/ipipneo120.htm
After seeing your scores, you can judge for yourself whether you think such tests are valid.
Traits are important and interesting because they describe stable patterns of behavior that
persist for long periods of time (Caspi, Roberts, & Shiner, 2005). Importantly, these stable
patterns can have broad-ranging consequences for many areas of our life (Roberts, Kuncel,
Shiner, Caspi, & Goldberg, 2007). For instance, think about the factors that determine success
in college. If you were asked to guess what factors predict good grades in college, you might
guess something like intelligence. This guess would be correct, but we know much more about
who is likely to do well. Specifically, personality researchers have also found the personality
traits like Conscientiousness play an important role in college and beyond, probably because
highly conscientious individuals study hard, get their work done on time, and are less
distracted by nonessential activities that take time away from school work. In addition, highly

349

Personality Traits

Figure 3. Example behaviors for those scoring low and high for the big 5 traits

conscientious people are often healthier than people low in conscientiousness because they
are more likely to maintain healthy diets, to exercise, and to follow basic safety procedures
like wearing seat belts or bicycle helmets. Over the long term, this consistent pattern of
behaviors can add up to meaningful differences in health and longevity. Thus, personality
traits are not just a useful way to describe people you know; they actually help psychologists
predict how good a worker someone will be, how long he or she will live, and the types of jobs
and activities the person will enjoy. Thus, there is growing interest in personality psychology
among psychologists who work in applied settings, such as health psychology or
organizational psychology.

Facets of Traits (Subtraits)
So how does it feel to be told that your entire personality can be summarized with scores on
just five personality traits? Do you think these five scores capture the complexity of your own
and others’ characteristic patterns of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors? Most people would
probably say no, pointing to some exception in their behavior that goes against the general
pattern that others might see. For instance, you may know people who are warm and friendly
and find it easy to talk with strangers at a party yet are terrified if they have to perform in
front of others or speak to large groups of people. The fact that there are different ways of
being extraverted or conscientious shows that there is value in considering lower-level units
of personality that are more specific than the Big Five traits. These more specific, lower-level

350

Personality Traits

units of personality are often called facets.
To give you a sense of what these narrow
units are like, Figure 4 shows facets for each
of the Big Five traits. It is important to note
that although personality researchers
generally agree about the value of the Big
Five traits as a way to summarize one’s
personality, there is no widely accepted list
of facets that should be studied. The list seen
here, based on work by researchers Paul
Costa and Jeff McCrae, thus reflects just one
possible list among many. It should,
however, give you an idea of some of the
facets making up each of the Five-Factor
Model.
Facets can be useful because they provide
more specific descriptions of what a person
is like. For instance, if we take our friend who
loves parties but hates public speaking, we
might say that this person scores high on the
“gregariousness” and “warmth” facets of
extraversion, while scoring lower on facets
such as “assertiveness” or “excitementseeking.” This precise profile of facet scores
not only provides a better description, it
might also allow us to better predict how this
friend will do in a variety of different jobs (for
example, jobs that require public speaking
versus jobs that involve one-on-one
Figure 4. Facets of Traits
interactions with customers; Paunonen &
Ashton, 2001). Because different facets
within a broad, global trait like extraversion tend to go together (those who are gregarious
are often but not always assertive), the broad trait often provides a useful summary of what
a person is like. But when we really want to know a person, facet scores add to our knowledge
in important ways.

Other Traits Beyond the Five-Factor Model

Personality Traits

351

Despite the popularity of the Five-Factor Model, it is certainly not the only model that exists.
Some suggest that there are more than five major traits, or perhaps even fewer. For example,
in one of the first comprehensive models to be proposed, Hans Eysenck suggested that
Extraversion and Neuroticism are most important. Eysenck believed that by combining
people’s standing on these two major traits, we could account for many of the differences in
personality that we see in people (Eysenck, 1981). So for instance, a neurotic introvert would
be shy and nervous, while a stable introvert might avoid social situations and prefer solitary
activities, but he may do so with a calm, steady attitude and little anxiety or emotion.
Interestingly, Eysenck attempted to link these two major dimensions to underlying differences
in people’s biology. For instance, he suggested that introverts experienced too much sensory
stimulation and arousal, which made them want to seek out quiet settings and less stimulating
environments. More recently, Jeffrey Gray suggested that these two broad traits are related
to fundamental reward and avoidance systems in the brain—extraverts might be motivated
to seek reward and thus exhibit assertive, reward-seeking behavior, whereas people high in
neuroticism might be motivated to avoid punishment and thus may experience anxiety as a
result of their heightened awareness of the threats in the world around them (Gray, 1981.
This model has since been updated; see Gray & McNaughton, 2000). These early theories
have led to a burgeoning interest in identifying the physiological underpinnings of the
individual differences that we observe.
Another revision of the Big Five is the HEXACO model of traits (Ashton & Lee, 2007). This model
is similar to the Big Five, but it posits slightly different versions of some of the traits, and its
proponents argue that one important class of individual differences was omitted from the
Five-Factor Model. The HEXACO adds Honesty-Humility as a sixth dimension of personality.
People high in this trait are sincere, fair, and modest, whereas those low in the trait are
manipulative, narcissistic, and self-centered. Thus, trait theorists are agreed that personality
traits are important in understanding behavior, but there are still debates on the exact number
and composition of the traits that are most important.
There are other important traits that are not included in comprehensive models like the Big
Five. Although the five factors capture much that is important about personality, researchers
have suggested other traits that capture interesting aspects of our behavior. In Figure 5 below
we present just a few, out of hundreds, of the other traits that have been studied by
personologists.
Not all of the above traits are currently popular with scientists, yet each of them has
experienced popularity in the past. Although the Five-Factor Model has been the target of
more rigorous research than some of the traits above, these additional personality
characteristics give a good idea of the wide range of behaviors and attitudes that traits can

Personality Traits

352

Figure 5. Other Traits Beyond Those Included in the Big Five

cover.

The Person-Situation Debate and Alternatives to the Trait Perspective
The ideas described in this module should probably seem familiar, if not obvious to you. When
asked to think about what our friends, enemies, family members, and colleagues are like,
some of the first things that come to mind are their personality characteristics. We might think

353

Personality Traits

about how warm and helpful our first
teacher was, how irresponsible and
careless our brother is, or how
demanding and insulting our first
boss was. Each of these descriptors
reflects a personality trait, and most
of us generally think that the
descriptions

that

we

use

for

individuals accurately reflect their
“characteristic pattern of thoughts,
feelings, and behaviors,” or in other
The way people behave is only, in part, a product of their natural

words, their personality.

personality. Situations also influence how a person behaves. [Photo:
woodleywonderworks]

But what if this idea were wrong?

What if our belief in personality traits were an illusion and people are not consistent from one
situation to the next? This was a possibility that shook the foundation of personality psychology
in the late 1960s when Walter Mischel published a book called Personality and Assessment
(1968). In this book, Mischel suggested that if one looks closely at people’s behavior across
many different situations, the consistency is really not that impressive. In other words, children
who cheat on tests at school may steadfastly follow all rules when playing games and may
never tell a lie to their parents. In other words, he suggested, there may not be any general
trait of honesty that links these seemingly related behaviors. Furthermore, Mischel suggested
that observers may believe that broad personality traits like honesty exist, when in fact, this
belief is an illusion. The debate that followed the publication of Mischel’s book was called the
person-situation debate because it pitted the power of personality against the power of
situational factors as determinants of the behavior that people exhibit.
Because of the findings that Mischel emphasized, many psychologists focused on an
alternative to the trait perspective. Instead of studying broad, context-free descriptions, like
the trait terms we’ve described so far, Mischel thought that psychologists should focus on
people’s distinctive reactions to specific situations. For instance, although there may not be
a broad and general trait of honesty, some children may be especially likely to cheat on a test
when the risk of being caught is low and the rewards for cheating are high. Others might be
motivated by the sense of risk involved in cheating and may do so even when the rewards
are not very high. Thus, the behavior itself results from the child’s unique evaluation of the
risks and rewards present at that moment, along with her evaluation of her abilities and values.
Because of this, the same child might act very differently in different situations. Thus, Mischel
thought that specific behaviors were driven by the interaction between very specific,
psychologically meaningful features of the situation in which people found themselves, the

354

Personality Traits

person’s unique way of perceiving that situation, and his or her abilities for dealing with it.
Mischel and others argued that it was these social-cognitive processes that underlie people’s
reactions to specific situations that provide some consistency when situational features are
the same. If so, then studying these broad traits might be more fruitful than cataloging and
measuring narrow, context-free traits like Extraversion or Neuroticism.
In the years after the publication of Mischel’s (1968) book, debates raged about whether
personality truly exists, and if so, how it should be studied. And, as is often the case, it turns
out that a more moderate middle ground than what the situationists proposed could be
reached. It is certainly true, as Mischel pointed out, that a person’s behavior in one specific
situation is not a good guide to how that person will behave in a very different specific situation.
Someone who is extremely talkative at one specific party may sometimes be reticent to speak
up during class and may even act like a wallflower at a different party. But this does not mean
that personality does not exist, nor does it mean that people’s behavior is completely
determined by situational factors. Indeed, research conducted after the person-situation
debate shows that on average, the effect of the “situation” is about as large as that of
personality traits. However, it is also true that if psychologists assess a broad range of
behaviors across many different situations, there are general tendencies that emerge.
Personality traits give an indication about how people will act on average, but frequently they
are not so good at predicting how a person will act in a specific situation at a certain moment
in time. Thus, to best capture broad traits, one must assess aggregate behaviors, averaged
over time and across many different types of situations. Most modern personality researchers
agree that there is a place for broad personality traits and for the narrower units such as those
studied by Walter Mischel.

Appendix
The Mini-IPIP Scale
(Donnellan, Oswald, Baird, & Lucas, 2006)
Instructions: Below are phrases describing people’s behaviors. Please use the rating scale
below to describe how accurately each statement describes you. Describe yourself as you
generally are now, not as you wish to be in the future. Describe yourself as you honestly see
yourself, in relation to other people you know of the same sex as you are, and roughly your
same age. Please read each statement carefully, and put a number from 1 to 5 next to it to
describe how accurately the statement describes you.

Personality Traits

355

1 = Very inaccurate
2 = Moderately inaccurate
3 = Neither inaccurate nor accurate
4 = Moderately accurate
5 = Very accurate
1. _______ Am the life of the party (E)
2. _______ Sympathize with others’ feelings (A)
3. _______ Get chores done right away (C)
4. _______ Have frequent mood swings (N)
5. _______ Have a vivid imagination (O)
6. _______Don’t talk a lot (E)
7. _______ Am not interested in other people’s problems (A)
8. _______ Often forget to put things back in their proper place (C)
9. _______ Am relaxed most of the time (N)
10. ______ Am not interested in abstract ideas (O)
11. ______ Talk to a lot of different people at parties (E)
12. ______ Feel others’ emotions (A)
13. ______ Like order (C)
14. ______ Get upset easily (N)
15. ______ Have difficulty understanding abstract ideas (O)
16. ______ Keep in the background (E)
17. ______ Am not really interested in others (A)
18. ______ Make a mess of things (C)
19. ______ Seldom feel blue (N)
20. ______ Do not have a good imagination (O)
Scoring: The first thing you must do is to reverse the items that are worded in the opposite

Personality Traits

356

direction. In order to do this, subtract the number you put for that item from 6. So if you put
a 4, for instance, it will become a 2. Cross out the score you put when you took the scale, and
put the new number in representing your score subtracted from the number 6.
Items to be reversed in this way: 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20
Next, you need to add up the scores for each of the five OCEAN scales (including the reversed
numbers where relevant). Each OCEAN score will be the sum of four items. Place the sum
next to each scale below.
__________ Openness: Add items 5, 10, 15, 20
__________ Conscientiousness: Add items 3, 8, 13, 18
__________ Extraversion: Add items 1, 6, 11, 16
__________ Agreeableness: Add items 2, 7, 12, 17
__________ Neuroticism: Add items 4, 9,14, 19
Compare your scores to the norms below to see where you stand on each scale. If you are
low on a trait, it means you are the opposite of the trait label. For example, low on Extraversion
is Introversion, low on Openness is Conventional, and low on Agreeableness is Assertive.
19–20 Extremely High, 17–18 Very High, 14–16 High,
11–13 Neither high nor low; in the middle, 8–10 Low, 6–7 Very low, 4–5 Extremely low

357

Personality Traits

Outside Resources
Web: International Personality Item Pool
http://ipip.ori.org/
Web: John Johnson personality scales
http://www.personal.psu.edu/j5j/IPIP/ipipneo120.htm
Web: Personality trait systems compared
http://www.personalityresearch.org/bigfive/goldberg.html
Web: Sam Gosling website
http://homepage.psy.utexas.edu/homepage/faculty/gosling/samgosling.htm

Discussion Questions
1. Consider different combinations of the Big Five, such as O (Low), C (High), E (Low), A (High),
and N (Low). What would this person be like? Do you know anyone who is like this? Can
you select politicians, movie stars, and other famous people and rate them on the Big Five?
2. How do you think learning and inherited personality traits get combined in adult
personality?
3. Can you think of instances where people do not act consistently—where their personality
traits are not good predictors of their behavior?
4. Has your personality changed over time, and in what ways?
5. Can you think of a personality trait not mentioned in this module that describes how people
differ from one another?
6. When do extremes in personality traits become harmful, and when are they unusual but
productive of good outcomes?

358

Personality Traits

Vocabulary
Agreeableness
A personality trait that reflects a person’s tendency to be compassionate, cooperative, warm,
and caring to others. People low in agreeableness tend to be rude, hostile, and to pursue their
own interests over those of others.
Conscientiousness
A personality trait that reflects a person’s tendency to be careful, organized, hardworking, and
to follow rules.
Continuous distributions
Characteristics can go from low to high, with all different intermediate values possible. One
does not simply have the trait or not have it, but can possess varying amounts of it.
Extraversion
A personality trait that reflects a person’s tendency to be sociable, outgoing, active, and
assertive.
Facets
Broad personality traits can be broken down into narrower facets or aspects of the trait. For
example, extraversion has several facets, such as sociability, dominance, risk-taking and so
forth.
Factor analysis
A statistical technique for grouping similar things together according to how highly they are
associated.
Five-Factor Model
(also called the Big Five) The Five-Factor Model is a widely accepted model of personality traits.
Advocates of the model believe that much of the variability in people’s thoughts, feelings, and
behaviors can be summarized with five broad traits. These five traits are Openness,
Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism.
HEXACO model
The HEXACO model is an alternative to the Five-Factor Model. The HEXACO model includes
six traits, five of which are variants of the traits included in the Big Five (Emotionality [E],
Extraversion [X], Agreeableness [A], Conscientiousness [C], and Openness [O]). The sixth

Personality Traits

359

factor, Honesty-Humility [H], is unique to this model.
Independent
Two characteristics or traits are separate from one another-- a person can be high on one
and low on the other, or vice-versa. Some correlated traits are relatively independent in that
although there is a tendency for a person high on one to also be high on the other, this is not
always the case.
Lexical hypothesis
The lexical hypothesis is the idea that the most important differences between people will be
encoded in the language that we use to describe people. Therefore, if we want to know which
personality traits are most important, we can look to the language that people use to describe
themselves and others.
Neuroticism
A personality trait that reflects the tendency to be interpersonally sensitive and the tendency
to experience negative emotions like anxiety, fear, sadness, and anger.
Openness to Experience
A personality trait that reflects a person’s tendency to seek out and to appreciate new things,
including thoughts, feelings, values, and experiences.
Personality
Enduring predispositions that characterize a person, such as styles of thought, feelings and
behavior.
Personality traits
Enduring dispositions in behavior that show differences across individuals, and which tend
to characterize the person across varying types of situations.
Person-situation debate
The person-situation debate is a historical debate about the relative power of personality
traits as compared to situational influences on behavior. The situationist critique, which
started the person-situation debate, suggested that people overestimate the extent to which
personality traits are consistent across situations.

360

Personality Traits

References
Allport, G. W., & Odbert, H. S. (1936). Trait names: A psycholexical study. Psychological
Monographs, 47, 211.
Ashton, M. C., & Lee, K. (2007). Empirical, theoretical, and practical advantages of the HEXACO
model of personality structure. Personality and Social Psychological Review, 11, 150–166.
Caspi, A., Roberts, B. W., & Shiner, R. L. (2005). Personality development: Stability and change.
Annual Reviews of Psychology, 56, 453–484.
Donnellan, M. B., Oswald, F. L., Baird, B. M., & Lucas, R. E. (2006). The mini-IPIP scales: Tinyyet-effective measures of the Big Five factors of personality. Psychological Assessment, 18,
192–203.
Eysenck, H. J. (1981). A model for personality.New York: Springer Verlag.
Goldberg, L. R. (1990). An alternative description of personality: The Big Five personality traits.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 1216–1229.
Gray, J. A. (1981). A critique of Eysenck’s theory of personality. In H. J. Eysenck (Ed.), A Model
for Personality (pp. 246-276). New York: Springer Verlag.
Gray, J. A. & McNaughton, N. (2000). The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry into the functions
of the septo-hippocampal system (second edition).Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Matthews, G., Deary, I. J., & Whiteman, M. C. (2003). Personality traits. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1987). Validation of the five-factor model of personality across
instruments and observers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 81–90.
McCrae, R. R. & John, O. P. (1992). An introduction to the five-factor model and its applications.
Journal of Personality, 60, 175–215.
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. New York: John Wiley.
Paunonen, S. V., & Ashton, M. S. (2001). Big five factors and facets and the prediction of
behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 524–539.
Roberts, B. W., Kuncel, N. R., Shiner, R., Caspi, A., & Golberg, L. R. (2007). The power of
personality: The comparative validity of personality traits, socioeconomic status, and
cognitive ability for predicting important life outcomes. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
2, 313-345.

21
The Psychodynamic Perspective
Robert Bornstein

Originating in the work of Sigmund Freud, the psychodynamic perspective emphasizes
unconscious psychological processes (for example, wishes and fears of which we’re not fully
aware), and contends that childhood experiences are crucial in shaping adult personality. The
psychodynamic perspective has evolved considerably since Freud’s time, and now includes
innovative new approaches such as object relations theory and neuropsychoanalysis. Some
psychodynamic concepts have held up well to empirical scrutiny while others have not, and
aspects of the theory remain controversial, but the psychodynamic perspective continues to
influence many different areas of contemporary psychology.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•

Describe the major models of personality within the psychodynamic perspective.
Define the concept of ego defense, and give examples of commonly used ego defenses.
Identify psychodynamic concepts that have been supported by empirical research.
Discuss current trends in psychodynamic theory.

Introduction
Have you ever done something that didn’t make sense? Perhaps you waited until the last
minute to begin studying for an exam, even though you knew that delaying so long would
ensure that you got a poor grade. Or maybe you spotted a person you liked across the room
—someone about whom you had romantic feelings—but instead of approaching that person

362

The Psychodynamic Perspective

you headed the other way (and felt
ashamed about it afterward). If
you’ve ever done something that
didn’t seem to make sense—and
who among us hasn’t—the psych­
odynamic perspective on personality
might be useful for you. It can help
you understand why you chose
not to study for that test, or why
you ran the other way when the
person of your dreams entered
According to psychodynamic theory, a lot of our behaviors and preferences

the room.

of adulthood are shaped by the experiences in our childhood. [Image:
aiesecinternational]

Psychodynamic theory (sometimes
called psychoanalytic theory) explains

personality in terms of unconscious psychological processes (for example, wishes and fears
of which we’re not fully aware), and contends that childhood experiences are crucial in shaping
adult personality. Psychodynamic theory is most closely associated with the work of Sigmund
Freud, and with psychoanalysis, a type of psychotherapy that attempts to explore the patient’s
unconscious thoughts and emotions so that the person is better able to understand him- or
herself.
Freud’s work has been extremely influential, its impact extending far beyond psychology
(several years ago Time magazine selected Freud as one of the most important thinkers of the
20th century). Freud’s work has been not only influential, but quite controversial as well. As
you might imagine, when Freud suggested in 1900 that much of our behavior is determined
by psychological forces of which we’re largely unaware—that we literally don’t know what’s
going on in our own minds—people were (to put it mildly) displeased (Freud, 1900/1953a).
When he suggested in 1905 that we humans have strong sexual feelings from a very early
age, and that some of these sexual feelings are directed toward our parents, people were
more than displeased—they were outraged (Freud, 1905/1953b). Few theories in psychology
have evoked such strong reactions from other professionals and members of the public.
Controversy notwithstanding, no competent psychologist, or student of psychology, can
ignore psychodynamic theory. It is simply too important for psychological science and practice,
and continues to play an important role in a wide variety of disciplines within and outside
psychology (for example, developmental psychology, social psychology, sociology, and
neuroscience; see Bornstein, 2005, 2006; Solms & Turnbull, 2011). This module reviews the
psychodynamic perspective on personality. We begin with a brief discussion of the core

363

The Psychodynamic Perspective

assumptions of psychodynamic theory, followed by an overview of the evolution of the theory
from Freud’s time to today. We then discuss the place of psychodynamic theory within
contemporary psychology, and look toward the future as well.

Core Assumptions of the Psychodynamic Perspective
The core assumptions of psychodynamic theory are surprisingly simple. Moreover, these
assumptions are unique to the psychodynamic framework: No other theories of personality
accept these three ideas in their purest form.

Assumption 1:Primacy of the Unconscious
Psychodynamic theorists contend that the majority of psychological processes take place
outside conscious awareness. In psychoanalytic terms, the activities of the mind (or psyche)
are presumed to be largely unconscious.

Research confirms this basic premise of

psychoanalysis: Many of our mental activities—memories, motives, feelings, and the like—
are largely inaccessible to consciousness (Bargh & Morsella, 2008; Bornstein, 2010; Wilson,
2009).

Assumption 2: Critical Importance of Early Experiences
Psychodynamic theory is not alone in positing that early childhood events play a role in shaping
personality, but the theory is unique in the degree to which it emphasizes these events as
determinants of personality development and dynamics. According to the psychodynamic
model, early experiences—including those occurring during the first weeks or months of life
—set in motion personality processes that affect us years, even decades, later (Blatt & Levy,
2003; McWilliams, 2009). This is especially true of experiences that are outside the normal
range (for example, losing a parent or sibling at a very early age).

Assumption 3: Psychic Causality
The third core assumption of psychodynamic theory is that nothing in mental life happens by
chance—that there is no such thing as a random thought, feeling, motive, or behavior. This
has come to be known as the principle of psychic causality, and though few psychologists
accept the principle of psychic causality precisely as psychoanalysts conceive it, most theorists
and researchers agree that thoughts, motives, emotional responses, and expressed behaviors
do not arise randomly, but always stem from some combination of identifiable biological and

364

The Psychodynamic Perspective

psychological processes (Elliott,
2002; Robinson & Gordon, 2011).

The Evolution of
Psychodynamic Theory
Given Freud’s background in
neurology, it is not surprising that
the first incarnation of psychoanalytic
theory was primarily biological:
Our every thought and behavior —even something as seemingly random as

Freud

set

out

to

explain

which hiking trail to take or which rock to sit on—results from biological or

psychological

phenomena

in

psychological influences. [Image: Trekking Rinjani]

terms that could be linked to
neurological functioning as it was

understood in his day. Because Freud’s work in this area evolved over more than 50 years
(he began in 1885, and continued until he died in 1939), there were numerous revisions along
the way. Thus, it is most accurate to think of psychodynamic theory as a set of interrelated
models that complement and build upon each other. Three are particularly important: the
topographic model, the psychosexual stage model, and the structural model.

The Topographic Model
In his 1900 book, The Interpretation of Dreams, Freud introduced his topographic model of the
mind, which contended that the mind could be divided into three regions: conscious,
preconscious, and unconscious. The conscious part of the mind holds information that you’re
focusing on at this moment—what you’re thinking and feeling right now. The preconscious
contains material that is capable of becoming conscious but is not conscious at the moment
because your attention is not being directed toward it. You can move material from the
preconscious into consciousness simply by focusing your attention on it. Consider, for
example, what you had for dinner last night.

A moment ago that information was

preconscious; now it’s conscious, because you “pulled it up” into consciousness. (Not to worry,
in a few moments it will be preconscious again, and you can move on to more important things.)
The unconscious—the most controversial part of the topographic model—contains anxietyproducing material (for example, sexual impulses, aggressive urges) that are deliberately
repressed (held outside of conscious awareness as a form of self-protection because they make
you uncomfortable). The terms conscious, preconscious, and unconscious continue to be used

365

The Psychodynamic Perspective

today in psychology, and
research has provided consi­
derable support for Freud’s
thinking regarding conscious
and preconscious processing
(Erdelyi, 1985, 2004).

The

existence of the unconscious
remains controversial, with
some
that

researchers
evidence

for

arguing
it

is

compelling and others contending
that “unconscious” processing
can be accounted for without
positing the existence of a

Dreams play an important role in psychodynamic theory, as they are often
considered the central route through which the unconscious expresses itself to
the conscious mind. [Image: Hartwig HKD]

Freudian repository of repressed
wishes and troubling urges and impulses (Eagle, 2011; Luborsky & Barrett, 2006).

The Psychosexual Stage Model
Freud remained devoted to the topographic model, but by 1905 he had outlined the key
elements of his psychosexual stage model, which argued that early in life we progress through
a sequence of developmental stages, each with its own unique challenge and its own mode
of sexual gratification. Freud’s psychosexual stages—oral, anal, Oedipal, latency, and genital
—are well-known even to non-analytic psychologists. Frustration or overgratification during
a particular stage was hypothesized to result in “fixation” at that stage, and to the development
of an oral, anal, or Oedipal personality style (Bornstein, 2005, 2006).
Table 1 illustrates the basic organization of Freud’s (1905/1953b) psychosexual stage model,
and the three personality styles that result. Note that—consistent with the developmental
challenges that the child confronts during each stage—oral fixation is hypothesized to result
in a dependent personality, whereas anal fixation results in a lifelong preoccupation with
control. Oedipal fixation leads to an aggressive, competitive personality orientation.

The Structural Model
Ultimately, Freud recognized that the topographic model was helpful in understanding how
people process and store information, but not all that useful in explaining other important
psychological phenomena (for example, why certain people develop psychological disorders

366

The Psychodynamic Perspective

and others do not). To extend his theory, Freud developed a complementary framework to
account for normal and abnormal personality development—the structural model—which
posits the existence of three interacting mental structures called the id, ego, and superego.
The id is the seat of drives and instincts, whereas the ego represents the logical, reality-oriented
part of the mind, and the superego is basically your conscience—the moral guidelines, rules,
and prohibitions that guide your behavior. (You acquire these through your family and through
the culture in which you were raised.)
According to the structural model, our personality reflects the interplay of these three psychic
structures, which differ across individuals in relative power and influence. When the id
predominates and instincts rule, the result is an impulsive personality style. When the
superego is strongest, moral prohibitions reign supreme, and a restrained, overcontrolled
personality ensues. When the ego is dominant, a more balanced set of personality traits
develop (Eagle, 2011; McWilliams, 2009).

The Ego and Its Defenses
In addition to being the logical, rational, reality-oriented part of the mind, the ego serves
another important function: It helps us manage anxiety through the use of ego defenses.
Ego defenses are basically mental strategies that we use automatically and unconsciously
when we feel threatened (Cramer, 2000, 2006). They help us navigate upsetting events, but
there’s a cost as well: All ego defenses involve some distortion of reality. For example,
repression (the most basic ego defense, according to Freud) involves removing from
consciousness upsetting thoughts and feelings, and moving those thoughts and feelings to
the unconscious. When you read about a person who “blocked out” upsetting memories of
child abuse, that’s an example of repression.
Another ego defense is denial. In denial (unlike repression), we are aware that a particular
event occurred, but we don’t allow ourselves to see the implications of that event. When you
hear a person with a substance abuse problem say “I’m fine—even though people complain
about my drinking I never miss a day of work,” that person is using denial. Table 2 lists some
common ego defenses in psychodynamic theory, along with a definition and example of each.

Psychodynamic Theories: Where Are We Now?
The topographic model, psychosexual stage model, and structural model continue to influence
contemporary psychology, but it is important to keep in mind that psychodynamic theory is
never static, ever changing and evolving in response to new ideas and findings. In the following

367

The Psychodynamic Perspective

sections we discussion four current trends in the psychodynamic perspective: object relations
theory, the empirical testing of psychodynamic concepts, psychoanalysis and culture, and the
opportunities and challenges of neuroscience.

Object Relations Theory and the Growth of the Psychodynamic
Perspective
In recent years a number of new
psychodynamic frameworks have
emerged to explain personality
development and dynamics.

The

most important of these is object
relations theory. (In psychoanalytic
language, the term “object” refers to
a person, so object relations theory
is

really

something

more

like

“interpersonal relations theory.”)

We first learn how to interact with people as children. And depending on

Object relations theory contends

those experiences, it will guide our expectations for how future

that personality can be understood

relationship interactions will go. [Image: Vincent Anderlucci]

as reflecting the mental images of
significant figures (especially the

parents) that we form early in life in response to interactions taking place within the family
(Kernberg, 2004; Wachtel, 1997). These mental images (sometimes called introjects) serve as
templates for later interpersonal relationships—almost like relationship blueprints or
“scripts.” So if you internalized positive introjects early in life (for example, a mental image of
mom or dad as warm and accepting), that’s what you expect to occur in later relationships as
well. If you internalized a mental image of mom or dad as harsh and judgmental, you might
instead become a self-critical person, and feel that you can never live up to other people’s
standards . . . or your own (Luyten & Blatt, 2013).
Object relations theory has increased many psychologists’ interest in studying psychodynamic
ideas and concepts, in part because it represents a natural bridge between the psychodynamic
perspective and research in other areas of psychology. For example, developmental and social
psychologists also believe that mental representations of significant people play an important
role in shaping our behavior. In developmental psychology you might read about this in the
context of attachment theory (which argues that attachments—or bonds—to significant people
are key to understanding human behavior; Fraley, 2002). In social psychology, mental

The Psychodynamic Perspective

368

representations of significant figures play an important role in social cognition (thoughts and
feelings regarding other people; Bargh & Morsella, 2008; Robinson & Gordon, 2011).

Empirical Research on Psychodynamic Theories
Empirical research assessing psychodynamic concepts has produced mixed results, with some
concepts receiving good empirical support, and others not faring as well. For example, the
notion that we express strong sexual feelings from a very early age, as the psychosexual stage
model suggests, has not held up to empirical scrutiny. On the other hand, the idea that there
are dependent, control-oriented, and competitive personality types—an idea also derived
from the psychosexual stage model—does seem useful.
Many ideas from the psychodynamic perspective have been studied empirically. Luborsky
and Barrett (2006) reviewed much of this research; other useful reviews are provided by
Bornstein (2005), Gerber (2007), and Huprich (2009). For now, let’s look at three psychodynamic
hypotheses that have received strong empirical support.

•

Unconscious processes influence our behavior as the psychodynamic perspective predicts. We
perceive and process much more information than we realize, and much of our behavior
is shaped by feelings and motives of which we are, at best, only partially aware (Bornstein,
2009, 2010). Evidence for the importance of unconscious influences is so compelling that
it has become a central element of contemporary cognitive and social psychology (Robinson
& Gordon, 2011).

•

We all use ego defenses and they help determine our psychological adjustment and physical
health. People really do differ in the degree that they rely on different ego defenses—so
much so that researchers now study each person’s “defense style” (the unique constellation
of defenses that we use). It turns out that certain defenses are more adaptive than others:
Rationalization and sublimation are healthier (psychologically speaking) than repression
and reaction formation (Cramer, 2006). Denial is, quite literally, bad for your health, because
people who use denial tend to ignore symptoms of illness until it’s too late (Bond, 2004).

•

Mental representations of self and others do indeed serve as blueprints for later relationships.
Dozens have studies have shown that mental images of our parents, and other significant
figures, really do shape our expectations for later friendships and romantic relationships.
The idea that you choose a romantic partner who resembles mom or dad is a myth, but
it’s true that you expect to be treated by others as you were treated by your parents early
in life (Silverstein, 2007; Wachtel, 1997).

369

The Psychodynamic Perspective

Psychoanalysis and Culture
One of Freud’s lifelong goals was to
use psychoanalytic principles to
understand culture and improve
intergroup relations (he actually
exchanged several letters with
Albert Einstein prior to World War
II, in which they discussed this
issue).

During the past several

decades, as society has become
increasingly multicultural, this effort
has taken on new importance;
psychoanalysts have been active in
If you were to describe yourself, would you focus on your personal

incorporating ideas and findings

preferences and hobbies? Or would you focus on your relationships and

regarding cultural influences into

ties with others? [Image: Rose Physical Therapy Group]

their research and clinical work. For
example, studies have shown that

individuals raised in individualistic, independence-focused cultures (for example, the United
States, Great Britain) tend to define themselves primarily in terms of personal attributes (like
attitudes and interests), whereas individuals raised in more sociocentric, interdependent
cultures (for example, Japan, India) are more likely to describe themselves in terms of
interpersonal relations and connections with others (Oyserman, Coon, & Kemmelmeier, 2002).
Our self-representations are, quite literally, a product of our cultural milieu (Markus &
Kitayama, 2010).

The Opportunities and Challenges of Neuroscience
Fifteen years ago, Nobel Laureate Eric Kandel (1998) articulated a vision for an empirically
oriented psychodynamic perspective firmly embedded within the principles and findings of
neuroscience. Kandel’s vision ultimately led to the development of neuropsychoanalysis, an
integration of psychodynamic and neuropsychological concepts that has enhanced
researchers’ understanding of numerous aspects of human behavior and mental functioning
(Solms & Turnbull, 2011). Some of the first efforts to integrate psychodynamic principles with
findings from neuroscience involved sleep and dreams, and contemporary models of dream
formation now incorporate principles from both domains (Levin & Nielsen, 2007).
Neuroimaging techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imagery (fMRI) have begun
to play an increasingly central role in this ongoing psychoanalysis–neuroscience integration

The Psychodynamic Perspective

370

as well (Gerber, 2007; Slipp, 2000).

Looking Ahead: Psychodynamic Theory in the 21st Century (and
Beyond)
Despite being surrounded by controversy, the psychodynamic perspective on personality has
survived for more than a century, reinventing itself in response to new empirical findings,
theoretical shifts, and changing social forces. The psychodynamic perspective evolved
considerably during the 20th century and will continue to evolve throughout the 21st century
as well. Psychodynamic theory may be the closest thing we have to an overarching, allencompassing theory in psychology. It deals with a broad range of issues—normal and
pathological functioning, motivation and emotion, childhood and adulthood, individual and
culture—and the psychodynamic perspective continues to have tremendous potential for
integrating ideas and findings across the many domains of contemporary psychology.

Table 1: The Psychosexual Stage Model

The Psychodynamic Perspective

Table 2: Some Common Ego Defenses

371

The Psychodynamic Perspective

Table 3: Conceptions of Personality within Psychodynamic Theory

372

373

The Psychodynamic Perspective

Outside Resources
Institution: Institute for Psychoanalytic Training and Research (IPTAR) - A branch of the
International Psychoanalytic Association, IPTAR plays an active role in supporting empirical
research on psychoanalytic theory and therapy.
http://www.iptar.org/
Institution: The American Psychoanalytic Association - The American Psychoanalytic
Association supports psychodynamic training and research, and sponsors a number of
workshops (as well as two annual meetings) each year.
http://www.apsa.org/
Institution: The American Psychological Association Division of Psychoanalysis - Division
39 of the American Psychological Association is the “psychological home” of
psychodynamic theory and research.
http://www.apadivisions.org/division-39/
Web: Library of Congress Exhibit – Freud: Conflict and Culture. This is a terrific website full
of photos, original manuscripts, and links to various Freud artifacts. Toward the end of
Section Three (From the Individual to Society) there is a link to Freud’s 1938 BBC radio
address; play it and you’ll get to hear Freud’s voice.
http://www.loc.gov/exhibits/freud/

Discussion Questions
1. What is psychic causality?
2. What are the main differences between the preconscious and the unconscious in Freud’s
topographic model?
3. What are the three key structures in the structural model of the mind—and what does each
structure do?
4. Which ego defense do you think is more adaptive: reaction formation or sublimation? Why?
5. How do people raised in individualistic societies differ from those raised in more
sociocentric societies with respect to their self-concept—how do they perceive and describe
themselves?
6. According to object relations theory, how do early relationships with our parents and other

The Psychodynamic Perspective

374

significant figures affect later friendships and romantic relationships?
7. Which field has the potential to benefit more from the emerging new discipline of
neuropsychoanalysis: neuroscience, or psychoanalysis? Why?

375

The Psychodynamic Perspective

Vocabulary
Ego defenses
Mental strategies, rooted in the ego, that we use to manage anxiety when we feel threatened
(some examples include repression, denial, sublimation, and reaction formation).
Neuropsychoanalysis
An integrative, interdisciplinary domain of inquiry seeking to integrate psychoanalytic and
neuropsychological ideas and findings to enhance both areas of inquiry (you can learn more
by

visiting

the

webpage

of

the

International

Neuropsychoanalysis

Society

at

http://www.neuropsa.org.uk/).
Object relations theory
A modern offshoot of the psychodynamic perspective, this theory contends that personality
can be understood as reflecting mental images of significant figures (especially the parents)
that we form early in life in response to interactions taking place within the family; these
mental images serve as templates (or “scripts”) for later interpersonal relationships.
Primacy of the Unconscious
The hypothesis—supported by contemporary empirical research—that the vast majority of
mental activity takes place outside conscious awareness.
Psychic causality
The assumption that nothing in mental life happens by chance—that there is no such thing
as a “random” thought or feeling.
Psychosexual stage model
Probably the most controversial aspect of psychodynamic theory, the psychosexual stage
model contends that early in life we progress through a sequence of developmental stages
(oral, anal, Oedipal, latency, and genital), each with its own unique mode of sexual gratification.
Structural model
Developed to complement and extend the topographic model, the structural model of the
mind posits the existence of three interacting mental structures called the id, ego, and
superego.
Topographic model
Freud’s first model of the mind, which contended that the mind could be divided into three

The Psychodynamic Perspective

376

regions: conscious, preconscious, and unconscious. (The “topographic” comes from the fact
that topography is the study of maps.)

377

The Psychodynamic Perspective

References
Bargh, J. A., & Morsella, E. (2008). The unconscious mind. Perspectives on Psychological Science,
3, 73-79.
Blatt, S. J., & Levy, K. N. (2003). Attachment theory, psychoanalysis, personality development,
and psychopathology. Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 23, 104-152.
Bond, M. (2004). Empirical studies of defense style: Relationships with psychopathology and
change. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 12, 263-278.
Bornstein, R. F. (2010). Psychoanalytic theory as a unifying framework for 21st century
personality assessment. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 27, 133-152.
Bornstein, R. F. (2009). Heisenberg, Kandinsky, and the heteromethod convergence problem:
Lessons from within and beyond psychology. Journal of Personality Assessment, 91, 1-8.
Bornstein, R. F. (2006). A Freudian construct lost and reclaimed: The psychodynamics of
personality pathology. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 23, 339-353.
Bornstein, R. F. (2005). Reonnecting psychoanalysis to mainstream psychology: Challenges
and opportunities. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 22, 323-340.
Cramer, P. (2006). Protecting the self: Defense mechanisms in action. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Cramer, P. (2000). Defense mechanisms in psychology today: Further processes for adaptation.
American Psychologist, 55, 637–646.
Eagle, M. N. (2011). From classical to contemporary psychoanalysis: A critique and integration.
New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.
Elliott, A. (2002). Psychoanalytic theory: An introduction. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Erdelyi, M. H. (2004). Subliminal perception and its cognates: Theory, indeterminacy, and time.
Consciousness and Cognition, 13, 73-91.
Erdelyi, M. H. (1985). Psychoanalysis: Freud’s cognitive psychology. New York, NY: W. H. Freeman.
Fraley, R. C. (2002). Attachment stability from infancy to adulthood: Meta-analysis and dynamic
modeling of developmental mechanisms. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 6,
123-151.
Freud, S. (1953a). The interpretation of dreams. In J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The standard edition
of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vols. 4-5). London, England: Hogarth.
(Original work published 1900)
Freud, S. (1953b). Three essays on the theory of sexuality. In J. Strachey (Ed. & Trans.), The
standard edition of the complete psychological works of Sigmund Freud (Vol. 7, pp. 125–245).

The Psychodynamic Perspective

378

London, England: Hogarth. (Original work published 1905)
Gerber, A. (2007). Whose unconscious is it anyway? The American Psychoanalyst, 41, 11, 28.
Huprich, S. K. (2009). Psychodynamic therapy: Conceptual and empirical foundations. New York,
NY: Taylor & Francis.
Kandel, E. R. (1998). A new intellectual framework for psychiatry. American Journal of Psychiatry,
155, 457–469.
Kernberg, O. F. (2004). Contemporary controversies in psychoanalytic theory, techniques, and their
applications. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Levin, R., & Nielsen, T. A. (2007). Disturbed dreaming, posttraumatic stress disorder, and affect
distress: A review and neurocognitive model. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 482–528.
Luborsky, L., & Barrett, M. S. (2006). The history and empirical status of key psychoanalytic
concepts. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 2, 1–19.
Luyten, P., & Blatt, S. J. (2013). Interpersonal relatedness and self-definition in normal and
disrupted personality development. American Psychologist, 68, 172–183.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (2010). Culture and selves: A cycle of mutual constitution.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 420–430.
McWilliams, N. (2009). Psychoanalytic diagnosis (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Oyserman, D., Coon, H. M., & Kemmelmeier, M. (2002). Rethinking individualism and
collectivism: Evaluation of theoretical assumptions and meta-analyses. Psychological
Bulletin, 128, 3–72.
Robinson, M. D., & Gordon, K. H. (2011). Personality dynamics: Insights from the personality
social cognitive literature. Journal of Personality Assessment, 93, 161–176.
Silverstein, M. L. (2007). Disorders of the self: A personality-guided approach. Washington, DC:
APA Books.
Slipp, S. (Ed.) (2000). Neuroscience and psychoanalysis [Special Issue]. Journal of the American
Academy of Psychoanalysis, 28, 191–395.
Solms, M., & Turnbull, O. H. (2011). What is neuropsychoanalysis? Neuropsychoanalysis, 13,
133–145.
Wachtel, P. L. (1997). Psychoanalysis, behavior therapy, and the relational world. Washington, DC:
APA Books.
Wilson, T. D. (2009). Know thyself. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 4, 384–389.

Chapter 13: Psychological Disorders

22
Anxiety and Related Disorders
David H. Barlow & Kristen K. Ellard

Anxiety is a natural part of life and, at normal levels, helps us to function at our best. However,
for people with anxiety disorders, anxiety is overwhelming and hard to control. Anxiety
disorders develop out of a blend of biological (genetic) and psychological factors that, when
combined with stress, may lead to the development of ailments. Primary anxiety-related
diagnoses include generalized anxiety disorder, panic disorder, specific phobia, social anxiety
disorder (social phobia), post traumatic stress disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder.
In this module, we summarize the main clinical features of each of these disorders and discuss
their similarities and differences with everyday experiences of anxiety.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•

Understand the relationship between anxiety and anxiety disorders.
Identify key vulnerabilities for developing anxiety and related disorders.
Identify main diagnostic features of specific anxiety-related disorders.
Differentiate between disordered and non-disordered functioning.

Introduction
What is anxiety? Most of us feel some anxiety almost every day of our lives. Maybe you have
an important test coming up for school. Or maybe there’s that big game next Saturday, or
that first date with someone new you are hoping to impress. Anxiety can be defined as a
negative mood state that is accompanied by bodily symptoms such as increased heart rate,

381

Anxiety and Related Disorders

muscle tension, a sense of unease, and apprehension about the future (APA, 2013; Barlow,
2002).
Anxiety is what motivates us to plan for
the future, and in this sense, anxiety is
actually a good thing. It’s that nagging
feeling that motivates us to study for that
test, practice harder for that game, or be
at our very best on that date. But some
people experience anxiety so intensely
that it is no longer helpful or useful. They
may become so overwhelmed and
distracted by anxiety that they actually
fail their test, fumble the ball, or spend
the whole date fidgeting and avoiding

While everyone may experience some level of anxiety at one time

eye contact. If anxiety begins to interfere

or another, those with anxiety disorders experience it consistently

in the person’s life in a significant way, it

and so intensely that it has a significantly negative impact on their

is considered a disorder.

quality of life. (Photo: Zetson)

Anxiety and closely related disorders emerge from “triple vulnerabilities,”a combination of
biological, psychological, and specific factors that increase our risk for developing a disorder
(Barlow, 2002; Suárez, Bennett, Goldstein, & Barlow, 2009). Biological vulnerabilities refer to
specific genetic and neurobiological factors that might predispose someone to develop anxiety
disorders. No single gene directly causes anxiety or panic, but our genes may make us more
susceptible to anxiety and influence how our brains react to stress (Drabant et al., 2012;
Gelernter & Stein, 2009; Smoller, Block, & Young, 2009). Psychological vulnerabilities refer
to the influences that our early experiences have on how we view the world. If we were
confronted with unpredictable stressors or traumatic experiences at younger ages, we may
come to view the world as unpredictable and uncontrollable, even dangerous (Chorpita &
Barlow, 1998; Gunnar & Fisher, 2006). Specific vulnerabilities refer to how our experiences
lead us to focus and channel our anxiety (Suárez et al., 2009). If we learned that physical illness
is dangerous, maybe through witnessing our family’s reaction whenever anyone got sick, we
may focus our anxiety on physical sensations. If we learned that disapproval from others has
negative, even dangerous consequences, such as being yelled at or severely punished for
even the slightest offense, we might focus our anxiety on social evaluation. If we learn that
the “other shoe might drop” at any moment, we may focus our anxiety on worries about the
future. None of these vulnerabilities directly causes anxiety disorders on its own—instead,
when all of these vulnerabilities are present, and we experience some triggering life stress,
an anxiety disorder may be the result (Barlow, 2002; Suárez et al., 2009). In the next sections,

382

Anxiety and Related Disorders

we will briefly explore each of the major anxiety based disorders, found in the fifth edition of
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) (APA, 2013).

Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Most of us worry some of the time, and this worry can actually be useful in helping us to plan
for the future or make sure we remember to do something important. Most of us can set
aside our worries when we need to focus on other things or stop worrying altogether whenever
a problem has passed. However, for someone with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), these
worries become difficult, or even impossible, to turn off. They may find themselves worrying
excessively about a number of different things, both minor and catastrophic. Their worries
also come with a host of other symptoms such as muscle tension, fatigue, agitation or
restlessness, irritability, difficulties with sleep (either falling asleep, staying asleep, or both),
or difficulty concentrating.The DSM-5 criteria specify that at least six months of excessive
anxiety and worry of this type must be ongoing, happening more days than not for a good
proportion of the day, to receive a diagnosis of GAD. About 5.7% of the population has met
criteria for GAD at some point during their lifetime (Kessler, Berglund, et al., 2005), making it
one of the most common anxiety disorders (see Table 1).

Table 1: Prevalence rates for major anxiety disorders. [1] Kessler et al. (2005), [2]Kessler, Chiu, Demler, Merikangas, & Walters
(2005), [3]Kessler, Sonnega, Bromet, Hughes, & Nelson (1995), [4]Craske et al. (1996).

What makes a person with GAD worry more than the average person? Research shows that
individuals with GAD are more sensitive and vigilant toward possible threats than people who
are not anxious (Aikins & Craske, 2001; Barlow, 2002; Bradley, Mogg, White, Groom, & de Bono,
1999). This may be related to early stressful experiences, which can lead to a view of the world

383

Anxiety and Related Disorders

as an unpredictable, uncontrollable, and even dangerous place. Some have suggested that
people with GAD worry as a way to gain some control over these otherwise uncontrollable or
unpredictable experiences and against uncertain outcomes (Dugas, Gagnon, Ladouceur, &
Freeston, 1998). By repeatedly going through all of the possible “What if?” scenarios in their
mind, the person might feel like they are less vulnerable to an unexpected outcome, giving
them the sense that they have some control over the situation (Wells, 2002). Others have
suggested people with GAD worry as a way to avoid feeling distressed (Borkovec, Alcaine, &
Behar, 2004). For example, Borkovec and Hu (1990) found that those who worried when
confronted with a stressful situation had less physiological arousal than those who didn’t
worry, maybe because the worry “distracted” them in some way.
The problem is, all of this “what if?”-ing doesn’t get the person any closer to a solution or an
answer and, in fact, might take them away from important things they should be paying
attention to in the moment, such as finishing an important project. Many of the catastrophic
outcomes people with GAD worry about are very unlikely to happen, so when the catastrophic
event doesn’t materialize, the act of worrying gets reinforced (Borkovec, Hazlett-Stevens, &
Diaz, 1999). For example, if a mother spends all night worrying about whether her teenage
daughter will get home safe from a night out and the daughter returns home without incident,
the mother could easily attribute her daughter’s safe return to her successful “vigil.” What the
mother hasn’t learned is that her daughter would have returned home just as safe if she had
been focusing on the movie she was watching with her husband, rather than being
preoccupied with worries. In this way, the cycle of worry is perpetuated, and, subsequently,
people with GAD often miss out on many otherwise enjoyable events in their lives.

Panic Disorder and Agoraphobia
Have you ever gotten into a near-accident or been taken by surprise in some way? You may
have felt a flood of physical sensations, such as a racing heart, shortness of breath, or tingling
sensations. This alarm reaction is called the “fight or flight” response (Cannon, 1929) and is
your body’s natural reaction to fear, preparing you to either fight or escape in response to
threat or danger. It’s likely you weren’t too concerned with these sensations, because you
knew what was causing them. But imagine if this alarm reaction came “out of the blue,” for
no apparent reason, or in a situation in which you didn’t expect to be anxious or fearful. This
is called an “unexpected” panic attack or a false alarm. Because there is no apparent reason
or cue for the alarm reaction, you might react to the sensations with intense fear, maybe
thinking you are having a heart attack, or going crazy, or even dying. You might begin to
associate the physical sensations you felt during this attack with this fear and may start to go
out of your way to avoid having those sensations again.

384

Anxiety and Related Disorders

Unexpected panic attacks such as these
are at the heart of panic disorder (PD).
However, to receive a diagnosis of PD,
the

person

must

not

only

have

unexpected panic attacks but also must
experience continued intense anxiety
and avoidance related to the attack for
at least one month, causing significant
distress or interference in their lives.
People with panic disorder tend to
interpret even normal physical sensations
Panic disorder is a debilitating condition that leaves sufferers with

in a catastrophic way, which triggers

acute anxiety that persists long after a specific panic attack has

more anxiety and, ironically, more

subsided. When this anxiety leads to deliberate avoidance of

physical sensations, creating a vicious

particular places and situations a person may be given a diagnosis
of agoraphobia. [Photo: nate steiner]

cycle of panic (Clark, 1986, 1996). The
person may begin to avoid a number of

situations or activities that produce the same physiological arousal that was present during
the beginnings of a panic attack. For example, someone who experienced a racing heart during
a panic attack might avoid exercise or caffeine. Someone who experienced choking sensations
might avoid wearing high-necked sweaters or necklaces. Avoidance of these internal bodily
or somatic cues for panic has been termed interoceptive avoidance (Barlow & Craske, 2007;
Brown, White, & Barlow, 2005; Craske & Barlow, 2008; Shear et al., 1997).
The individual may also have experienced an overwhelming urge to escape during the
unexpected panic attack. This can lead to a sense that certain places or situations—particularly
situations where escape might not be possible—are not “safe.” These situations become
external cues for panic. If the person begins to avoid several places or situations, or still
endures these situations but does so with a significant amount of apprehension and anxiety,
then the person also has agoraphobia (Barlow, 2002; Craske & Barlow, 1988; Craske & Barlow,
2008). Agoraphobia can cause significant disruption to a person’s life, causing them to go out
of their way to avoid situations, such as adding hours to a commute to avoid taking the train
or only ordering take-out to avoid having to enter a grocery store. In one tragic case seen by
our clinic, a woman suffering from agoraphobia had not left her apartment for 20 years and
had spent the past 10 years confined to one small area of her apartment, away from the view
of the outside. In some cases, agoraphobia develops in the absence of panic attacks and
therefor is a separate disorder in DSM-5. But agoraphobia often accompanies panic disorder.
About 4.7% of the population has met criteria for PD or agoraphobia over their lifetime (Kessler,
Chiu, Demler, Merikangas, & Walters, 2005; Kessler et al., 2006) (see Table 1). In all of these

385

Anxiety and Related Disorders

cases of panic disorder, what was once an adaptive natural alarm reaction now becomes a
learned, and much feared, false alarm.

Specific Phobia
The majority of us might have certain things we fear, such as bees, or needles, or heights
(Myers et al., 1984). But what if this fear is so consuming that you can’t go out on a summer’s
day, or get vaccines needed to go on a special trip, or visit your doctor in her new office on
the 26th floor? To meet criteria for a diagnosis of specific phobia, there must be an irrational
fear of a specific object or situation that substantially interferes with the person’s ability to
function. For example, a patient at our clinic turned down a prestigious and coveted artist
residency because it required spending time near a wooded area, bound to have insects.
Another patient purposely left her house two hours early each morning so she could walk
past her neighbor’s fenced yard before they let their dog out in the morning.
The list of possible phobias is staggering, but four major subtypes of specific phobia are
recognized: blood-injury-injection (BII) type, situational type (such as planes, elevators, or
enclosed places), natural environment type for events one may encounter in nature (for
example, heights, storms, and water), and animal type.
A fifth category “other” includes phobias
that do not fit any of the four major
subtypes (for example, fears of choking,
vomiting, or contracting an illness). Most
phobic reactions cause a surge of activity
in the sympathetic nervous system and
increased

heart

rate

and

blood

pressure, maybe even a panic attack.
However, people with BII type phobias
usually experience a marked drop in
heart rate and blood pressure and may
even faint. In this way, those with BII
phobias almost always differ in their

Elevators can be a trigger for sufferers of claustrophobia or

physiological reaction from people with

agoraphobia. (Image: srgpicker)

other types of phobia (Barlow &
Liebowitz, 1995; Craske, Antony, & Barlow, 2006; Hofmann, Alpers, & Pauli, 2009; Ost, 1992).
BII phobia also runs in families more strongly than any phobic disorder we know (Antony &
Barlow, 2002; Page & Martin, 1998). Specific phobia is one of the most common psychological

386

Anxiety and Related Disorders

disorders in the United States, with 12.5% of the population reporting a lifetime history of
fears significant enough to be considered a “phobia” (Arrindell et al., 2003; Kessler, Berglund,
et al., 2005) (see Table 1). Most people who suffer from specific phobia tend to have multiple
phobias of several types (Hofmann, Lehman, & Barlow, 1997).

Social Anxiety Disorder (Social Phobia)
Many people consider themselves shy, and most people find social evaluation uncomfortable
at best, or giving a speech somewhat mortifying. Yet, only a small proportion of the population
fear these types of situations significantly enough to merit a diagnosis of social anxiety
disorder (SAD) (APA, 2013). SAD is more than exaggerated shyness (Bogels et al., 2010;
Schneier et al., 1996). To receive a diagnosis of SAD, the fear and anxiety associated with social
situations must be so strong that the person avoids them entirely, or if avoidance is not
possible, the person endures them with a great deal of distress. Further, the fear and avoidance
of social situations must get in the way of the person’s daily life, or seriously limit their academic
or occupational functioning. For example, a patient at our clinic compromised her perfect 4.0
grade point average because she could not complete a required oral presentation in one of
her classes, causing her to fail the course. Fears of negative evaluation might make someone
repeatedly turn down invitations to social events or avoid having conversations with people,
leading to greater and greater isolation.
The specific social situations that trigger anxiety and fear range from one-on-one interactions,
such as starting or maintaining a conversation; to performance-based situations, such as
giving a speech or performing on stage; to assertiveness, such as asking someone to change
disruptive or undesirable behaviors. Fear of social evaluation might even extend to such things
as using public restrooms, eating in a restaurant, filling out forms in a public place, or even
reading on a train. Any type of situation that could potentially draw attention to the person
can become a feared social situation. For example, one patient of ours went out of her way
to avoid any situation in which she might have to use a public restroom for fear that someone
would hear her in the bathroom stall and think she was disgusting. If the fear is limited to
performance-based situations, such as public speaking, a diagnosis of SAD performance only
is assigned.
What causes someone to fear social situations to such a large extent? The person may have
learned growing up that social evaluation in particular can be dangerous, creating a specific
psychological vulnerability to develop social anxiety (Bruch & Heimberg, 1994; Lieb et al., 2000;
Rapee & Melville, 1997). For example, the person’s caregivers may have harshly criticized and
punished them for even the smallest mistake, maybe even punishing them physically.

387

Anxiety and Related Disorders

Or, someone might have experienced a social trauma
that had lasting effects, such as being bullied or
humiliated. Interestingly, one group of researchers
found that 92% of adults in their study sample with
social phobia experienced severe teasing and bullying
in childhood, compared with only 35% to 50% among
people with other anxiety disorders (McCabe, Antony,
Summerfeldt, Liss, & Swinson, 2003). Someone else
might react so strongly to the anxiety provoked by a
social situation that they have an unexpected panic
attack. This panic attack then becomes associated
(conditioned response) with the social situation,
causing the person to fear they will panic the next time
they are in that situation. This is not considered PD,
however, because the person’s fear is more focused
on social evaluation than having unexpected panic
attacks, and the fear of having an attack is limited to
social situations. As many as 12.1% of the general

Social trauma in childhood may have long-lasting
effects. (Photo: Chesi - Photos CC)

population suffer from social phobia at some point in
their lives (Kessler, Berglund, et al., 2005), making it one of the most common anxiety disorders,
second only to specific phobia (see Table 1).

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
With stories of war, natural disasters, and physical and sexual assault dominating the news,
it is clear that trauma is a reality for many people. Many individual traumas that occur every
day never even make the headlines, such as a car accident, domestic abuse, or the death of
a loved one. Yet, while many people face traumatic events, not everyone who faces a trauma
develops a disorder. Some, with the help of family and friends, are able to recover and continue
on with their lives (Friedman, 2009). For some, however, the months and years following a
trauma are filled with intrusive reminders of the event, a sense of intense fear that another
traumatic event might occur, or a sense of isolation and emotional numbing. They may engage
in a host of behaviors intended to protect themselves from being vulnerable or unsafe, such
as constantly scanning their surroundings to look for signs of potential danger, never sitting
with their back to the door, or never allowing themselves to be anywhere alone. This lasting
reaction to trauma is what characterizes posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
A diagnosis of PTSD begins with the traumatic event itself. An individual must have been

388

Anxiety and Related Disorders

exposed to an event that involves actual or threatened death, serious injury, or sexual violence.
To receive a diagnosis of PTSD, exposure to the event must include either directly experiencing
the event, witnessing the event happening to someone else, learning that the event occurred
to a close relative or friend, or having repeated or extreme exposure to details of the event
(such as in the case of first responders). The person subsequently re-experiences the event
through both intrusive memories and nightmares. Some memories may come back so vividly
that the person feels like they are experiencing the event all over again, what is known as
having a flashback. The individual may avoid anything that reminds them of the trauma,
including conversations, places, or even specific types of people. They may feel emotionally
numb or restricted in their ability to feel, which may interfere in their interpersonal
relationships. The person may not be able to remember certain aspects of what happened
during the event. They may feel a sense of a foreshortened future, that they will never marry,
have a family, or live a long, full life. They may be jumpy or easily startled, hypervigilant to
their surroundings, and quick to anger. The prevalence of PTSD among the population as a
whole is relatively low, with 6.8% having experienced PTSD at some point in their life (Kessler,
Berglund, et al., 2005) (see Table 1). Combat and sexual assault are the most common
precipitating traumas (Kessler, Sonnega, Bromet, Hughes, & Nelson, 1995). Whereas PTSD
was previously categorized as an Anxiety Disorder, in the most recent version of the DSM
(DSM-5; APA, 2013) it has been reclassified under the more specific category of Trauma- and
Stressor-Related Disorders.
A person with PTSD is particularly sensitive to both internal and external cues that serve as
reminders of their traumatic experience. For example, as we saw in PD, the physical sensations
of arousal present during the initial trauma can become threatening in and of themselves,
becoming a powerful reminder of the event. Someone might avoid watching intense or
emotional movies in order to prevent the experience of emotional arousal. Avoidance of
conversations, reminders, or even of the experience of emotion itself may also be an attempt
to avoid triggering internal cues. External stimuli that were present during the trauma can
also become strong triggers. For example, if a woman is raped by a man wearing a red t-shirt,
she may develop a strong alarm reaction to the sight of red shirts, or perhaps even more
indiscriminately to anything with a similar color red. A combat veteran who experienced a
strong smell of gasoline during a roadside bomb attack may have an intense alarm reaction
when pumping gas back at home. Individuals with a psychological vulnerability toward viewing
the world as uncontrollable and unpredictable may particularly struggle with the possibility
of additional future, unpredictable traumatic events, fueling their need for hypervigilance and
avoidance, and perpetuating the symptoms of PTSD.

Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder

Anxiety and Related Disorders

389

Have you ever had a strange thought pop into your mind, such as picturing the stranger next
to you naked? Or maybe you walked past a crooked picture on the wall and couldn’t resist
straightening it. Most people have occasional strange thoughts and may even engage in some
“compulsive” behaviors, especially when they are stressed (Boyer & Liénard, 2008; Fullana et
al., 2009). But for most people, these thoughts are nothing more than a passing oddity, and
the behaviors are done (or not done) without a second thought. For someone with obsessivecompulsive disorder (OCD), however, these thoughts and compulsive behaviors don’t just
come and go. Instead, strange or unusual thoughts are taken to mean something much more
important and real, maybe even something dangerous or frightening. The urge to engage in
some behavior, such as straightening a picture, can become so intense that it is nearly
impossible not to carry it out, or causes significant anxiety if it can’t be carried out. Further,
someone with OCD might become preoccupied with the possibility that the behavior wasn’t
carried out to completion and feel compelled to repeat the behavior again and again, maybe
several times before they are “satisfied.”
To receive a diagnosis of OCD, a person must experience obsessive thoughts and/or
compulsions that seem irrational or nonsensical, but that keep coming into their mind. Some
examples of obsessions include doubting thoughts (such as doubting a door is locked or an
appliance is turned off), thoughts of contamination (such as thinking that touching almost
anything might give you cancer), or aggressive thoughts or images that are unprovoked or
nonsensical. Compulsions may be carried out in an attempt to neutralize some of these
thoughts, providing temporary relief from the anxiety the obsessions cause, or they may be
nonsensical in and of themselves. Either way, compulsions are distinct in that they must be
repetitive or excessive, the person feels “driven” to carry out the behavior, and the person
feels a great deal of distress if they can’t engage in the behavior. Some examples of compulsive
behaviors are repetitive washing (often in response to contamination obsessions), repetitive
checking (locks, door handles, appliances often in response to doubting obsessions), ordering
and arranging things to ensure symmetry, or doing things according to a specific ritual or
sequence (such as getting dressed or ready for bed in a specific order). To meet diagnostic
criteria for OCD, engaging in obsessions and/or compulsions must take up a significant amount
of the person’s time, at least an hour per day, and must cause significant distress or impairment
in functioning. About 1.6% of the population has met criteria for OCD over the course of a
lifetime (Kessler, Berglund, et al., 2005) (see Table 1). Whereas OCD was previously categorized
as an Anxiety Disorder, in the most recent version of the DSM (DSM-5; APA, 2013) it has been
reclassified under the more specific category of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders.
People with OCD often confuse having an intrusive thought with their potential for carrying
out the thought. Whereas most people when they have a strange or frightening thought are
able to let it go, a person with OCD may become “stuck” on the thought and be intensely afraid

390

Anxiety and Related Disorders

that they might somehow lose
control and act on it. Or worse,
they believe that having the
thought is just as bad as doing it.
This

is

called

thought-action

fusion. For example, one patient
of ours was plagued by thoughts
that she would cause harm to her
young daughter. She experienced
intrusive images of throwing hot
coffee in her daughter’s face or
pushing her face underwater
when she was giving her a bath.
These images were so terrifying to
the patient that she would no

Where does productive organization end and compulsive behavior begin? If
the behavior consumes more than an hour per day and causes distress it
can be considered OCD. (Photo: mt_neer man)

longer allow herself any physical
contact with her daughter and would leave her daughter in the care of a babysitter if her
husband or another family was not available to “supervise” her. In reality, the last thing she
wanted to do was harm her daughter, and she had no intention or desire to act on the
aggressive thoughts and images, nor does anybody with OCD act on these thoughts, but these
thoughts were so horrifying to her that she made every attempt to prevent herself from the
potential of carrying them out, even if it meant not being able to hold, cradle, or cuddle her
daughter. These are the types of struggles people with OCD face every day.

Treatments for Anxiety and Related Disorders
Many successful treatments for anxiety and related disorders have been developed over the
years. Medications (anti-anxiety drugs and antidepressants) have been found to be beneficial
for disorders other than specific phobia, but relapse rates are high once medications are
stopped (Heimberg et al., 1998; Hollon et al., 2005), and some classes of medications (minor
tranquilizers or benzodiazepines) can be habit forming.
Exposure-based cognitive behavioral therapies (CBT) are effective psychosocial treatments
for anxiety disorders, and many show greater treatment effects than medication in the long
term (Barlow, Allen, & Basden, 2007; Barlow, Gorman, Shear, & Woods, 2000). In CBT, patients
are taught skills to help identify and change problematic thought processes, beliefs, and
behaviors that tend to worsen symptoms of anxiety, and practice applying these skills to reallife situations through exposure exercises. Patients learn how the automatic “appraisals” or

Anxiety and Related Disorders

391

thoughts they have about a situation affect
both how they feel and how they behave.
Similarly, patients learn how engaging in
certain behaviors, such as avoiding situations,
tends to strengthen the belief that the
situation is something to be feared. A key
aspect of CBT is exposure exercises, in which
the patient learns to gradually approach
situations they find fearful or distressing, in
order to challenge their beliefs and learn new,
less fearful associations about these
situations.
Typically 50% to 80% of patients receiving
drugs or CBT will show a good initial response,
with the effect of CBT more durable. Newer
developments in the treatment of anxiety
disorders are focusing on novel interventions,
Exposure-based CBT aims to help patients recognize and
such as the use of certain medications to
change problematic thoughts and behaviors in real-life
enhance learning during CBT (Otto et al.,
situations. A person with a fear of elevators would be
2010), and transdiagnostic treatments targeting
encouraged to practice exposure exercises that might
core, underlying vulnerabilities (Barlow et al.,
involve approaching or riding elevators to attempt to
2011). As we advance our understanding of
overcome their anxiety. [Photo: tatejohnson]
anxiety and related disorders, so too will our
treatments advance, with the hopes that for the many people suffering from these disorders,
anxiety can once again become something useful and adaptive, rather than something
debilitating.

392

Anxiety and Related Disorders

Outside Resources
American Psychological Association (APA)
http://www.apa.org/topics/anxiety/index.aspx
National Institutes of Mental Health (NIMH)
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/anxiety-disorders/index.shtml
Web: Anxiety and Depression Association of America (ADAA)
http://www.adaa.org/
Web: Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders (CARD)
http://www.bu.edu/card/

Discussion Questions
1. Name and describe the three main vulnerabilities contributing to the development of
anxiety and related disorders. Do you think these disorders could develop out of biological
factors alone? Could these disorders develop out of learning experiences alone?
2. Many of the symptoms in anxiety and related disorders overlap with experiences most
people have. What features differentiate someone with a disorder versus someone
without?
3. What is an “alarm reaction?” If someone experiences an alarm reaction when they are about
to give a speech in front of a room full of people, would you consider this a “true alarm”
or a “false alarm?”
4. Many people are shy. What differentiates someone who is shy from someone with social
anxiety disorder? Do you think shyness should be considered an anxiety disorder?
5. Is anxiety ever helpful? What about worry?

393

Anxiety and Related Disorders

Vocabulary
Agoraphobia
A sort of anxiety disorder distinguished by feelings that a place is uncomfortable or may be
unsafe because it is significantly open or crowded.
Anxiety
A mood state characterized by negative affect, muscle tension, and physical arousal in which
a person apprehensively anticipates future danger or misfortune.
Biological vulnerability
A specific genetic and neurobiological factor that might predispose someone to develop
anxiety disorders.
Conditioned response
A learned reaction following classical conditioning, or the process by which an event that
automatically elicits a response is repeatedly paired with another neutral stimulus
(conditioned stimulus), resulting in the ability of the neutral stimulus to elicit the same
response on its own.
External cues
Stimuli in the outside world that serve as triggers for anxiety or as reminders of past traumatic
events.
Fight or flight response
A biological reaction to alarming stressors that prepares the body to resist or escape a threat.
Flashback
Sudden, intense re-experiencing of a previous event, usually trauma-related.
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
Excessive worry about everyday things that is at a level that is out of proportion to the specific
causes of worry.
Internal bodily or somatic cues
Physical sensations that serve as triggers for anxiety or as reminders of past traumatic events.
Interoceptive avoidance

Anxiety and Related Disorders

394

Avoidance of situations or activities that produce sensations of physical arousal similar to
those occurring during a panic attack or intense fear response.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
A disorder characterized by the desire to engage in certain behaviors excessively or
compulsively in hopes of reducing anxiety. Behaviors include things such as cleaning,
repeatedly opening and closing doors, hoarding, and obsessing over certain thoughts.
Panic disorder (PD)
A condition marked by regular strong panic attacks, and which may include significant levels
of worry about future attacks.
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
A sense of intense fear, triggered by memories of a past traumatic event, that another
traumatic event might occur. PTSD may include feelings of isolation and emotional numbing.
Psychological vulnerabilities
Influences that our early experiences have on how we view the world.
Reinforced response
Following the process of operant conditioning, the strengthening of a response following
either the delivery of a desired consequence (positive reinforcement) or escape from an
aversive consequence.
SAD performance only
Social anxiety disorder which is limited to certain situations that the sufferer perceives as
requiring some type of performance.
Social anxiety disorder (SAD)
A condition marked by acute fear of social situations which lead to worry and diminished day
to day functioning.
Specific vulnerabilities
How our experiences lead us to focus and channel our anxiety.
Thought-action fusion
The tendency to overestimate the relationship between a thought and an action, such that
one mistakenly believes a “bad” thought is the equivalent of a “bad” action.

395

Anxiety and Related Disorders

References
APA. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, D.C.:
American Psychiatric Association.
Aikins, D. E., & Craske, M. G. (2001). Cognitive theories of generalized anxiety disorder.
Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 24(1), 57-74, vi.
Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (2002). Specific phobias. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.), Anxiety and its
disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.
Arrindell, W. A., Eisemann, M., Richter, J., Oei, T. P., Caballo, V. E., van der Ende, J., . . . Cultural
Clinical Psychology Study, Group. (2003). Phobic anxiety in 11 nations. Part I: Dimensional
constancy of the five-factor model. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 41(4), 461-479.
Barlow, D. H. (2002). Anxiety and its disorders: The nature and treatment of anxiety and panic (2nd
ed.). New York: Guilford Press.
Barlow, D. H., & Craske, M. G. (2007). Mastery of your anxiety and panic (4th ed.). New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Barlow, D. H., & Liebowitz, M. R. (1995). Specific and social phobias. In H. I. Kaplan & B. J. Sadock
(Eds.), Comprehensive textbook of psychiatry: VI (pp. 1204-1217). Baltimore, MD: Williams &
Wilkins.
Barlow, D. H., Allen, L.B., & Basden, S. (2007). Pscyhological treatments for panic disorders,
phobias, and generalized anxiety disorder. In P.E. Nathan & J.M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to
treatments that work (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Barlow, D. H., Ellard, K. K., Fairholme, C. P., Farchione, T. J., Boisseau, C. L., Allen, L. B., &
Ehrenreich-May, J. (2011). Unified Protocol for the Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional
Disorders (Workbook). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Barlow, D. H., Gorman, J. M., Shear, M. K., & Woods, S. W. (2000). Cognitive-behavioral therapy,
imipramine, or their combination for panic disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 283(19), 2529-2536.
Bogels, S. M., Alden, L., Beidel, D. C., Clark, L. A., Pine, D. S., Stein, M. B., & Voncken, M. (2010).
Social anxiety disorder: questions and answers for the DSM-V. Depression and Anxiety, 27
(2), 168-189. doi: 10.1002/da.20670
Borkovec, T. D., & Hu, S. (1990). The effect of worry on cardiovascular response to phobic
imagery. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28(1), 69-73.
Borkovec, T. D., Alcaine, O.M., & Behar, E. (2004). Avoidance theory of worry and generalized

Anxiety and Related Disorders

396

anxiety disorder. In R.G. Heimberg, Turk C.L. & D.S. Mennin (Eds.), Generalized Anxiety
Disorder: Advances in research and practice (pp. 77-108). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Borkovec, T. D., Hazlett-Stevens, H., & Diaz, M.L. (1999). The role of positive beliefs about worry
in generalized anxiety disorder and its treatment. Clinical Psychology and Pscyhotherapy, 6,
69-73.
Boyer, P., & Liénard, P. (2008). Ritual behavior in obsessive and normal individuals: Moderating
anxiety and reorganizing the flow of action. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 17
(4), 291-294.
Bradley, B. P., Mogg, K., White, J., Groom, C., & de Bono, J. (1999). Attentional bias for emotional
faces in generalized anxiety disorder. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 38 ( Pt 3), 267-278.
Brown, T.A., White, K.S., & Barlow, D.H. (2005). A psychometric reanalysis of the Albany Panic
and Phobia Questionnaire. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 43, 337-355.
Bruch, M. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (1994). Differences in perceptions of parental and personal
characteristics between generalized and non-generalized social phobics. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 8, 155-168.
Cannon, W.B. (1929). Bodily changes in pain, hunger, fear and rage. Oxford, UK: Appleton.
Chorpita, B. F., & Barlow, D. H. (1998). The development of anxiety: the role of control in the
early environment. Psychological Bulletin, 124(1), 3-21.
Clark, D. M. (1996). Panic disorder: From theory to therapy. In P. Salkovskis (Ed.), Fronteirs of
cognitive therapy(pp. 318-344). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Clark, D. M. (1986). A cognitive approach to panic. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 24(4),
461-470.
Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D. H. (1988). A review of the relationship between panic and avoidance.
Clinical Pscyhology Review, 8, 667-685.
Craske, M. G., & Barlow, D.H. (2008). Panic disorder and agoraphobia. New York, NY: Guilford
Press.
Craske, M. G., Antony, M. M., & Barlow, D. H. (2006). Mastering your fears and phobias: Therapist
guide. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Drabant, E. M., Ramel, W., Edge, M. D., Hyde, L. W., Kuo, J. R., Goldin, P. R., . . . Gross, J. J. (2012).
Neural mechanisms underlying 5-HTTLPR-related sensitivity to acute stress. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 169(4), 397-405. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2011.10111699
Dugas, M. J., Gagnon, F., Ladouceur, R., & Freeston, M. H. (1998). Generalized anxiety disorder:
a preliminary test of a conceptual model. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36(2), 215-226.
Friedman, M. J. (2009). Phenomenology of postraumatic stress disorder and acute stress

Anxiety and Related Disorders

397

disorder. In M. M. Anthony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Anxiety and Related
Disorders. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Fullana, M. A., Mataix-Cols, D., Caspi, A., Harrington, H., Grisham, J. R., Moffitt, T. E., & Poulton,
R. (2009). Obsessions and compulsions in the community: prevalence, interference, helpseeking, developmental stability, and co-occurring psychiatric conditions. American Journal
of Psychiatry, 166(3), 329-336. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2008.08071006
Gelernter, J., & Stein, M. B. (2009). Heritability and genetics of anxiety disorders. In M.M. Antony
& M.B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related disorders. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Gunnar, M. R., & Fisher, P. A. (2006). Bringing basic research on early experience and stress
neurobiology to bear on preventive interventions for neglected and maltreated children.
Developmental Psychopathology, 18(3), 651-677.
Heimberg, R. G., Liebowitz, M. R., Hope, D. A., Schneier, F. R., Holt, C. S., Welkowitz, L. A., . . .
Klein, D. F. (1998). Cognitive behavioral group therapy vs phenelzine therapy for social
phobia: 12-week outcome. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55(12), 1133-1141.
Hofmann, S. G., Alpers, G. W., & Pauli, P. (2009). Phenomenology of panic and phobic disorders.
In M. M. Antony & M. B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford handbook of anxiety and related disorders (pp.
34-46). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Hofmann, S. G., Lehman, C. L., & Barlow, D. H. (1997). How specific are specific phobias? Journal
of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 28(3), 233-240.
Hollon, S. D., DeRubeis, R. J., Shelton, R. C., Amsterdam, J. D., Salomon, R. M., O'Reardon, J.
P., . . . Gallop, R. (2005). Prevention of relapse following cognitive therapy vs medications
in moderate to severe depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(4), 417-422. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.62.4.417
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime
prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(6), 593-602. doi: 10.1001/
archpsyc.62.6.593
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Prevalence,
severity, and comorbidity of 12-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62(6), 617-627. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.617
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Jin, R., Ruscio, A. M., Shear, K., & Walters, E. E. (2006). The epidemiology
of panic attacks, panic disorder, and agoraphobia in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63(4), 415-424. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.63.4.415
Kessler, R. C., Sonnega, A., Bromet, E., Hughes, M., & Nelson, C. B. (1995). Posttraumatic stress

Anxiety and Related Disorders

398

disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey. Archives of General Psychiatry, 52(12),
1048-1060.
Lieb, R., Wittchen, H. U., Hofler, M., Fuetsch, M., Stein, M. B., & Merikangas, K. R. (2000). Parental
psychopathology, parenting styles, and the risk of social phobia in offspring: a prospectivelongitudinal community study. Archives of General Psychiatry, 57(9), 859-866.
McCabe, R. E., Antony, M. M., Summerfeldt, L. J., Liss, A., & Swinson, R. P. (2003). Preliminary
examination of the relationship between anxiety disorders in adults and self-reported
history of teasing or bullying experiences. Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 32(4), 187-193. doi:
10.1080/16506070310005051
Myers, J. K., Weissman, M. M., Tischler, C. E., Holzer, C. E., Orvaschel, H., Anthony, J. C., . . .
Stoltzman, R. (1984). Six-month prevalence of psychiatric disorders in three communities.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 41, 959-967.
Ost, L. G. (1992). Blood and injection phobia: background and cognitive, physiological, and
behavioral variables. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 101(1), 68-74.
Otto, M. W., Tolin, D. F., Simon, N. M., Pearlson, G. D., Basden, S., Meunier, S. A., . . . Pollack, M.
H. (2010). Efficacy of d-cycloserine for enhancing response to cognitive-behavior therapy
for panic disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 67(4), 365-370. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.07.036
Page, A. C., & Martin, N. G. (1998). Testing a genetic structure of blood-injury-injection fears.
American Journal of Medical Genetics, 81(5), 377-384.
Rapee, R. M., & Melville, L. F. (1997). Recall of family factors in social phobia and panic disorder:
comparison of mother and offspring reports. Depress Anxiety, 5(1), 7-11.
Schneier, F. R., Leibowitz, M. R., Beidel, D. C., J., Fyer A., George, M. S., Heimberg, R. G., . . .
Versiani, M. (1996). Social Phobia. In T. A. Widiger, A. J. Frances, H. A. Pincus, R. Ross, M. B.
First & W. W. Davis (Eds.), DSM-IV sourcebook (Vol. 2, pp. 507-548). Washington, D.C.:
American Psychiatric Association.
Shear, M. K., Brown, T. A., Barlow, D. H., Money, R., Sholomskas, D. E., Woods, S. W., . . . Papp,
L. A. (1997). Multicenter collaborative panic disorder severity scale. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 154(11), 1571-1575.
Smoller, J. W., Block, S. R., & Young, M. M. (2009). Genetics of anxiety disorders: the complex
road from DSM to DNA. Depression and Anxiety, 26(11), 965-975. doi: 10.1002/da.20623
Suárez, L, Bennett, S., Goldstein, C., & Barlow, D.H. (2009). Understanding anxiety disorders
from a "triple vulnerabilities" framework. In M.M. Antony & M.B. Stein (Eds.), Oxford
Handbook of anxiety and related disorders (pp. 153-172). New York, NY: Oxford University
Press.
Wells, A. (2002). GAD, metacognition, and mindfulness: An information processing analysis.

Anxiety and Related Disorders

Clinical Psychology Science and Practice, 9, 95-100.

399

23
Mood Disorders
Anda Gershon & Renee Thompson

Everyone feels down or euphoric from time to time, but this is different from having a mood
disorder such as major depressive disorder or bipolar disorder. Mood disorders are extended
periods of depressed, euphoric, or irritable moods that in combination with other symptoms
cause the person significant distress and interfere with his or her daily life, often resulting in
social and occupational difficulties. In this module, we describe major mood disorders,
including their symptom presentations, general prevalence rates, and how and why the rates
of these disorders tend to vary by age, gender, and race. In addition, biological and
environmental risk factors that have been implicated in the development and course of mood
disorders, such as heritability and stressful life events, are reviewed. Finally, we provide an
overview of treatments for mood disorders, covering treatments with demonstrated
effectiveness, as well as new treatment options showing promise.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•

Describe the diagnostic criteria for mood disorders.
Understand age, gender, and ethnic differences in prevalence rates of mood disorders.
Identify common risk factors for mood disorders.
Know effective treatments of mood disorders.

The actress Brooke Shields published a memoir titled Down Came the Rain: My Journey
through Postpartum Depression in which she described her struggles with depression
following the birth of her daughter. Despite the fact that about one in 20 women experience

401

Mood Disorders

depression after the birth of a baby (American Psychiatric Association [APA], 2013), postpartum
depression—recently renamed “perinatal depression”—continues to be veiled by stigma,
owing in part to a widely held expectation that motherhood should be a time of great joy. In
an opinion piece in the New York Times, Shields revealed that entering motherhood was a
profoundly overwhelming experience for her. She vividly describes experiencing a sense of
“doom” and “dread” in response to her newborn baby. Because motherhood is conventionally
thought of as a joyous event and not associated with sadness and hopelessness, responding
to a newborn baby in this way can be shocking to the new mother as well as those close to
her. It may also involve a great deal of shame for the mother, making her reluctant to divulge
her experience to others, including her doctors and family.
Feelings of shame are not unique to
perinatal depression. Stigma applies to
other types of depressive and bipolar
disorders and contributes to people not
always receiving the necessary support
and treatment for these disorders. In fact,
the World Health Organization ranks
both major depressive disorder (MDD)
and bipolar disorder (BD) among the top
10 leading causes of disability worldwide.
Further, MDD and BD carry a high risk of
Perinatal depression following child birth afflicts about 5% of all

suicide. It is estimated that 25%–50% of

mothers. An unfortunate social stigma regarding this form of

people diagnosed with BD will attempt

depression compounds the problem for the women who suffer its
effects. [Photo: Quinn Dombrowski]

suicide at least once in their lifetimes
(Goodwin & Jamison, 2007).

What Are Mood Disorders?
Mood Episodes
Everyone experiences brief periods of sadness, irritability, or euphoria. This is different than
having a mood disorder, such as MDD or BD, which are characterized by a constellation of
symptoms that causes people significant distress or impairs their everyday functioning.
Major Depressive EpisodeA major depressive episode (MDE) refers to symptoms that co-occur
for at least two weeks and cause significant distress or impairment in functioning, such as
interfering with work, school, or relationships. Core symptoms include feeling down or

Mood Disorders

402

depressed or experiencing anhedonia—loss of interest or pleasure in things that one typically
enjoys. According to the fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-5; APA, 2013),
the criteria for an MDE require five or more of the following nine symptoms, including one or
both of the first two symptoms, for most of the day, nearly every day:
1. depressed mood
2. diminished interest or pleasure in almost all activities
3. significant weight loss or gain or an increase or decrease in appetite
4. insomnia or hypersomnia
5. psychomotor agitation or retardation
6. fatigue or loss of energy
7. feeling worthless or excessive or inappropriate guilt
8. diminished ability to concentrate or indecisiveness
9. recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, or a suicide attempt
These symptoms cannot be caused by physiological effects of a substance or a general medical
condition (e.g., hypothyroidism).
Manic or Hypomanic EpisodeThe core criterion for a manic or hypomanic episode is a distinct
period of abnormally and persistently euphoric, expansive, or irritable mood and persistently
increased goal-directed activity or energy. The mood disturbance must be present for one
week or longer in mania (unless hospitalization is required) or four days or longer in
hypomania. Concurrently, at least three of the following symptoms must be present in the
context of euphoric mood (or at least four in the context of irritable mood):
1. inflated self-esteem or grandiosity
2. increased goal-directed activity or psychomotor agitation
3. reduced need for sleep
4. racing thoughts or flight of ideas
5. distractibility
6. increased talkativeness
7. excessive involvement in risky behaviors
Manic episodes are distinguished from hypomanic episodes by their duration and associated

403

Mood Disorders

impairment; whereas manic episodes must last one week and are defined by a significant
impairment in functioning, hypomanic episodes are shorter and not necessarily accompanied
by impairment in functioning.

Mood Disorders
Unipolar Mood DisordersTwo major types of unipolar disorders described by the DSM-5 (APA,
2013) are major depressive disorder and persistent depressive disorder (PDD; dysthymia).
MDD is defined by one or more MDEs, but no history of manic or hypomanic episodes. Criteria
for PDD are feeling depressed most of the day for more days than not, for at least two years.
At least two of the following symptoms are also required to meet criteria for PDD:
1. poor appetite or overeating
2. insomnia or hypersomnia
3. low energy or fatigue
4. low self-esteem
5. poor concentration or difficulty making decisions
6. feelings of hopelessness
Like MDD, these symptoms need to cause significant distress or impairment and cannot be
due to the effects of a substance or a general medical condition. To meet criteria for PDD, a
person cannot be without symptoms for more than two months at a time. PDD has overlapping
symptoms with MDD. If someone
meets criteria for an MDE during a
PDD episode, the person will receive
diagnoses of PDD and MDD.
Bipolar Mood DisordersThree major
types of BDs are described by the
DSM-5 (APA, 2013). Bipolar I Disorder
(BD I), which was previously known as
manic-depression, is characterized by
a single (or recurrent) manic episode.
A depressive episode is not necessary
but

commonly

present

for

the

diagnosis of BD I. Bipolar II Disorder is

Bipolar disorders are characterized by cycles of high energy and

characterized by single (or recurrent)

depression. [Photo: arghon]

Mood Disorders

404

hypomanic episodes and depressive episodes. Another type of BD is cyclothymic disorder,
characterized by numerous and alternating periods of hypomania and depression, lasting at
least two years. To qualify for cyclothymic disorder, the periods of depression cannot meet
full diagnostic criteria for an MDE; the person must experience symptoms at least half the
time with no more than two consecutive symptom-free months; and the symptoms must
cause significant distress or impairment.
It is important to note that the DSM-5
was published in 2013, and findings
based on the updated manual will be
forthcoming. Consequently, the research
presented below was largely based on
a similar, but not identical, conceptualization
of mood disorders drawn from the DSMIV (APA, 2000).

How Common Are Mood
Disorders? Who Develops
Mood Disorders?
Depressive Disorders
In a nationally representative sample,
lifetime prevalence rate for MDD is
16.6% (Kessler, Berglund, Demler, Jin,
Merikangas, & Walters, 2005). This means that nearly one in five Americans will meet the
criteria for MDD during their lifetime. The 12-month prevalence—the proportion of people
who meet criteria for a disorder during a 12-month period—for PDD is approximately 0.5%
(APA, 2013).
Although the onset of MDD can occur at any time throughout the lifespan, the average age
of onset is mid-20s, with the age of onset decreasing with people born more recently (APA,
2000). Prevalence of MDD among older adults is much lower than it is for younger cohorts
(Kessler, Birnbaum, Bromet, Hwang, Sampson, & Shahly, 2010). The duration of MDEs varies
widely. Recovery begins within three months for 40% of people with MDD and within 12
months for 80% (APA, 2013). MDD tends to be a recurrent disorder with about 40%–50% of
those who experience one MDE experiencing a second MDE (Monroe & Harkness, 2011). An

405

Mood Disorders

earlier age of onset predicts a worse course. About 5%–10% of people who experience an
MDE will later experience a manic episode (APA, 2000), thus no longer meeting criteria for
MDD but instead meeting them for BD I. Diagnoses of other disorders across the lifetime are
common for people with MDD: 59% experience an anxiety disorder; 32% experience an
impulse control disorder, and 24% experience a substance use disorder (Kessler, Merikangas,
& Wang, 2007).
Women experience two to three times higher rates of MDD than do men (Nolen-Hoeksema
& Hilt, 2009). This gender difference emerges during puberty (Conley & Rudolph, 2009). Before
puberty, boys exhibit similar or higher prevalence rates of MDD than do girls (Twenge & NolenHoeksema, 2002). MDD is inversely correlated with socioeconomic status (SES), a person’s
economic and social position based on income, education, and occupation. Higher prevalence
rates of MDD are associated with lower SES (Lorant, Deliege, Eaton, Robert, Philippot, &
Ansseau, 2003), particularly for adults over 65 years old (Kessler et al., 2010). Independent
of SES, results from a nationally representative sample found that European Americans had
a higher prevalence rate of MDD than did African Americans and Hispanic Americans, whose
rates were similar (Breslau, Aguilar-Gaxiola, Kendler, Su, Williams, & Kessler, 2006). The course
of MDD for African Americans is often more severe and less often treated than it is for European
Americans, however (Williams et al., 2007). Native Americans have a higher prevalence rate
than do European Americans, African Americans, or Hispanic Americans (Hasin, Goodwin,
Stinson & Grant, 2005). Depression is not limited to industrialized or western cultures; it is
found in all countries that have
been

examined,

although

the

symptom presentation as well as
prevalence

rates

vary

across

cultures (Chentsova-Dutton & Tsai,
2009).

Bipolar Disorders
The lifetime prevalence rate of
bipolar spectrum disorders in the
general U.S. population is estimated
at approximately 4.4%, with BD I
Adolescents experience a higher incidence of bipolar spectrum disorders

constituting about 1% of this rate

than do adults. Making matters worse, those who are diagnosed with BD

(Merikangas et al., 2007). Prevalence

at a younger age seem to suffer symptoms more intensely than those with

estimates, however, are highly

adult onset.

dependent

on

the

diagnostic

406

Mood Disorders

procedures used (e.g., interviews vs. self-report) and whether or not sub-threshold forms of
the disorder are included in the estimate. BD often co-occurs with other psychiatric disorders.
Approximately 65% of people with BD meet diagnostic criteria for at least one additional
psychiatric disorder, most commonly anxiety disorders and substance use disorders (McElroy
et al., 2001). The co-occurrence of BD with other psychiatric disorders is associated with poorer
illness course, including higher rates of suicidality (Leverich et al., 2003). A recent cross-national
study sample of more than 60,000 adults from 11 countries, estimated the worldwide
prevalence of BD at 2.4%, with BD I constituting 0.6% of this rate (Merikangas et al., 2011). In
this study, the prevalence of BD varied somewhat by country. Whereas the United States had
the highest lifetime prevalence (4.4%), India had the lowest (0.1%). Variation in prevalence
rates was not necessarily related to SES, as in the case of Japan, a high-income country with
a very low prevalence rate of BD (0.7%).
With regard to ethnicity, data from studies not confounded by SES or inaccuracies in diagnosis
are limited, but available reports suggest rates of BD among European Americans are similar
to those found among African Americans (Blazer et al., 1985) and Hispanic Americans (Breslau,
Kendler, Su, Gaxiola-Aguilar, & Kessler, 2005). Another large community-based study found
that although prevalence rates of mood disorders were similar across ethnic groups, Hispanic
Americans and African Americans with a mood disorder were more likely to remain
persistently ill than European Americans (Breslau et al., 2005). Compared with European
Americans with BD, African Americans tend to be underdiagnosed for BD (and over-diagnosed
for schizophrenia) (Kilbourne, Haas, Mulsant, Bauer, & Pincus, 2004; Minsky, Vega, Miskimen,
Gara, & Escobar, 2003), and Hispanic Americans with BD have been shown to receive fewer
psychiatric medication prescriptions and specialty treatment visits (Gonzalez et al., 2007).
Misdiagnosis of BD can result in the underutilization of treatment or the utilization of
inappropriate treatment, and thus profoundly impact the course of illness.
As with MDD, adolescence is known to be a significant risk period for BD; mood symptoms
start by adolescence in roughly half of BD cases (Leverich et al., 2007; Perlis et al., 2004).
Longitudinal studies show that those diagnosed with BD prior to adulthood experience a more
pernicious course of illness relative to those with adult onset, including more episode
recurrence, higher rates of suicidality, and profound social, occupational, and economic
repercussions (e.g., Lewinsohn, Seeley, Buckley, & Klein, 2002). The prevalence of BD is
substantially lower in older adults compared with younger adults (1% vs. 4%) (Merikangas et
al., 2007).

What Are Some of the Factors Implicated in the Development and
Course of Mood Disorders?

407

Mood Disorders

Mood disorders are complex disorders resulting from multiple factors. Causal explanations
can be attempted at various levels, including biological and psychosocial levels. Below are
several of the key factors that contribute to onset and course of mood disorders are
highlighted.

Depressive Disorders
Research across family and twin
studies has provided support that
genetic factors are implicated in the
development of MDD. Twin studies
suggest that familial influence on
MDD is mostly due to genetic effects
and that individual-specific environ­
mental

effects

(e.g.,

romantic

relationships) play an important
role, too. By contrast, the contribution
of shared environmental effect by
siblings is negligible (Sullivan, Neale
& Kendler, 2000).

The mode of

inheritance is not fully understood

Romantic relationships can affect mood as in the case of divorce or the
death of a spouse. [Photo: johnm2205]

although no single genetic variation
has been found to increase the risk of MDD significantly. Instead, several genetic variants and
environmental factors most likely contribute to the risk for MDD (Lohoff, 2010).
One environmental stressor that has received much support in relation to MDD is stressful
life events. In particular, severe stressful life events—those that have long-term consequences
and involve loss of a significant relationship (e.g., divorce) or economic stability (e.g.,
unemployment) are strongly related to depression (Brown & Harris, 1989; Monroe et al., 2009).
Stressful life events are more likely to predict the first MDE than subsequent episodes
(Lewinsohn, Allen, Seeley, & Gotlib, 1999). In contrast, minor events may play a larger role in
subsequent episodes than the initial episodes (Monroe & Harkness, 2005).
Depression research has not been limited to examining reactivity to stressful life events. Much
research, particularly brain imagining research using functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI), has centered on examining neural circuitry—the interconnections that allow multiple
brain regions to perceive, generate, and encode information in concert. A meta-analysis of
neuroimaging studies showed that when viewing negative stimuli (e.g., picture of an angry

408

Mood Disorders

face, picture of a car accident), compared with healthy control participants, participants with
MDD have greater activation in brain regions involved in stress response and reduced
activation of brain regions involved in positively motivated behaviors (Hamilton, Etkin, Furman,
Lemus, Johnson, & Gotlib, 2012).
Other environmental factors related to increased risk for MDD include experiencing early
adversity (e.g., childhood abuse or neglect; Widom, DuMont, & Czaja, 2007), chronic stress
(e.g., poverty) and interpersonal factors. For example, marital dissatisfaction predicts
increases in depressive symptoms in both men and women. On the other hand, depressive
symptoms also predict increases in marital dissatisfaction (Whisman & Uebelacker, 2009).
Research has found that people with MDD generate some of their interpersonal stress
(Hammen, 2005). People with MDD whose relatives or spouses can be described as critical
and emotionally overinvolved have higher relapse rates than do those living with people who
are less critical and emotionally overinvolved (Butzlaff & Hooley, 1998).
People’s attributional styles or their general ways of thinking, interpreting, and recalling
information have also been examined in the etiology of MDD (Gotlib & Joormann, 2010).
People with a pessimistic attributional style tend to make internal (versus external), global
(versus specific), and stable (versus unstable) attributions to negative events, serving as a
vulnerability to developing MDD. For example, someone who when he fails an exam thinks
that it was his fault (internal), that he is stupid (global), and that he will always do poorly (stable)
has a pessimistic attribution style. Several influential theories of depression incorporate
attributional styles (Abramson, Metalsky, & Alloy, 1989; Abramson Seligman, & Teasdale, 1978).

Bipolar Disorders
Although there have been important advances in research on the etiology, course, and
treatment of BD, there remains a need to understand the mechanisms that contribute to
episode onset and relapse. There is compelling evidence for biological causes of BD, which is
known to be highly heritable (McGuffin, Rijsdijk, Andrew, Sham, Katz, & Cardno, 2003). It may
be argued that a high rate of heritability demonstrates that BD is fundamentally a biological
phenomenon. However, there is much variability in the course of BD both within a person
across time and across people (Johnson, 2005). The triggers that determine how and when
this genetic vulnerability is expressed are not yet understood; however, there is evidence to
suggest that psychosocial triggers may play an important role in BD risk (e.g., Johnson et al.,
2008; Malkoff-Schwartz et al., 1998).
In addition to the genetic contribution, biological explanations of BD have also focused on

409

Mood Disorders

brain function. Many of the studies using fMRI techniques to characterize BD have focused
on the processing of emotional stimuli based on the idea that BD is fundamentally a disorder
of emotion (APA, 2000). Findings show that regions of the brain thought to be involved in
emotional processing and regulation are activated differently in people with BD relative to
healthy controls (e.g., Altshuler et al., 2008; Hassel et al., 2008; Lennox, Jacob, Calder, Lupson,
& Bullmore, 2004).
However, there is little consensus as to whether a particular brain region becomes more or
less active in response to an emotional stimulus among people with BD compared with healthy
controls. Mixed findings are in part due to samples consisting of participants who are at various
phases of illness at the time of testing (manic, depressed, inter-episode). Sample sizes tend
to be relatively small, making comparisons between subgroups difficult. Additionally, the use
of a standardized stimulus (e.g., facial expression of anger) may not elicit a sufficiently strong
response. Personally engaging stimuli, such as recalling a memory, may be more effective in
inducing strong emotions (Isacowitz, Gershon, Allard, & Johnson, 2013).
Within the psychosocial level, research has focused on the environmental contributors to BD.
A series of studies show that environmental stressors, particularly severe stressors (e.g., loss
of a significant relationship), can adversely impact the course of BD. People with BD have
substantially increased risk of relapse (Ellicott, Hammen, Gitlin, Brown, & Jamison, 1990) and
suffer more depressive symptoms (Johnson, Winett, Meyer, Greenhouse, & Miller, 1999)
following a severe life stressor. Interestingly, positive life events can also adversely impact the
course of BD. People with BD suffer more manic symptoms after life events involving
attainment of a desired goal (Johnson et al., 2008). Such findings suggest that people with BD
may have a hypersensitivity to rewards.
Evidence from the life stress literature has also suggested that people with mood disorders
may have a circadian vulnerability that renders them sensitive to stressors that disrupt their
sleep or rhythms. According to social zeitgeber theory (Ehlers, Frank, & Kupfer, 1988; Frank
et al., 1994), stressors that disrupt sleep, or that disrupt the daily routines that entrain the
biological clock (e.g., meal times) can trigger episode relapse. Consistent with this theory,
studies have shown that life events that involve a disruption in sleep and daily routines, such
as overnight travel, can increase bipolar symptoms in people with BD (Malkoff-Schwartz et
al., 1998).

What Are Some of the Well-Supported Treatments for Mood
Disorders?

410

Mood Disorders

Depressive Disorders
There are many treatment options
available for people with MDD. First,
a number of antidepressant medications
are available, all of which target one
or more of the neurotransmitters
implicated in depression.The earliest
antidepressant medications were
monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs).
MAOIs inhibit monoamine oxidase,
an enzyme involved in deactivating
dopamine,

norepinephrine,

and

serotonin. Although effective in
A number of medications are effective in treating mood disorders.
Meditation, exercise, counseling and other therapies also show
effectiveness for some disorders. [Photo: TheRogue]

treating depression, MAOIs can have
serious side effects. Patients taking
MAOIs may develop dangerously

high blood pressure if they take certain drugs (e.g., antihistamines) or eat foods containing
tyramine, an amino acid commonly found in foods such as aged cheeses, wine, and soy sauce.
Tricyclics, the second-oldest class of antidepressant medications, block the reabsorption of
norepinephrine, serotonin, or dopamine at synapses, resulting in their increased availability.
Tricyclics are most effective for treating vegetative and somatic symptoms of depression. Like
MAOIs, they have serious side effects, the most concerning of which is being cardiotoxic.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs; e.g., Fluoxetine) and serotonin and
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs; e.g., Duloxetine) are the most recently introduced
antidepressant medications. SSRIs, the most commonly prescribed antidepressant
medication, block the reabsorption of serotonin, whereas SNRIs block the reabsorption of
serotonin and norepinephrine. SSRIs and SNRIs have fewer serious side effects than do MAOIs
and tricyclics. In particular, they are less cardiotoxic, less lethal in overdose, and produce fewer
cognitive impairments. They are not, however, without their own side effects, which include
but are not limited to difficulty having orgasms, gastrointestinal issues, and insomnia.
Other biological treatments for people with depression include electroconvulsive therapy
(ECT), transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), and deep brain stimulation. ECT involves
inducing a seizure after a patient takes muscle relaxants and is under general anesthesia. ECT
is viable treatment for patients with severe depression or who show resistance to
antidepressants although the mechanisms through which it works remain unknown. A
common side effect is confusion and memory loss, usually short-term (Schulze-

411

Mood Disorders

Rauschenbach, Harms, Schlaepfer, Maier, Falkai, & Wagner, 2005). Repetitive TMS is a
noninvasive technique administered while a patient is awake. Brief pulsating magnetic fields
are delivered to the cortex, inducing electrical activity. TMS has fewer side effects than ECT
(Schulze-Rauschenbach et al., 2005), and while outcome studies are mixed, there is evidence
that TMS is a promising treatment for patients with MDD who have shown resistance to other
treatments (Rosa et al., 2006). Most recently, deep brain stimulation is being examined as a
treatment option for patients who did not respond to more traditional treatments like those
already described. Deep brain stimulation involves implanting an electrode in the brain. The
electrode is connected to an implanted neurostimulator, which electrically stimulates that
particular brain region. Although there is some evidence of its effectiveness (Mayberg et al.,
2005), additional research is needed.
Several psychosocial treatments have received strong empirical support, meaning that
independent investigations have achieved similarly positive results—a high threshold for
examining treatment outcomes. These treatments include but are not limited to behavior
therapy, cognitive therapy, and interpersonal therapy. Behavior therapies focus on increasing
the frequency and quality of experiences that are pleasant or help the patient achieve mastery.
Cognitive therapies primarily focus on helping patients identify and change distorted
automatic thoughts and assumptions (e.g., Beck, 1967). Cognitive-behavioral therapies are
based on the rationale that thoughts, behaviors, and emotions affect and are affected by each
other. Interpersonal Therapy for Depression focuses largely on improving interpersonal
relationships by targeting problem areas, specifically unresolved grief, interpersonal role
disputes, role transitions, and interpersonal deficits. Finally, there is also some support for
the effectiveness of Short-Term Psychodynamic Therapy for Depression (Leichsenring, 2001).
The short-term treatment focuses on a limited number of important issues, and the therapist
tends to be more actively involved than in more traditional psychodynamic therapy.

Bipolar Disorders
Patients with BD are typically treated with pharmacotherapy. Antidepressants such as SSRIs
and SNRIs are the primary choice of treatment for depression, whereas for BD, lithium is the
first line treatment choice. This is because SSRIs and SNRIs have the potential to induce mania
or hypomania in patients with BD. Lithium acts on several neurotransmitter systems in the
brain through complex mechanisms, including reduction of excitatory (dopamine and
glutamate) neurotransmission, and increasing of inhibitory (GABA) neurotransmission (Lenox
& Hahn, 2000). Lithium has strong efficacy for the treatment of BD (Geddes, Burgess, Hawton,
Jamison, & Goodwin, 2004). However, a number of side effects can make lithium treatment
difficult for patients to tolerate. Side effects include impaired cognitive function (Wingo, Wingo,

412

Mood Disorders

Harvey, & Baldessarini, 2009), as well as physical symptoms such as nausea, tremor, weight
gain, and fatigue (Dunner, 2000). Some of these side effects can improve with continued use;
however, medication noncompliance remains an ongoing concern in the treatment of patients
with BD. Anticonvulsant medications (e.g., carbamazepine, valproate) are also commonly used
to treat patients with BD, either alone or in conjunction with lithium.

There are several adjunctive treatment options for people with BD. Interpersonal and social
rhythm therapy (IPSRT; Frank et al., 1994) is a psychosocial intervention focused on addressing
the mechanism of action posited in social zeitgeber theory to predispose patients who have
BD to relapse, namely sleep disruption. A growing body of literature provides support for the
central role of sleep dysregulation in BD (Harvey, 2008). Consistent with this literature, IPSRT
aims to increase rhythmicity of patients’ lives and encourage vigilance in maintaining a stable
rhythm. The therapist and patient work to develop and maintain a healthy balance of activity
and stimulation such that the patient does not become overly active (e.g., by taking on too
many projects) or inactive (e.g., by avoiding social contact). The efficacy of IPSRT has been
demonstrated in that patients who received this treatment show reduced risk of episode
recurrence and are more likely to remain well (Frank et al., 2005).

Conclusion
Everyone feels down or euphoric from time to time. For some people, these feelings can last
for long periods of time and can also co-occur with other symptoms that, in combination,
interfere with their everyday lives. When people experience an MDE or a manic episode, they
see the world differently. During an MDE, people often feel hopeless about the future, and
may even experience suicidal thoughts. During a manic episode, people often behave in ways
that are risky or place them in danger. They may spend money excessively or have unprotected
sex, often expressing deep shame over these decisions after the episode. MDD and BD cause
significant problems for people at school, at work, and in their relationships and affect people
regardless of gender, age, nationality, race, religion, or sexual orientation. If you or someone
you know is suffering from a mood disorder, it is important to seek help. Effective treatments
are available and continually improving. If you have an interest in mood disorders, there are
many ways to contribute to their understanding, prevention, and treatment, whether by
engaging in research or clinical work.

413

Mood Disorders

Outside Resources
Books: Recommended memoirs include A Memoir of Madness by William Styron (MDD);
Noonday Demon: An Atlas of Depression by Andrew Solomon (MDD); and An Unquiet Mind:
A Memoir of Moods and Madness by Kay Redfield (BD).
Web: Visit the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies to find a list of the
recommended therapists and evidence-based treatments.
http://www.abct.org
Web: Visit the Depression and Bipolar Support Alliance for educational information and
social support options.
http://www.dbsalliance.org/

Discussion Questions
1. What factors might explain the large gender difference in the prevalence rates of MDD?
2. Why might American ethnic minority groups experience more persistent BD than European
Americans?
3. Why might the age of onset for MDD be decreasing over time?
4. Why might overnight travel constitute a potential risk for a person with BD?
5. What are some reasons positive life events may precede the occurrence of manic episode?

414

Mood Disorders

Vocabulary
Anhedonia
Loss of interest or pleasure in activities one previously found enjoyable or rewarding.
Attributional style
The tendency by which a person infers the cause or meaning of behaviors or events.
Chronic stress
Discrete or related problematic events and conditions which persist over time and result in
prolonged activation of the biological and/or psychological stress response (e.g.,
unemployment, ongoing health difficulties, marital discord).
Early adversity
Single or multiple acute or chronic stressful events, which may be biological or psychological
in nature (e.g., poverty, abuse, childhood illness or injury), occurring during childhood and
resulting in a biological and/or psychological stress response.
Grandiosity
Inflated self-esteem or an exaggerated sense of self-importance and self-worth (e.g., believing
one has special powers or superior abilities).
Hypersomnia
Excessive daytime sleepiness, including difficulty staying awake or napping, or prolonged
sleep episodes.
Psychomotor agitation
Increased motor activity associated with restlessness, including physical actions (e.g.,
fidgeting, pacing, feet tapping, handwringing).
Psychomotor retardation
A slowing of physical activities in which routine activities (e.g., eating, brushing teeth) are
performed in an unusually slow manner.
Social zeitgeber
Zeitgeber is German for “time giver.” Social zeitgebers are environmental cues, such as meal
times and interactions with other people, that entrain biological rhythms and thus sleep-wake
cycle regularity.

Mood Disorders

415

Socioeconomic status (SES)
A person’s economic and social position based on income, education, and occupation.
Suicidal ideation
Recurring thoughts about suicide, including considering or planning for suicide, or
preoccupation with suicide.

416

Mood Disorders

References
Abramson, L. Y, Seligman, M. E. P., & Teasdale, J. (1978). Learned helplessness in humans:
Critique

and

reformulation.

Journal

of

Abnormal

Psychology,

87,

49–74.

doi:

10.1037/0021-843X.87.1.49
Abramson, L. Y., Metalsky, G. I., & Alloy, L. B. (1989). Hopelessness depression: A theory-based
subtype of depression. Psychological Review, 96, 358–373. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.56.3.431
Altshuler, L., Bookheimer, S., Townsend, J., Proenza, M. A., Sabb, F., Mintz, J., & Cohen, M. S.
(2008). Regional brain changes in bipolar I depression: A functional magnetic resonance
imaging study. Bipolar Disorders, 10, 708–717. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5618.2008.00617.x
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(4th ed., text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.
Beck, A. T. (1967). Depression: Clinical, experimental, and theoretical aspects. New York, NY:
Hoeber.
Blazer, D., George, L. K., Landerman, R., Pennybacker, M., Melville, M. L., Woodbury, M., et al.
(1985). Psychiatric disorders. A rural/urban comparison. Archives of General Psychiatry, 42,
651–656. PMID: 4015306. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1985.01790300013002
Breslau, J., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Kendler, K. S., Su, M., Williams, D., & Kessler, R. C. (2006).
Specifying race-ethnic differences in risk for psychiatric disorder in a US national sample.
Psychological Medicine, 36, 57–68. doi: 10.1017/S0033291705006161
Breslau, J., Kendler, K. S., Su, M., Gaxiola-Aguilar, S., & Kessler, R. C. (2005). Lifetime risk and
persistence of psychiatric disorders across ethnic groups in the United States. Psychological
Medicine, 35, 317–327. doi: 10.1017/S0033291704003514
Brown, G. W., & Harris, T. O. (1989). Life events and illness. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Butzlaff, R. L., & Hooley, J. M. (1998). Expressed emotion and psychiatric relapse: A metaanalysis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 547–552. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.55.6.547
Chentsova-Dutton, Y. E., & Tsai, J. L. (2009). Understanding depression across cultures. In I. H.
Gotlib & C.L. Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (2nd ed., pp. 363–385). New York, NY:
Guilford Press.
Conley, C. S., & Rudolph, K. D. (2009). The emerging sex difference in adolescent depression:
Interacting contributions of puberty and peer stress. Development and Psychopathology, 21,
593–620. doi: 10.1017/S0954579409000327

Mood Disorders

417

Dunner, D. L. (2000). Optimizing lithium treatment. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 61(S9), 76–81.
Ehlers, C. L., Frank, E., & Kupfer, D. J. (1988). Social zeitgebers and biological rhythms: a unified
approach to understanding the etiology of depression. Archives of General Psychiatry, 45,
948–952. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1988.01800340076012
Ellicott, A., Hammen, C., Gitlin, M., Brown, G., & Jamison, K. (1990). Life events and the course
of bipolar disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 147, 1194–1198.
Frank, E., Kupfer, D. J., Ehlers, C. L., Monk, T., Cornes, C., Carter, S., et al. (1994). Interpersonal
and social rhythm therapy for bipolar disorder: Integrating interpersonal and behavioral
approaches. Behavior Therapy, 17, 143–149.
Frank, E., Kupfer, D. J., Thase, M. E., Mallinger, A. G., Swartz, H. A., Fagiolini, A. M., et al. (2005).
Two-year outcomes for interpersonal and social rhythm therapy in individuals with bipolar
I disorder. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 996–1004. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.62.9.996
Geddes, J. R., Burgess, S., Hawton, K., Jamison, K., & Goodwin, G. M. (2004). Long-term lithium
therapy for bipolar disorder: systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. American Journal of Psychiatry, 161, 217–222. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.161.2.217
Gonzalez, J. M., Perlick, D. A., Miklowitz, D. J., Kaczynski, R., Hernandez, M., Rosenheck, R. A.,
et al. (2007). Factors associated with stigma among caregivers of patients with bipolar
disorder in the STEP-BD study. Psychiatric Services, 58, 41–48. doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.58.1.41
Goodwin, F. K., & Jamison, K. R. (2007). Manic-depressive illness: Bipolar disorders and recurrent
depression. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Gotlib, I. H., & Joormann, J. (2010). Cognition and depression: Current status and future
directions. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 6, 285–312. doi: 10.1146/annurev.
clinpsy.121208.131305
Hamilton, J. P., Etkin, A., Furman, D. F., Lemus, M. G., Johnson, R. F., & Gotlib, I. H. (2012).
Functional neuroimaging of major depressive disorder: A meta-analysis and new
integration of baseline activation and neural response data. American Journal of Psychiatry,
169, 693–703.
Hammen, C. (2005). Stress and depression. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1, 293–319.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.1.102803.143938
Harvey, A. G. (2008). Sleep and Circadian Rhythms in Bipolar Disorder: Seeking synchrony,
harmony and regulation. American Journal of Psychiatry, 165, 820–829. doi: 10.1176/appi.
ajp.2008.08010098
Hasin, D. S., Goodwin, R. D., Sintson, F. S., & Grant, B. F. (2005). Epidemiology of major depressive
disorder: Results from the National Epidemiological Survey on Alcoholism and Related
Conditions. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 1097–1106. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.62.10.1097

Mood Disorders

418

Hassel, S., Almeida, J. R., Kerr, N., Nau, S., Ladouceur, C. D., Fissell, K., et al. (2008). Elevated
striatal and decreased dorsolateral prefrontal cortical activity in response to emotional
stimuli in euthymic bipolar disorder: No associations with psychotropic medication load.
Bipolar Disorders, 10, 916–927. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5618.2008.00641.x
Isaacowitz, D. M., Gershon, A., Allard, E. S., & Johnson, S. L. (2013). Emotion in aging and bipolar
disorder: Similarities, differences and lessons for further research. Emotion Review, 5, 312–
320. doi: 10.1177/1754073912472244
Johnson, S. L. (2005). Mania and dysregulation in goal pursuit: A review. Clinical Psychology
Review, 25, 241–262. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2004.11.002
Johnson, S. L., Cueller, A. K., Ruggero, C., Winett-Perlman, C., Goodnick, P., White, R., et al.
(2008). Life events as predictors of mania and depression in bipolar I disorder. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 117, 268–277. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.117.2.268
Johnson, S. L., Winett, C. A., Meyer, B., Greenhouse, W. J., & Miller, I. (1999). Social support and
the course of bipolar disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 108, 558–566. doi:
10.1037/0021-843X.108.4.558
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jim, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime
prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593–602. doi: 10.1001/
archpsyc.62.6.593
Kessler, R. C., Birnbaum, H., Bromet, E., Hwang, I., Sampson, N., & Shahly, V. (2010). Age
differences in major depression: Results from the National Comorbidity Surveys Replication
(NCS-R). Psychological Medicine, 40, 225–237. doi: 10.1017/S0033291709990213
Kessler, R. C., Merikangas, K. R., & Wang, P. S. (2007). Prevalence, comorbidity, and service
utilization for mood disorders in the United States at the beginning of the 21st century.
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 3, 137–158. doi: 10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.3.022806.091444
Kilbourne, A. M., Haas, G. L., Mulsant, B. H., Bauer, M. S., & Pincus, H. A. (2004) Concurrent
psychiatric diagnoses by age and race among persons with bipolar disorder. Psychiatric
Services, 55, 931–933. doi: 10.1176/appi.ps.55.8.931
Leichsenring, F. (2001). Comparative effects of short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy and
cognitive-behavioral therapy in depression: A meta-analytic approach. Clinical Psychology
Review, 21, 401–419. doi: 10.1016/S0272-7358(99)00057-4
Lennox, B. R., Jacob, R., Calder, A. J., Lupson, V., & Bullmore, E. T. (2004). Behavioural and
neurocognitive responses to sad facial affect are attenuated in patients with mania.
Psychological Medicine, 34, 795–802. doi: 10.1017/S0033291704002557
Lenox, R. H., & Hahn C. G. (2000). Overview of the mechanism of action of lithium in the brain:

Mood Disorders

419

fifty-year update. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 61 (S9), 5–15.
Leverich, G. S., Altshuler, L. L., Frye, M. A., Suppes, T., Keck, P. E. Jr, McElroy, S. L., et al. (2003).
Factors associated with suicide attempts in 648 patients with bipolar disorder in the Stanley
Foundation Bipolar Network. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 64, 506–515. doi: 10.4088/JCP.
v64n0503
Leverich, G. S., Post, R. M., Keck, P. E. Jr, Altshuler, L. L., Frye, M. A., Kupka, R. W., et al. (2007).
The poor prognosis of childhood-onset bipolar disorder. Journal of Pediatrics, 150, 485–490.
PMID: 17452221. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2006.10.070
Lewinsohn, P. M., Allen, N. B., Seeley, J. R., & Gotlib, I. H. (1999). First onset versus recurrence
of depression: differential processes of psychosocial risk. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
108, 483–489. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.108.3.483
Lewinsohn, P. M., Seeley, J. R., Buckley, M. E., & Klein, D. N. (2002). Bipolar disorder in
adolescence and young adulthood. Child & Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America,
11, 461–475. doi: 10.1016/S1056-4993(02)00005-6
Lohoff, F. W. (2010). Overview of genetics of major depressive disorder. Current Psychiatry
Reports, 12, 539–546. doi: 10.1007/s11920-010-0150-6
Lorant, V., Deliege, D., Eaton, W., Robert, A., Philippot, P., & Ansseau, A. (2003). Socioeconomic
inequalities in depression: A meta-analysis. American Journal of Epidemiology, 157, 98–112.
doi: 10.1093/aje/kwf182
Malkoff-Schwartz, S., Frank, E., Anderson, B. P., Sherrill, J. T., Siegel, L., Patterson, D., et al. (1998).
Stressful life events and social rhythm disruption in the onset of manic and depressive
bipolar episodes: a preliminary investigation. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55, 702–707.
doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.55.8.702
Mayberg, H. S., Lozano, A. M., Voon, V., McNeely, H. E., Seminowixz, D., Hamani, C., Schwalb,
J. M., & Kennedy, S. H. (2005). Deep brain stimulation for treatment-resistant depression.
Neuron, 45, 651–660. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2005.02.014
McElroy, S. L., Altshuler, L. L., Suppes, T., Keck, P. E. Jr, Frye, M. A., Denicoff, K. D., et al. (2001).
Axis I psychiatric comorbidity and its relationship to historical illness variables in 288
patients with bipolar disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 420–426. doi: 10.1176/
appi.ajp.158.3.420
McGuffin, P., Rijsdijk, F., Andrew, M., Sham, P., Katz, R., Cardno, A. (2003). The heritability of
bipolar affective disorder and the genetic relationship to unipolar depression. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 60, 497–502. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.60.5.497
Merikangas, K. R., Akiskal, H. S., Angst, J., Greenberg, P. E., Hirschfeld, R. M., Petukhova, M., et
al. (2007). Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of bipolar spectrum disorder in the National

420

Mood Disorders

Comorbidity Survey replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 543–552. doi: 10.1001/
archpsyc.64.5.543
Merikangas, K. R., Jin, R., He, J. P., Kessler, R. C., Lee, S., Sampson, N. A., et al. (2011). Prevalence
and correlates of bipolar spectrum disorder in the world mental health survey initiative.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 68, 241–251. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.12
Minsky, S., Vega, W., Miskimen, T., Gara, M., & Escobar, J. (2003). Diagnostic patterns in Latino,
African American, and European American psychiatric patients. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 60, 637–644. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.60.6.637
Monroe, S. M., & Harkness, K. L. (2011). Recurrence in major depression: A conceptual analysis.
Psychological Review, 118, 655–674. doi: 10.1037/a0025190
Monroe, S. M., & Harkness, K. L. (2005). Life stress, the “Kindling” hypothesis, and the
recurrence of depression: Considerations from a life stress perspective. Psychological
Review, 112, 417–445. doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.112.2.417
Monroe, S.M., Slavich, G.M., Georgiades, K. (2009). The social environment and life stress in
depression. In Gotlib, I.H., Hammen, C.L (Eds.) Handbook of depression (2nd ed., pp. 340-360).
New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Hilt, L. M. (2009). Gender differences in depression. In I. H. Gotlib &
Hammen, C. L. (Eds.), Handbook of depression (2nd ed., pp. 386–404). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.
Perlis, R. H., Miyahara, S., Marangell, L. B., Wisniewski, S. R., Ostacher, M., DelBello, M. P., et al.
(2004). Long-term implications of early onset in bipolar disorder: data from the first 1000
participants in the systematic treatment enhancement program for bipolar disorder (STEPBD). Biological Psychiatry, 55, 875–881. PMID: 15110730. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2007.10.003
Rosa, M. A., Gattaz, W. F., Pascual-Leone, A., Fregni, F., Rosa, M. O., Rumi, D. O., … Marcolin, M.
A. (2006). Comparison of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation and electroconvulsive
therapy in unipolar non-psychotic refractory depression: a randomized, single-blind study.
International

Journal

of

Neuropsychopharmacology,

9,

667–676.

doi:

10.1017/

S1461145706007127
Schulze-Rauschenbach, S. C., Harms, U., Schlaepfer, T. E., Maier, W., Falkai, P., & Wagner, M.
(2005). Distinctive neurocognitive effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation
and electroconvulsive therapy in major depression. British Journal of Psychiatry, 186, 410–
416. doi: 10.1192/bjp.186.5.410
Shields, B. (2005). Down Came the Rain: My Journey Through Postpartum Depression. New York:
Hyperion.
Sullivan, P., Neale, M. C., & Kendler, K. S. (2000). Genetic epidemiology of major depression:

Mood Disorders

421

Review and meta-analysis. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 1552–1562. doi: 10.1176/
appi.ajp.157.10.1552
Twenge, J. M., & Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (2002). Age, gender, race, SES, and birth cohort differences
on the Children’s Depression Inventory: A meta-analysis. Journal of Abnormal Psychology,
111, 578–588. doi: 10.1037/0021-843X.111.4.578
Whisman, M. A., & Uebelacker, L. A. (2009). Prospective associations between marital discord
and depressive symptoms in middle-aged and older adults. Psychology and Aging, 24, 184–
189. doi: 10.1037/a0014759
Widom, C. S., DuMont, K., & Czaja, S. J. (2007). A prospective investigation of major depressive
disorder and comorbidity in abused and neglected children grown up. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 64, 49–56. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.1.49
Williams, D. R., Gonzalez, H. M., Neighbors, H., Nesse, R., Abelson, J. M., Sweetman, J., & Jackson,
J. S. (2007). Prevalence and distribution of major depressive disorder in African Americans,
Caribbean blacks, and non-Hispanic whites: Results from the National Survey of American
Life. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64, 305–315. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.3.305
Wingo, A. P., Wingo, T. S., Harvey, P. D., & Baldessarini, R. J. (2009). Effects of lithium on cognitive
performance: a meta-analysis. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 70, 1588–1597. doi: 10.4088/
JCP.08r04972

24
Dissociative Disorders
Dalena van Heugten - van der Kloet

In psychopathology, dissociation happens when thoughts, feelings, and experiences of our
consciousness and memory do not collaborate well with each other. This module provides
an overview of dissociative disorders, including the definitions of dissociation, its origins and
competing theories, and their relation to traumatic experiences and sleep problems.

Learning Objectives

•

Define the basic terminology and historical origins of dissociative symptoms and
dissociative disorders.

•

Describe the posttraumatic model of dissociation and the sleep-dissociation model, and
the controversies and debate between these competing theories.

•
•

What is the innovative angle of the sleep-dissociation model?
How can the two models be combined into one conceptual scheme?

Introduction
Think about the last time you were daydreaming. Perhaps it was while you were driving or
attending class. Some portion of your attention was on the activity at hand, but most of your
conscious mind was wrapped up in fantasy. Now imagine that you could not control your
daydreams. What if they intruded your waking consciousness unannounced, causing you to
lose track of reality or experience the loss of time. Imagine how difficult it would be for you.
This is similar to what people who suffer from dissociative disorders may experience. Of the

423

Dissociative Disorders

many disorders listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5)
(American Psychiatric Association, 2013), dissociative disorders rank as among the most
puzzling and controversial. Dissociative disorders encompass an array of symptoms ranging
from memory loss (amnesia) for autobiographical events, to changes in identity and the
experience of everyday reality (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).

Is it real?
Let’s start with a little
history. Multiple personality
disorder,

or

dissociative

identity disorder—as it is
known now—used to be a
mere curiosity. This is a
disorder in which people
present with more than one
personality. For example, at
times they might act and
identify as an adult while at
other times they might
identify and behave like a
Dissociative disorders are often exaggerated when portrayed in television and

child. The disorder was

movies; however, there is concrete evidence that people do suffer from these

rarely diagnosed until the

disorders. [Image: Camilo Rueda López]

1980s. That’s when multiple
personality disorder became

an official diagnosis in the DSM-III. From then on, the numbers of “multiples” increased rapidly.
In the 1990s, there were hundreds of people diagnosed with multiple personality in every
major city in the United States (Hacking, 1995). How could this “epidemic” be explained?
One possible explanation might be the media attention that was given to the disorder. It all
started with the book The Three Faces of Eve (Thigpen & Cleckley, 1957). This book, and later
the movie, was one of the first to speak of multiple personality disorder. However, it wasn’t
until years later, when the fictional “as told to” book of Sybil (Schreiber, 1973) became known
worldwide, that the prototype of what it was like to be a “multiple personality” was born. Sybil
tells the story of how a clinician—Cornelia Wilbur—unravels the different personalities of her
patient Sybil during a long course of treatment (over 2,500 office hours!). She was one of the
first to relate multiple personality to childhood sexual abuse. Probably, this relation between
childhood abuse and dissociation has fueled the increase of numbers of multiples from that

424

Dissociative Disorders

time on. It motivated therapists to actively seek for clues of childhood abuse in their
dissociative patients. This suited well within the mindset of the 1980s, as childhood abuse
was a sensitive issue then in psychology as well as in politics (Hacking, 1995).
From then on, many movies and books were made on the subject of multiple personality, and
nowadays, we see patients with dissociative identity disorder as guests visiting the Oprah
Winfrey show, as if they were our modern-day circus acts.

Defining dissociation
The DSM-5 defines dissociation as “a disruption and/or discontinuity in the normal integration
of consciousness, memory, identity, emotion, perception, body representation, motor control
and behavior” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 291). A distinction is often made
between dissociative states and dissociative traits (e.g., Bremner, 2010; Bremner & Brett, 1997).
State dissociation is viewed as a transient symptom, which lasts for a few minutes or hours
(e.g., dissociation during a traumatic event). Trait dissociation is viewed as an integral aspect
of personality. Dissociative symptoms occur in patients but also in the general population,
like you and me. Therefore, dissociation has commonly been conceptualized as ranging on a
continuum, from nonsevere manifestations of daydreaming to more severe disturbances
typical of dissociative disorders (Bernstein & Putnam, 1986). The dissociative disorders
include:
1. Dissociative Amnesia (extensive forgetting typically associated with highly aversive events);
2. Dissociative Fugue (short-lived reversible amnesia for personal identity, involving
unplanned travel or “bewildered wandering.” Dissociative fugue is not viewed as a separate
disorder but is a feature of some, but not all, cases of dissociative amnesia );
3. Depersonalization/Derealization Disorder (feeling as though one is an outside observer of
one’s body); and
4. Dissociative Identity Disorder (DID; experiencing two or more distinct identities that
recurrently take control over one’s behavior) (American Psychiatric Association, 2000).
Although the concept of dissociation lacks a generally accepted definition, the Structural
Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders (SCID-D) (Steinberg, 2001) assesses five
symptom clusters that encompass key features of the dissociative disorders. These clusters
are also found in the DSM-5:
1. depersonalization,

425

Dissociative Disorders

2. derealization,
3. dissociative amnesia,
4. identity confusion, and
5. identity alteration.
Depersonalization refers to a
“feeling of detachment or
estrangement

from

one’s

self.” Imagine that you are
outside of your own body,
looking at yourself from a
distance as though you were
looking at somebody else.
Maybe you can also imagine
what it would be like if you
felt like a robot, deprived of
all feelings. These are examples
of depersonalization. Derea­
Have you ever said a word so many times that it no longer seemed “real” to you?

lization is defined as “an

Derealization is a similar experience, but one that applies to all of reality. [Image:

alteration in the perception

madamepsychosis]

of one’s surroundings so that
a sense of reality of the

external world is lost” (Steinberg, 2001, p. 101). Imagine that the world around you seems as
if you are living in a movie, or looking through a fog. These are examples of derealization.
Dissociative amnesia does not refer to permanent memory loss, similar to the erasure of a
computer disk, but rather to the hypothetical disconnection of memories from conscious
inspection (Steinberg, 2001). Thus, the memory is still there somewhere, but you cannot reach
it. Identity confusion is defined by Steinberg as “… thoughts and feelings of uncertainty and
conflict a person has related to his or her identity” (Steinberg, 2001, p. 101), whereas identity
alteration describes the behavioral acting out of this uncertainty and conflict (Bernstein &
Putnam, 1986).
Dissociative disorders are not as uncommon as you would expect. Several studies in a variety
of patient groups show that dissociative disorders are prevalent in a 4%–29% range (Ross,
Anderson, Fleischer, & Norton, 1991; Sar, Tutkun, Alyanak, Bakim, & Baral, 2000; Tutkun et al.,
1998. For reviews see: Foote, Smolin, Kaplan, Legatt, & Lipschitz, 2006; Spiegel et al., 2011).
Studies generally find a much lower prevalence in the general population, with rates in the
order of 1%–3% (Lee, Kwok, Hunter, Richards, & David, 2010; Rauschenberger & Lynn, 1995;

426

Dissociative Disorders

Sandberg & Lynn, 1992). Importantly, dissociative symptoms are not limited to the dissociative
disorders. Certain diagnostic groups, notably patients with borderline personality disorder,
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), obsessive-compulsive disorder (Rufer, Fricke, Held,
Cremer, & Hand, 2006), and schizophrenia (Allen & Coyne, 1995; Merckelbach, à Campo, Hardy,
& Giesbrecht, 2005; Yu et al., 2010) also display heightened levels of dissociation.

Measuring dissociation
The Dissociative Experiences Scale(DES) (Bernstein & Putnam, 1986; Carlson & Putnam, 2000;
Wright & Loftus, 1999) is the most widely used self-report measure of dissociation. A selfreport measure is a type of psychological test in which a person completes a survey or
questionnaire with or without the help of an investigator. This scale measures dissociation
with items such as (a) “Some people sometimes have the experience of feeling as though they
are standing next to themselves or watching themselves do something, and they actually see
themselves as if they were looking at another person” and (b) “Some people find that
sometimes they are listening to someone talk, and they suddenly realize that they did not
hear part or all of what was said.”
The DES is suitable only as a screening tool. When somebody scores a high level of dissociation
on this scale, this does not necessarily mean that he or she is suffering from a dissociative
disorder. It does, however, give an indication to investigate the symptoms more extensively.
This is usually done with a structured clinical interview, called the Structured Clinical Interview
for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders (Steinberg, 1994), which is performed by an experienced
clinician. With the publication of the new DSM-5 there has been an updated version of this
instrument.

Dissociation and Trauma
The most widely held perspective on dissociative symptoms is that they reflect a defensive
response to highly aversive events, mostly trauma experiences during the childhood years
(Bremner, 2010; Spiegel et al., 2011; Spitzer, Vogel, Barnow, Freyberger, & Grabe, 2007).
One prominent interpretation of the origins of dissociative disorders is that they are the direct
result of exposure to traumatic experiences. We will refer to this interpretation as the
posttraumatic model (PTM). According to the PTM, dissociative symptoms can best be
understood as mental strategies to cope with or avoid the impact of highly aversive
experiences (e.g., Spiegel et al., 2011). In this view, individuals rely on dissociation to escape
from painful memories (Gershuny & Thayer, 1999). Once they have learned to use this

427

Dissociative Disorders

defensive coping mechanism, it can become automatized and habitual, even emerging in
response to minor stressors
(Van der Hart & Horst, 1989).
The idea that dissociation can
serve a defensive function can
be traced back to Pierre Janet
(1899/1973), one of the first
scholars to link dissociation to
psychological trauma (Hacking,
1995).
The PTM casts the clinical
All of us have played games at times to “escape reality.” But for some people with

observation that dissociative

truly traumatic experiences, that reality they escape to can become the reality

disorders are linked to a

they live in. [Image: Janine]

trauma history in straightforward

causal terms, that is, one causes the other (Gershuny & Thayer, 1999). For example, Vermetten
and colleagues (Vermetten, Schmahl, Lindner, Loewenstein, & Bremner, 2006) found that the
DID patients in their study all suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder and concluded that
DID should be conceptualized as an extreme form of early-abuse–related posttraumatic stress
disorder (Vermetten et al., 2006).

Causality and evidence
The empirical evidence that trauma leadsto dissociative symptoms is the subject of intense
debate (Kihlstrom, 2005; Bremner, 2010; Giesbrecht, Lynn, Lilienfeld & Merckelbach, 2010).
Three limitations of the PTM will be described below.
First, the majority of studies reporting links between self-reported trauma and dissociation
are based on cross-sectional designs. This means that the data are collected at one point in
time. When analyzing this type of data, one can only state whether scoring high on a particular
questionnaire (for example, a trauma questionnaire) is indicative of also scoring high on
another questionnaire (for example, the DES). This makes it difficult to state if one thing led
to another, and therefore if the relation between the two is causal. Thus, the data that these
designs yield do not allow for strong causal claims (Merckelbach & Muris, 2002).
Second, whether somebody has experienced a trauma is often established using a
questionnaire that the person completes himself or herself. This is called a self-report
measure. Herein lies the problem. Individuals suffering from dissociative symptoms typically

428

Dissociative Disorders

have high fantasy proneness. This is a character trait to engage in extensive and vivid
fantasizing. The tendency to fantasize a lot may increase the risk of exaggerating or
understating self-reports of traumatic experiences (Merckelbach et al., 2005; Giesbrecht, Lynn,
Lilienfeld, & Merckelbach, 2008).
Third, high dissociative individuals report more cognitive failures than low dissociative
individuals. Cognitive failures are everyday slips and lapses, such as failing to notice signposts
on the road, forgetting appointments, or bumping into people. This can be seen, in part, in
the DSM-5 criteria for DID, in which people may have difficulty recalling everyday events as
well as those that are traumatic. People who frequently make such slips and lapses often
mistrust their own cognitive capacities. They also tend to overvalue the hints and cues provided
by others (Merckelbach, Horselenberg, & Schmidt, 2002; Merckelbach, Muris, Rassin, &
Horselenberg, 2000). This makes them vulnerable to suggestive information, which may
distort self-reports, and thus limits conclusions that can be drawn from studies that rely solely
on self-reports to investigate the trauma-dissociation link (Merckelbach & Jelicic, 2004).
Most important, however, is that the PTM does not tell us how trauma produces dissociative
symptoms. Therefore, workers in the field have searched for other explanations. They
proposed that due to their dreamlike character, dissociative symptoms such as derealization,
depersonalization, and absorption are associated with sleep-related experiences. They further
noted that sleep-related experiences can explain the relation between highly aversive events
and dissociative symptoms (Giesbrecht et al., 2008; Watson, 2001). In the following paragraph,
the relation between dissociation and sleep will be discussed.

Dissociation and Sleep
A little history
Researchers (Watson, 2001) have
proposed that dissociative symptoms,
such as absorption, derealization,
and depersonalization originate
from sleep. This idea is not entirely
Those who have fallen asleep in class have likely experienced those “microdreams” - that moment or two where reality kind of blends in with your

new. In the 19th century, double
consciousness (or dédoublement),

dreams. For a long time, scientists thought dissociative disorders were

the historical precursor of dissociative

simply this confusion of waking and dreaming states.

identity disorder (DID; formerly

[Image: Mislav Marohnić]

known

as

multiple

personality

Dissociative Disorders

429

disorder), was often described as “somnambulism,” which refers to a state of sleepwalking.
Patients suffering from this disorder were referred to as “somnambules” (Hacking, 1995).
Many 19th-century scholars believed that these patients were switching between a “normal
state” and a “somnambulistic state.” Hughlings Jackson, a well-known English neurologist from
this era, viewed dissociation as the uncoupling of normal consciousness, which would result
in what he termed “the dreamy state” (Meares, 1999). Interestingly, a century later, Levitan
(1967) hypothesized that “depersonalization is a compromise state between dreaming and
waking” (p.157). Arlow (1966) observed that the dissociation between the “experiencing self”
and the “observing self” serves as the basis of depersonalized states, emphasizing its
occurrence, especially in dreams. Likewise, Franklin (1990) considered dreamlike thoughts,
the amnesia one usually has for dreams, and the lack of orientation of time, place, and person
during dreams to be strikingly similar to the amnesia DID patients often report for their
traumas. Related, Barrett (1994, 1995) described the similarity between dream characters and
“alter personalities” in DID, with respect to cognitive and sensory abilities, movement, amnesia,
and continuity with normal waking. The many similarities between dreaming states and
dissociative symptoms are also a recurrent theme in the more recent clinical literature (e.g.,
Bob, 2004).

Sleep problems in patients with dissociative disorders
Anecdotal evidence supports the idea that sleep disruptions are linked to dissociation. For
example, in patients with depersonalization, symptoms are worst when they are tired (Simeon
& Abugel, 2006). Interestingly, among participants who report memories of childhood sexual
abuse, experiences of sleep paralysis typically are accompanied by raised levels of dissociative
symptoms (McNally & Clancy, 2005; Abrams, Mulligan, Carleton, & Asmundson, 2008).
Patients with mood disorders, anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, and borderline personality
disorder—conditions with relatively high levels of dissociative symptoms—as a rule exhibit
sleep abnormalities. Recent research points to fairly specific relationships between certain
sleep complaints (e.g., insomnia, nightmares) and certain forms of psychopathology (e.g.,
depression, posttraumatic stress disorder) (Koffel & Watson, 2009).

Studying the relationship between dissociation and sleep
In the general population, both dissociative symptoms and sleep problems are highly
prevalent. For example, 29 percent of American adults report sleep problems (National Sleep
Foundation, 2005). This allows researchers to study the relationship between dissociation and
sleep not only in patients but also in the general population. In a pioneering study, Watson

430

Dissociative Disorders

(2001) showed that dissociative symptoms—measured by the DES—are linked to self-reports
of vivid dreams, nightmares, recurrent dreams, and other unusual sleep phenomena. This
relationship has been studied extensively ever since, leading to three important statements.
First, Watson’s (2001) basic findings have been reproduced time and again. This means that
the same results (namely that dissociation and sleep problems are related) have been found
in lots of different studies, using different groups, and different materials. All lead to the
conclusion that unusual sleep experiences and dissociative symptoms are linked.
Second, the connection between sleep and dissociation is specific. It seems that unusual sleep
phenomena that are difficult to control, including nightmares and waking dreams, are related
to dissociative symptoms, but lucid dreaming—dreams that are controllable—are only weakly
related to dissociative symptoms. For example, dream recall frequency was related to
dissociation (Suszek & Kopera, 2005). Individuals who reported three or more nightmares
over a three-week period showed higher levels of dissociation compared to individuals
reporting two nightmares or less (Levin & Fireman, 2002), and a relation was found between
dream intensity and dissociation (Yu et al., 2010).
Third, the sleep-dissociation link is apparent not only in general population groups—people
such as you and me—but also in patient groups. Accordingly, one group of researchers
reported nightmare disorder in 17 out of 30 DID patients (Agargun et al., 2003). They also
found a 27.5% prevalence of nocturnal dissociative episodes in patients with dissociative
disorders (Agargun et al., 2001). Another study investigated a group of borderline personality
disorder patients and found that 49% of them suffered from nightmare disorder. Moreover,
the patients with nightmare disorder displayed higher levels of dissociation than patients not
suffering from nightmare disorder (Semiz, Basoglu, Ebrinc, & Cetin, 2008). Additionally, Ross
(2011) found that patients suffering from DID reported higher rates of sleepwalking compared
to a group of psychiatric outpatients and a sample from the general population.
To sum up, there seems to be a strong relationship between dissociative symptoms and
unusual sleep experiences that is evident in a range of phenomena, including waking dreams,
nightmares, and sleepwalking.

Inducing and reducing sleep problems
Sleep problems can be induced in healthy participants by keeping them awake for a long
duration of time. This is called sleep deprivation. If dissociative symptoms are fueled by a
labile sleep-wake cycle, then sleep loss would be expected to intensify dissociative symptoms.

431

Dissociative Disorders

Some evidence that this might work was already found in 2001, when soldiers who underwent
a U.S. Army survival training, which included sleep deprivation, showed increases in
dissociative symptoms (Morgan et al., 2001). Other researchers conducted a study that tracked
25 healthy volunteers during one day and one night of sleep loss. They found that dissociative
symptoms increased substantially after one night of sleep loss (Giesbrecht, Smeets, Leppink,
Jelicic, & Merckelbach, 2007).
To further examine the causal link between dissociative experiences and sleep, we (van der
Kloet, Giesbrecht, Lynn, Merckelbach, & de Zutter, 2011) investigated the relationship between
unusual sleep experiences and dissociation in a patient group at a private clinic. They
completed questionnaires upon arrival at the clinic and again when they departed eight weeks
later. During their stay, they followed a strict program designed to improve sleep problems.
And it worked! In most patients, sleep quality was improved after eight weeks. We found a
robust link between sleep experiences and dissociative symptoms and determined that sleep
normalization was accompanied by a reduction in dissociative symptoms.
An exciting interpretation of the link between dissociative symptoms and unusual sleep
phenomena (see also, Watson, 2001) may be this: A disturbed sleep–wake cycle may lead to
dissociative symptoms. However, we should be cautious. Although studies support a causal
arrow leading from sleep disruption to dissociative symptoms, the associations between sleep
and dissociation may be more complex. For example, causal links may be bi-directional, such
that dissociative symptoms may lead to sleep problems and vice versa, and other
psychopathology may interfere in the link between sleep and dissociative symptoms (van der
Kloet et al., 2011).

Implications and Conclusions
The sleep-dissociation model
offers a fresh and exciting
perspective on dissociative
symptoms. This model may
seem remote from the PTM.
However, both models can
be integrated in a single
conceptual scheme in which
No longer are dissociative disorders an untreatable illness. With the new methods

traumatic childhood experiences

developed by researchers, there is hope for curing (or at least improving) those with

may lead to disturbed sleep

this debilitating disorder. [Image: Heidi & Matt]

patterns, which may be the

Dissociative Disorders

432

final common pathway to dissociative symptoms. Accordingly, the sleep-dissociation model
may explain both: (a) how traumatic experiences disrupt the sleep–wake cycle and increase
vulnerability to dissociative symptoms, and (b) why dissociation, trauma, fantasy proneness,
and cognitive failures overlap.
Future studies can also discern what characteristic sleep disruptions in the sleep–wake cycle
are most reliably related to dissociative disorders, and then establish training programs,
including medication regimens, to address these problems. This would constitute an entirely
novel and exciting approach to the treatment of dissociative symptoms.
In closing, the sleep-dissociation model can serve as a framework for studies that address a
wide range of fascinating questions about dissociative symptoms and disorders. We now have
good reason to be confident that research on sleep and dissociative symptoms will inform
psychiatry, clinical science, and psychotherapeutic practice in meaningful ways in the years
to come.

433

Dissociative Disorders

Outside Resources
Book: Schreiber, F. R. (1973). Sybil. Chicago: Regnery.
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 (SCID-5)
https://www.appi.org/products/structured-clinical-interview-for-dsm-5-scid-5
Web: Video depicting the controversy regarding the existence of DID and show you some
debate between clinicians and researchers on the topics of brain imaging, recovered
memories, and false memories. Brain scan—switching on command.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zhM0xp5vXqY
Web: Video depicting the controversy regarding the existence of DID and show you some
debate between clinicians and researchers on the topics of brain imaging, recovered
memories, and false memories. False memory syndrome.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=K4NZ7_Hn-rI
Web: Video depicting the controversy regarding the existence of DID and show you some
debate between clinicians and researchers on the topics of brain imaging, recovered
memories, and false memories. Revisiting the memory wars.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VcFRZsD8DLk
Web: Video illustrating patients suffering from DID. Paula- a stereotype picture of the
disorder, with the patients switching between personality states.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=weLvkZGr9Tw
Web: Video illustrating patients suffering from DID. The woman with seven personalities.
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7TlYGivBGYE

Discussion Questions
1. Why are dissociation and trauma related to each other?
2. How is dissociation related to sleep problems?
3. Are dissociative symptoms induced or merely increased by sleep disturbances?
4. Do you have any ideas regarding treatment possibilities for dissociative disorders?

Dissociative Disorders

5. Does DID really exist?

434

435

Dissociative Disorders

Vocabulary
Amnesia
The loss of memory.
Anxiety disorder
A group of diagnoses in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IVTR) classification system where anxiety is central to the person’s dysfunctioning. Typical
symptoms include excessive rumination, worrying, uneasiness, apprehension, and fear about
future uncertainties either based on real or imagined events. These symptoms may affect
both physical and psychological health. The anxiety disorders are subdivided into panic
disorder, specific phobia, social phobia, posttraumatic stress disorder, obsessive-compulsive
disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder.
Borderline Personality Disorder
This personality disorder is defined by a chronic pattern of instability. This instability manifests
itself in interpersonal relationships, mood, self-image, and behavior that can interfere with
social functioning or work. It may also cause grave emotional distress.
Cognitive failures
Every day slips and lapses, also called absentmindedness.
Consciousness
The quality or state of being aware of an external object or something within oneself. It has
been defined as the ability to experience or to feel, wakefulness, having a sense of selfhood,
and the executive control system of the mind.
Cross-sectional design
Research method that involves observation of all of a population, or a representative subset,
at one specific point in time.
Defensive coping mechanism
An unconscious process, which protects an individual from unacceptable or painful ideas,
impulses, or memories.
DES
Dissociative Experiences Scale.

Dissociative Disorders

436

DID
Dissociative identity disorder, formerly known as multiple personality disorder, is at the far
end of the dissociative disorder spectrum. It is characterized by at least two distinct, and
dissociated personality states. These personality states – or ‘alters’ - alternately control a
person’s behavior. The sufferer therefore experiences significant memory impairment for
important information not explained by ordinary forgetfulness.
Dissociation
A disruption in the usually integrated function of consciousness, memory, identity, or
perception of the environment.
Fantasy proneness
The tendency to extensive fantasizing or daydreaming.
General population
A sample of people representative of the average individual in our society.
Insomnia
A sleep disorder in which there is an inability to fall asleep or to stay asleep as long as desired.
Symptoms also include waking up too early, experience many awakenings during the night,
and not feeling rested during the day.
Lucid dreams
Any dream in which one is aware that one is dreaming.
Mood disorder
A group of diagnoses in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IVTR) classification system where a disturbance in the person’s mood is the primary dysfunction.
Mood disorders include major depressive disorder, bipolar disorder, dysthymic and
cyclothymic disorder.
Nightmares
An unpleasant dream that can cause a strong negative emotional response from the mind,
typically fear or horror, but also despair, anxiety, and great sadness. The dream may contain
situations of danger, discomfort, psychological or physical terror. Sufferers usually awaken
in a state of distress and may be unable to return to sleep for a prolonged period of time.
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
This anxiety disorder is characterized by intrusive thoughts (obsessions), by repetitive

Dissociative Disorders

437

behaviors (compulsions), or both. Obsessions produce uneasiness, fear, or worry.
Compulsions are then aimed at reducing the associated anxiety. Examples of compulsive
behaviors include excessive washing or cleaning; repeated checking; extreme hoarding; and
nervous rituals, such as switching the light on and off a certain number of times when entering
a room. Intrusive thoughts are often sexual, violent, or religious in nature...
Prevalence
The number of cases of a specific disorder present in a given population at a certain time.
PTM
Post-traumatic model of dissociation.
Recurrent dreams
The same dream narrative or dreamscape is experienced over different occasions of sleep.
Schizophrenia
This mental disorder is characterized by a breakdown of thought processes and emotional
responses. Symptoms include auditory hallucinations, paranoid or bizarre delusions, or
disorganized speech and thinking. Sufferers from this disorder experience grave dysfunctions
in their social functioning and in work.
SCID-D
Structural Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders.
S​elf-report measure
A type of psychological test in which a person fills out a survey or questionnaire with or without
the help of an investigator.
Sleep deprivation
A sufficient lack of restorative sleep over a cumulative period so as to cause physical or
psychiatric symptoms and affect routine performances of tasks.
Sleep paralysis
Sleep paralysis occurs when the normal paralysis during REM sleep manifests when falling
asleep or awakening, often accompanied by hallucinations of danger or a malevolent presence
in the room.
Sleep-wake cycle
A daily rhythmic activity cycle, based on 24-hour intervals, that is exhibited by many organisms.

Dissociative Disorders

438

State
When a symptom is acute, or transient, lasting from a few minutes to a few hours.
Trait
When a symptom forms part of the personality or character.
Trauma
An event or situation that causes great distress and disruption, and that creates substantial,
lasting damage to the psychological development of a person.
Vivid dreams
A dream that is very clear, where the individual can remember the dream in great detail.

439

Dissociative Disorders

References
Abrams, M. P., Mulligan, A. D., Carleton, R. N., & Asmundson, G. J. G. (2008). Prevalence and
correlates of sleep paralysis in adults reporting childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Anxiety
Disorders, 22, 1535–1541.
Agargun, M. Y., Kara H., Ozer, O. A., Selvi, Y., Kiran, U., & Ozer, B. (2003). Clinical importance of
nightmare disorder in patients with dissociative disorders. Psychiatry Clinical Neuroscience,
57, 575–579.
Agargun, M. Y., Kara, H., Ozer, O. A., Semiz, U., Selvi, Y., Kiran, U., & Tombul, T. (2001).
Characteristics of patients with nocturnal dissociative disorders. Sleep and Hypnosis, 3, 131–
134.
Allen, J. G., & Coyne, L. (1995). Dissociation and the vulnerability to psychotic experiences.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 183, 615–622.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders:
DSM-5. Washington, D.C: American Psychiatric Association.
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(text revision). Washington, DC: Author.
Arlow, J. (1966). Depersonalization and derealization. In: R. Loewenstein, L. M. Newman, M.
Schur, & A. J. Solnit (Eds.), Psychoanalysis–A general psychology (pp. 456–478). New York, NY:
International Universities Press, Inc.
Barrett, D. (1995). The dream character as a prototype for the multiple personality “alter.”
Dissociation, 8, 61-68.
Barrett, D. (1994). Dreaming as a normal model for multiple personality disorder. In S.J. Lynn
& J.W. Rhue (Eds.), Dissociation: Clinical and theoretical perspectives (pp. 123–135). New York,
NY: Guilford Press.
Bernstein, E., & Putnam, F. W. (1986). Development, reliability, and validity of a dissociation
scale. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 174, 727–735.
Bob, P. (2004). Dissociative processes, multiple personality, and dream functions. American
Journal of Psychotherapy, 58, 139-149.
Bremner, J. D. (2010). Cognitive processes in dissociation: Comment on Giesbrecht et al. (2008).
Psychological Bulletin, 136, 1–6.
Bremner, J. D., & Brett, E. (1997). Trauma-related dissociative states and long-term
psychopathology in posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of Trauma and Stress, 10, 37–49.
Carlson, E. B., & Putnam, F. W. (2000). DES-II. Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 20, 361–366.

Dissociative Disorders

440

Foote, B., Smolin, Y., Kaplan, M., Legatt, M.E., & Lipschitz, D. (2006). Prevalence of dissociative
disorders in psychiatric outpatients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 623–629.
Franklin, J. (1990). Dreamlike thought and dream mode processes in the formation of
personalities in MPD. Dissociation, 3, 70–80.
Gershuny, B. S., & Thayer, J. F. (1999). Relations among psychological trauma, dissociative
phenomena, and trauma-related distress: A review and integration. Clinical Psychology
Review, 19, 631–657.
Giesbrecht, T., Lynn, S. J., Lilienfeld, S. O., & Merckelbach, H. (2010). Cognitive processes, trauma,
and dissociation—Misconceptions and misrepresentations: Reply to Bremner (2010).
Psychological Bulletin, 136, 7–11.
Giesbrecht, T., Lynn, S. J., Lilienfeld, S. O., & Merckelbach, H. (2008). Cognitive processes in
dissociation: An analysis of core theoretical assumptions. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 617–
647.
Giesbrecht, T., Smeets, T., Leppink, J., Jelicic, M., & Merckelbach, H. (2007). Acute dissociation
after 1 night of sleep loss. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 116, 599–606.
Hacking, I. (1995). Rewriting the soul: Multiple personality and the sciences. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Kihlstrom, J. F. (2005). Dissociative disorders. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 10, 1–27.
Koffel, E., & Watson, D. (2009). The two-factor structure of sleep complaints and its relation
to depression and anxiety. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 118, 183–194.
Lee, W. E., Kwok, C. H. T., Hunter, E. C. M., Richards, M. & David, A. S. (2010). Prevalence and
childhood antecedents of depersonalization syndrome in a UK birth cohort. Social
Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, (in press).
Levin, R., & Fireman, G. (2002). Nightmare prevalence, nightmare distress, and self-reported
psychological disturbance. Sleep, 25, 205–212.
Levitan, H. L. (1967). Depersonalization and the dream. The Psychoanalytic Quaterly, 36,
157-171.
McNally, R. J., & Clancy, S. A. (2005). Sleep paralysis in adults reporting repressed, recovered,
or continuous memories of childhood sexual abuse. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 19, 595–
602.
Meares, R. (1999). The contribution of Hughlings Jackson to an understanding of dissociation.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 1850–1855.
Merckelbach, H., & Jelicic, M. (2004). Dissociative symptoms are related to endorsement of
vague trauma items. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 45, 70–75.

Dissociative Disorders

441

Merckelbach, H., & Muris, P. (2002). The causal link between self-reported trauma and
dissociation: A critical review. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 245–254.
Merckelbach, H., Horselenberg, R., & Schmidt, H. (2002). Modeling the connection between
self-reported trauma and dissociation in a student sample. Personality and Individual
Differences, 32, 695–705.
Merckelbach, H., Muris, P., Rassin, E., & Horselenberg, R. (2000). Dissociative experiences and
interrogative suggestibility in college students. Personality and Individual Differences, 29,
1133–1140.
Merckelbach, H., à Campo, J. A., Hardy, S., & Giesbrecht, T. (2005). Dissociation and fantasy
proneness in psychiatric patients: A preliminary study. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 46, 181–
185.
Morgan, C. A., Hazlett, G., Wang, S., Richardson, E. G., Schnurr, P., & Southwick, S. M. (2001).
Symptoms of dissociation in humans experiencing acute, uncontrollable stress: A
prospective investigation. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1239–1247.
National Sleep Foundation. (2005). 2005 Sleep in America poll. Washington DC: Author.
Rauschenberg, S.L., Lynn, S.J. (1995). Fantasy proneness, DSM-III-r axis I psychopathology and
dissociation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 104, 373-380.
Ross, C. A. (2011). Possession experiences in Dissociative Identity Disorder: A preliminary
study. Journal of Trauma & Dissociation, 12, 393–400.
Ross, C. A., Anderson, G., Fleisher, W. P., & Norton, G. R. (1991). The frequency of Multiple
Personality Disorder among psychiatric-inpatients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 148,
1717–1720.
Rufer, M., Fricke, S., Held, D., Cremer, J., & Hand, I. (2006). Dissociation and symptom
dimensions of obsessive-compulsive disorder—A replication study. European Archives of
Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 256, 146–150.
Sandberg, D., & Lynn, S.J. (1992). Dissociative experiences, psychopathology and adjustment,
and child and adolescent maltreatment in female college students. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 101, 717–723.
Sar, V., Tutkun, H., Alyanak, B., Bakim, B., & Baral, I. (2000). Frequency of dissociative disorders
among psychiatric outpatients in Turkey. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 41, 216-222.
Schreiber, F. R. (1973). Sybil. Chicago, IL: Regnery.
Semiz, U. B., Basoglu, C., Ebrinc, S., & Cetin, M. (2008). Nightmare disorder, dream anxiety, and
subjective sleep quality in patients with borderline personality disorder. Psychiatry and
Clinical Neurosciences, 62, 48–55.

Dissociative Disorders

442

Simeon, D., & Abugel, J. (2006). Feeling unreal: Depersonalization disorder and the loss of the self.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Spiegel, D., Loewenstein, R. J., Lewis-Fernandez, R., Sar, V., Simeon, D., Vermetten, E., Cardena,
E., & Dell, P. F. (2011). Dissociative disorders in DSM-5. Depression and Anxiety, 28, 824–852.
Spitzer, C., Vogel, M., Barnow, S., Freyberger, H. J., & Grabe, H. J. (2007). Psychopathology and
alexithymia in severe mental illness: The impact of trauma and posttraumatic stress
symptoms. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 257, 191–196
Steinberg, M. (2001). The stranger in the mirror: Dissociation—the hidden epidemic. New York,
NY: Harper Collins Publishers, Inc.
Steinberg, M. (1994). Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders (SCID-D) (p.
96). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Suszek, H., & Kopera, M. (2005). Altered states of consciousness, dissociation, and dream
recall. Perceptual Motor Skills, 100, 176–178.
Thigpen, C. H., & Cleckley, H. (1957). The Three Faces of Eve. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Tutkun, H., Sar, V., Yargic, L. I., Ozpulat, T., Yanik, M., & Kiziltan, E. (1998). Frequency of
dissociative disorders among psychiatric inpatients in a Turkish university clinic. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 155, 800–805.
Van der Hart, O., & Horst, R. (1989). The dissociation theory of Pierre Janet. Journal of Traumatic
Stress, 2, 2–11.
Van der Kloet, D., Giesbrecht, T., Lynn, S.J., Merckelbach, & de Zutter, A. (2011). Sleep
normalization and decrease in dissociative experiences: Evaluation in an inpatient sample.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, Online First Publication, August 15, 2011. doi: 10.1037/
a0024781
Vermetten, E., Schmahl, C., Lindner, S., Loewenstein, R.J. & Bremner, J.D. (2006). Hippocampal
and amygdalar volumes in dissociative identity disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163,
630–636.
Watson, D. (2001). Dissociations of the night: Individual differences in sleep-related
experiences and their relation to dissociation and schizotypy. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 110, 526–535.
Wright, D. B., & Loftus, E.F. (1999). Measuring dissociation: Comparison of alternative forms
of the Dissociative Experiences Scale. American Journal of Psychology, 112, 497–519.
Yu, J. H., Ross, C. A., Keyes, B. B., Li, Y., Dai, Y. F., Zhang, T. H., Wang, L. L., Fang, Q., & Xiao, Z. P.
(2010). Dissociative disorders among Chinese inpatients diagnosed with schizophrenia.
Journal of Trauma and Dissociation, 11, 358–372.

25
Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders
Deanna M. Barch

Schizophrenia and the other psychotic disorders are some of the most impairing forms of
psychopathology, frequently associated with a profound negative effect on the individual’s
educational, occupational, and social function. Sadly, these disorders often manifest right at
time of the transition from adolescence to adulthood, just as young people should be evolving
into independent young adults. The spectrum of psychotic disorders includes schizophrenia,
schizoaffective disorder, delusional disorder, schizotypal personality disorder, schizophreniform
disorder, brief psychotic disorder, as well as psychosis associated with substance use or
medical conditions. In this module, we summarize the primary clinical features of these
disorders, describe the known cognitive and neurobiological changes associated with
schizophrenia, describe potential risk factors and/or causes for the development of
schizophrenia, and describe currently available treatments for schizophrenia.

Learning Objectives

•
•

Describe the signs and symptoms of schizophrenia and related psychotic disorders.
Describe the most well-replicated cognitive and neurobiological changes associated with
schizophrenia.

•
•

Describe the potential risk factors for the development of schizophrenia.
Describe the controversies associated with “clinical high risk” approaches to identifying
individuals at risk for the development of schizophrenia.

•

Describe the treatments that work for some of the symptoms of schizophrenia.

444

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

The phenomenology of schizophrenia and related psychotic
disorders
Most of you have probably had
the experience of walking down
the street in a city and seeing a
person you thought was acting
oddly. They may have been
dressed in an unusual way,
perhaps disheveled or wearing
an unusual collection of clothes,
makeup, or jewelry that did not
seem to fit any particular group
or subculture. They may have
been talking to themselves or
yelling at someone you could not
see. If you tried to speak to them,
Schizophrenia is sometimes viewed as a "splitting of the self" in which a person

they may have been difficult to

may have false beliefs about reality. [Photo: Johnny Grim]

follow or understand, or they
may have acted paranoid or

started telling a bizarre story about the people who were plotting against them. If so, chances
are that you have encountered an individual with schizophrenia or another type of psychotic
disorder. If you have watched the movie A Beautiful Mind or The Fisher King, you have also seen
a portrayal of someone thought to have schizophrenia. Sadly, a few of the individuals who
have committed some of the recently highly publicized mass murders may have had
schizophrenia, though most people who commit such crimes do not have schizophrenia. It is
also likely that you have met people with schizophrenia without ever knowing it, as they may
suffer in silence or stay isolated to protect themselves from the horrors they see, hear, or
believe are operating in the outside world. As these examples begin to illustrate, psychotic
disorders involve many different types of symptoms, including delusions, hallucinations,
disorganized speech and behavior, abnormal motor behavior (including catatonia), and
negative symptoms such anhedonia/amotivation and blunted affect/reduced speech.
Delusions are false beliefs that are often fixed, hard to change even when the person is
presented with conflicting information, and are often culturally influenced in their content (e.
g., delusions involving Jesus in Judeo-Christian cultures, delusions involving Allah in Muslim
cultures). They can be terrifying for the person, who may remain convinced that they are true
even when loved ones and friends present them with clear information that they cannot be

445

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

true. There are many different types or themes to delusions.
The most common delusions
are persecutory and involve the
belief that individuals or groups
are trying to hurt, harm, or plot
against the person in some way.
These can be people that the
person knows (people at work,
the neighbors, family members),
or more abstract groups (the
FBI, the CIA, aliens, etc.). Other
types

of

delusions

include

grandiose delusions, where the
person believes that they have
some special power or ability (e.
g., I am the new Buddha, I am a
rock star); referential delusions,

Under Surveillance: Abstract groups like the police or the government are
commonly the focus of a schizophrenic's persecutory delusions. [Photo: Tim
Shields BC]

where the person believes that events or objects in the environment have special meaning
for them (e.g., that song on the radio is being played specifically for me); or other types of
delusions where the person may believe that others are controlling their thoughts and actions,
their thoughts are being broadcast aloud, or that others can read their mind (or they can read
other people’s minds).
When you see a person on the street talking to themselves or shouting at other people, they
are experiencing hallucinations. These are perceptual experiences that occur even when
there is no stimulus in the outside world generating the experiences. They can be auditory,
visual, olfactory (smell), gustatory (taste), or somatic (touch). The most common hallucinations
in psychosis (at least in adults) are auditory, and can involve one or more voices talking about
the person, commenting on the person’s behavior, or giving them orders. The content of the
hallucinations is frequently negative (“you are a loser,” “that drawing is stupid,” “you should
go kill yourself”) and can be the voice of someone the person knows or a complete stranger.
Sometimes the voices sound as if they are coming from outside the person’s head. Other
times the voices seem to be coming from inside the person’s head, but are not experienced
the same as the person’s inner thoughts or inner speech.
Talking to someone with schizophrenia is sometimes difficult, as their speech may be difficult
to follow, either because their answers do not clearly flow from your questions, or because
one sentence does not logically follow from another. This is referred to as disorganized

446

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

speech, and it can be present even when the person is writing. Disorganized behavior can
include odd dress, odd makeup (e.g., lipstick outlining a mouth for 1 inch), or unusual rituals
(e.g., repetitive hand gestures). Abnormal motor behavior can include catatonia, which refers
to a variety of behaviors that seem to reflect a reduction in responsiveness to the external
environment. This can include holding unusual postures for long periods of time, failing to
respond to verbal or motor prompts from another person, or excessive and seemingly
purposeless motor activity.
Some

of

symptoms

the
of

most

debilitating

schizophrenia

are

difficult for others to see. These
include what people refer to as
“negative symptoms” or the absence
of certain things we typically expect
most people to have. For example,
anhedonia or amotivation reflect a
lack of apparent interest in or drive to
engage in social or recreational
activities.

These

symptoms

can

manifest as a great amount of time
spent in physical immobility. Importantly,
"Negative symptoms" of schizophrenia like anhedonia - a lack of interest

anhedonia and amotivation do not

in the kinds of social and recreational activities most others enjoy - are

seem to reflect a lack of enjoyment in

not as readily apparent to outside observers as the more obvious
symptoms like disorganized speech or talk of hallucinations. [Photo:
Jessia Hime]

pleasurable

activities

or

events

(Cohen & Minor, 2010; Kring & Moran,
2008; Llerena, Strauss, & Cohen,

2012) but rather a reduced drive or ability to take the steps necessary to obtain the potentially
positive outcomes (Barch & Dowd, 2010). Flat affect and reduced speech (alogia) reflect a
lack of showing emotions through facial expressions, gestures, and speech intonation, as well
as a reduced amount of speech and increased pause frequency and duration.
In many ways, the types of symptoms associated with psychosis are the most difficult for us
to understand, as they may seem far outside the range of our normal experiences. Unlike
depression or anxiety, many of us may not have had experiences that we think of as on the
same continuum as psychosis. However, just like many of the other forms of psychopathology
described in this book, the types of psychotic symptoms that characterize disorders like
schizophrenia are on a continuum with “normal” mental experiences. For example, work by
Jim van Os in the Netherlands has shown that a surprisingly large percentage of the general
population (10%+) experience psychotic-like symptoms, though many fewer have multiple

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

447

experiences and most will not continue to experience these symptoms in the long run (Verdoux
& van Os, 2002). Similarly, work in a general population of adolescents and young adults in
Kenya has also shown that a relatively high percentage of individuals experience one or more
psychotic-like experiences (~19%) at some point in their lives (Mamah et al., 2012; Ndetei et
al., 2012), though again most will not go on to develop a full-blown psychotic disorder.
Schizophrenia is the primary disorder that comes to mind when we discuss “psychotic”
disorders (see Table 1 for diagnostic criteria), though there are a number of other disorders

Table 1: Types of Psychotic Disorders (Simplified from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual - 5th Edition (DSM-5) (APA, 2013)

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

448

that share one or more features with schizophrenia. In the remainder of this module, we will
use the terms “psychosis” and “schizophrenia” somewhat interchangeably, given that most of
the research has focused on schizophrenia. In addition to schizophrenia (see Table 1), other
psychotic disorders include schizophreniform disorder (a briefer version of schizophrenia),
schizoaffective disorder (a mixture of psychosis and depression/mania symptoms), delusional
disorder (the experience of only delusions), and brief psychotic disorder (psychotic symptoms
that last only a few days or weeks).

The Cognitive Neuroscience of Schizophrenia
As described above, when we think of the core symptoms of psychotic disorders such as
schizophrenia, we think of people who hear voices, see visions, and have false beliefs about
reality (i.e., delusions). However, problems in cognitive function are also a critical aspect of
psychotic disorders and of schizophrenia in particular. This emphasis on cognition in
schizophrenia is in part due to the growing body of research suggesting that cognitive
problems in schizophrenia are a major source of disability and loss of functional capacity
(Green, 2006; Nuechterlein et al., 2011). The cognitive deficits that are present in schizophrenia
are widespread and can include problems with episodic memory (the ability to learn and
retrieve new information or episodes in one’s life), working memory (the ability to maintain
information over a short period of time, such as 30 seconds), and other tasks that require one
to “control” or regulate one’s behavior (Barch & Ceaser, 2012; Bora, Yucel, & Pantelis, 2009a;
Fioravanti, Carlone, Vitale, Cinti, & Clare, 2005; Forbes, Carrick, McIntosh, & Lawrie, 2009;
Mesholam-Gately, Giuliano, Goff, Faraone, & Seidman, 2009). Individuals with schizophrenia
also have difficulty with what is referred to as “processing speed” and are frequently slower
than healthy individuals on almost all tasks. Importantly, these cognitive deficits are present
prior to the onset of the illness (Fusar-Poli et al., 2007) and are also present, albeit in a milder
form, in the first-degree relatives of people with schizophrenia (Snitz, Macdonald, & Carter,
2006). This suggests that cognitive impairments in schizophrenia reflect part of the risk for
the development of psychosis, rather than being an outcome of developing psychosis. Further,
people with schizophrenia who have more severe cognitive problems also tend to have more
severe negative symptoms and more disorganized speech and behavior (Barch, Carter, &
Cohen, 2003; Barch et al., 1999; Dominguez Mde, Viechtbauer, Simons, van Os, & Krabbendam,
2009; Ventura, Hellemann, Thames, Koellner, & Nuechterlein, 2009; Ventura, Thames, Wood,
Guzik, & Hellemann, 2010). In addition, people with more cognitive problems have worse
function in everyday life (Bowie et al., 2008; Bowie, Reichenberg, Patterson, Heaton, & Harvey,
2006; Fett et al., 2011).
Some people with schizophrenia also show deficits in what is referred to as social cognition,

449

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

though it is not clear whether such
problems

are

separate

from

the

cognitive problems described above or
the result of them (Hoe, Nakagami,
Green, & Brekke, 2012; Kerr & Neale,
1993; van Hooren et al., 2008). This
includes problems with the recognition
of emotional expressions on the faces
of other individuals (Kohler, Walker,
Martin, Healey, & Moberg, 2010) and
problems inferring the intentions of
other people (theory of mind) (Bora,
Yucel, & Pantelis, 2009b). Individuals
with schizophrenia who have more
problems with social cognition also
Some with schizophrenia suffer from difficulty with social cognition.

tend to have more negative and

They may not be able to detect the meaning of facial expressions or

disorganized symptoms (Ventura, Wood,

other subtle cues that most other people rely on to navigate the social

& Hellemann, 2011), as well as worse

world. [Photo: Wolfgangfoto]

community function (Fett et al., 2011).

The advent of neuroimaging techniques such as structural and functional magnetic resonance
imaging and positron emission tomography opened up the ability to try to understand the
brain mechanisms of the symptoms of schizophrenia as well as the cognitive impairments
found in psychosis. For example, a number of studies have suggested that delusions in
psychosis may be associated with problems in “salience” detection mechanisms supported
by the ventral striatum (Jensen & Kapur, 2009; Jensen et al., 2008; Kapur, 2003; Kapur, Mizrahi,
& Li, 2005; Murray et al., 2008) and the anterior prefrontal cortex (Corlett et al., 2006; Corlett,
Honey, & Fletcher, 2007; Corlett, Murray, et al., 2007a, 2007b). These are regions of the brain
that normally increase their activity when something important (aka “salient”) happens in the
environment. If these brain regions misfire, it may lead individuals with psychosis to mistakenly
attribute importance to irrelevant or unconnected events. Further, there is good evidence
that problems in working memory and cognitive control in schizophrenia are related to
problems in the function of a region of the brain called the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(DLPFC) (Minzenberg, Laird, Thelen, Carter, & Glahn, 2009; Ragland et al., 2009). These
problems include changes in how the DLPFC works when people are doing working-memory
or cognitive-control tasks, and problems with how this brain region is connected to other brain
regions important for working memory and cognitive control, including the posterior parietal
cortex (e.g., Karlsgodt et al., 2008; J. J. Kim et al., 2003; Schlosser et al., 2003), the anterior
cingulate (Repovs & Barch, 2012), and temporal cortex (e.g., Fletcher et al., 1995; Meyer-

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

450

Lindenberg et al., 2001). In terms of understanding episodic memory problems in
schizophrenia, many researchers have focused on medial temporal lobe deficits, with a specific
focus on the hippocampus (e.g., Heckers & Konradi, 2010). This is because there is much data
from humans and animals showing that the hippocampus is important for the creation of
new memories (Squire, 1992). However, it has become increasingly clear that problems with
the DLPFC also make important contributions to episodic memory deficits in schizophrenia
(Ragland et al., 2009), probably because this part of the brain is important for controlling our
use of memory.
In addition to problems with regions such as the DLFPC and medial temporal lobes in
schizophrenia described above, magnitude resonance neuroimaging studies have also
identified changes in cellular architecture, white matter connectivity, and gray matter volume
in a variety of regions that include the prefrontal and temporal cortices (Bora et al., 2011).
People with schizophrenia also show reduced overall brain volume, and reductions in brain
volume as people get older may be larger in those with schizophrenia than in healthy people
(Olabi et al., 2011). Taking antipsychotic medications or taking drugs such as marijuana,
alcohol, and tobacco may cause some of these structural changes. However, these structural
changes are not completely explained by medications or substance use alone. Further, both
functional and structural brain changes are seen, again to a milder degree, in the first-degree
relatives of people with schizophrenia (Boos, Aleman, Cahn, Pol, & Kahn, 2007; Brans et al.,
2008; Fusar-Poli et al., 2007; MacDonald, Thermenos, Barch, & Seidman, 2009). This again
suggests that that neural changes associated with schizophrenia are related to a genetic risk
for this illness.

Risk Factors for Developing Schizophrenia
It is clear that there are important genetic contributions to the likelihood that someone will
develop schizophrenia, with consistent evidence from family, twin, and adoption studies.
(Sullivan, Kendler, & Neale, 2003). However, there is no “schizophrenia gene” and it is likely
that the genetic risk for schizophrenia reflects the summation of many different genes that
each contribute something to the likelihood of developing psychosis (Gottesman & Shields,
1967; Owen, Craddock, & O'Donovan, 2010). Further, schizophrenia is a very heterogeneous
disorder, which means that two different people with “schizophrenia” may each have very
different symptoms (e.g., one has hallucinations and delusions, the other has disorganized
speech and negative symptoms). This makes it even more challenging to identify specific genes
associated with risk for psychosis. Importantly, many studies also now suggest that at least
some of the genes potentially associated with schizophrenia are also associated with other
mental health conditions, including bipolar disorder, depression, and autism (Gejman,

451

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

Sanders, & Kendler, 2011; Y. Kim, Zerwas, Trace, & Sullivan, 2011; Owen et al., 2010; Rutter,
Kim-Cohen, & Maughan, 2006).
There are also a number of environmental
factors that are associated with an increased
risk of developing schizophrenia. For example,
problems during pregnancy such as increased
stress, infection, malnutrition, and/or diabetes
have been associated with increased risk of
schizophrenia. In addition, complications that
occur at the time of birth and which cause
hypoxia (lack of oxygen) are also associated
with

an

increased

risk

for

developing

schizophrenia (M. Cannon, Jones, & Murray,
2002; Miller et al., 2011). Children born to older
fathers are also at a somewhat increased risk
of developing schizophrenia. Further, using
cannabis

increases

risk

for

developing

psychosis, especially if you have other risk
factors (Casadio, Fernandes, Murray, & Di Forti,
2011; Luzi, Morrison, Powell, di Forti, & Murray,
2008). The likelihood of developing schizophrenia
is also higher for kids who grow up in urban
settings (March et al., 2008) and for some

There are a number of biological risk factors for

minority ethnic groups (Bourque, van der Ven,

schizophrenia including older fathers, complications

& Malla, 2011). Both of these factors may reflect

during pregnancy/delivery and a family history of

higher social and environmental stress in these

schizophrenia. [Photo: Mattnic]

settings. Unfortunately, none of these risk
factors is specific enough to be particularly useful in a clinical setting, and most people with
these “risk” factors do not develop schizophrenia. However, together they are beginning to
give us clues as the neurodevelopmental factors that may lead someone to be at an increased
risk for developing this disease.
An important research area on risk for psychosis has been work with individuals who may be
at “clinical high risk.” These are individuals who are showing attenuated (milder) symptoms
of psychosis that have developed recently and who are experiencing some distress or disability
associated with these symptoms. When people with these types of symptoms are followed
over time, about 35% of them develop a psychotic disorder (T. D. Cannon et al., 2008), most
frequently schizophrenia (Fusar-Poli, McGuire, & Borgwardt, 2012). In order to identify these

452

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

individuals, a new category of diagnosis, called “Attenuated Psychotic Syndrome,” was added
to Section III (the section for disorders in need of further study) of the DSM-5 (see Table 1 for
symptoms) (APA, 2013). However, adding this diagnostic category to the DSM-5 created a good
deal of controversy (Batstra & Frances, 2012; Fusar-Poli & Yung, 2012). Many scientists and
clinicians have been worried that including “risk” states in the DSM-5 would create mental
disorders where none exist, that these individuals are often already seeking treatment for
other problems, and that it is not clear that we have good treatments to stop these individuals
from developing to psychosis. However, the counterarguments have been that there is
evidence that individuals with high-risk symptoms develop psychosis at a much higher rate
than individuals with other types of psychiatric symptoms, and that the inclusion of Attenuated
Psychotic Syndrome in Section III will spur important research that might have clinical benefits.
Further, there is some evidence that non-invasive treatments such as omega-3 fatty acids and
intensive family intervention may help reduce the development of full-blown psychosis (Preti
& Cella, 2010) in people who have high-risk symptoms.

Treatment of Schizophrenia
The currently available treatments for schizophrenia leave much to be desired, and the search
for more effective treatments for both the psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia (e.g.,
hallucinations and delusions) as well as cognitive deficits and negative symptoms is a highly
active area of research. The first line of treatment for schizophrenia and other psychotic
disorders is the use of antipsychotic medications. There are two primary types of antipsychotic
medications, referred to as “typical” and “atypical.” The fact that “typical” antipsychotics helped
some symptoms of schizophrenia was discovered serendipitously more than 60 years ago
(Carpenter & Davis, 2012; Lopez-Munoz et al., 2005). These are drugs that all share a common
feature of being a strong block of the D2 type dopamine receptor. Although these drugs can
help reduce hallucinations, delusions, and disorganized speech, they do little to improve
cognitive deficits or negative symptoms and can be associated with distressing motor side
effects. The newer generation of antipsychotics is referred to as “atypical” antipsychotics.
These drugs have more mixed mechanisms of action in terms of the receptor types that they
influence, though most of them also influence D2 receptors. These newer antipsychotics are
not necessarily more helpful for schizophrenia but have fewer motor side effects. However,
many of the atypical antipsychotics are associated with side effects referred to as the
“metabolic syndrome,” which includes weight gain and increased risk for cardiovascular illness,
Type-2 diabetes, and mortality (Lieberman et al., 2005).
The evidence that cognitive deficits also contribute to functional impairment in schizophrenia
has led to an increased search for treatments that might enhance cognitive function in

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

453

schizophrenia. Unfortunately, as of yet, there are no pharmacological treatments that work
consistently to improve cognition in schizophrenia, though many new types of drugs are
currently under exploration. However, there is a type of psychological intervention, referred
to as cognitive remediation, which has shown some evidence of helping cognition and function
in schizophrenia. In particular, a version of this treatment called Cognitive Enhancement
Therapy (CET) has been shown to improve cognition, functional outcome, social cognition,
and to protect against gray matter loss (Eack et al., 2009; Eack, Greenwald, Hogarty, &
Keshavan, 2010; Eack et al., 2010; Eack, Pogue-Geile, Greenwald, Hogarty, & Keshavan, 2010;
Hogarty, Greenwald, & Eack, 2006) in young individuals with schizophrenia. The development
of new treatments such as Cognitive Enhancement Therapy provides some hope that we will
be able to develop new and better approaches to improving the lives of individuals with this
serious mental health condition and potentially even prevent it some day.

454

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

Outside Resources
Book: Ben Behind His Voices: One family’s journal from the chaos of schizophrenia to hope
(2011). Randye Kaye. Rowman and Littlefield.
Book: Conquering Schizophrenia: A father, his son, and a medical breakthrough (1997). Peter
Wyden. Knopf.
Book: Henry’s Demons: Living with schizophrenia, a father and son’s story (2011). Henry and
Patrick Cockburn. Scribner Macmillan.
Book: My Mother’s Keeper: A daughter’s memoir of growing up in the shadow of schizophrenia
(1997). Tara Elgin Holley. William Morrow Co.
Book: Recovered, Not Cured: A journey through schizophrenia (2005). Richard McLean. Allen
and Unwin.
Book: The Center Cannot Hold: My journey through madness (2008). Elyn R. Saks. Hyperion.
Book: The Quiet Room: A journal out of the torment of madness (1996). Lori Schiller. Grand
Central Publishing.
Book: Welcome Silence: My triumph over schizophrenia (2003). Carol North. CSS Publishing.
Web: National Alliance for the Mentally Ill. This is an excellent site for learning more about
advocacy for individuals with major mental illnesses such as schizophrenia.
http://www.nami.org/
Web: National Institute of Mental Health. This website has information on NIMH-funded
schizophrenia research.
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/schizophrenia/index.shtml
Web: Schizophrenia Research Forum. This is an excellent website that contains a broad
array of information about current research on schizophrenia.
http://www.schizophreniaforum.org/

Discussion Questions

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

455

1. Describe the major differences between the major psychotic disorders.
2. How would one be able to tell when an individual is “delusional” versus having nondelusional beliefs that differ from the societal normal? How should cultural and sub-cultural
variation been taken into account when assessing psychotic symptoms?
3. Why are cognitive impairments important to understanding schizophrenia?
4. Why has the inclusion of a new diagnosis (Attenuated Psychotic Syndrome) in Section III
of the DSM-5 created controversy?
5. What are some of the factors associated with increased risk for developing schizophrenia?
If we know whether or not someone has these risk factors, how well can we tell whether
they will develop schizophrenia?
6. What brain changes are most consistent in schizophrenia?
7. Do antipsychotic medications work well for all symptoms of schizophrenia? If not, which
symptoms respond better to antipsychotic medications?
8. Are there any treatments besides antipsychotic medications that help any of the symptoms
of schizophrenia? If so, what are they?

456

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

Vocabulary
Alogia
A reduction in the amount of speech and/or increased pausing before the initiation of speech.
Anhedonia/amotivation
A reduction in the drive or ability to take the steps or engage in actions necessary to obtain
the potentially positive outcome.
Catatonia
Behaviors that seem to reflect a reduction in responsiveness to the external environment.
This can include holding unusual postures for long periods of time, failing to respond to verbal
or motor prompts from another person, or excessive and seemingly purposeless motor
activity.
Delusions
False beliefs that are often fixed, hard to change even in the presence of conflicting
information, and often culturally influenced in their content.
Diagnostic criteria
The specific criteria used to determine whether an individual has a specific type of psychiatric
disorder. Commonly used diagnostic criteria are included in the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorder, 5th Edition (DSM-5) and the Internal Classification of Disorders,
Version 9 (ICD-9).
Disorganized behavior
Behavior or dress that is outside the norm for almost all subcultures. This would include odd
dress, odd makeup (e.g., lipstick outlining a mouth for 1 inch), or unusual rituals (e.g., repetitive
hand gestures).
Disorganized speech
Speech that is difficult to follow, either because answers do not clearly follow questions or
because one sentence does not logically follow from another.
Dopamine
A neurotransmitter in the brain that is thought to play an important role in regulating the
function of other neurotransmitters.

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

457

Episodic memory
The ability to learn and retrieve new information or episodes in one’s life.
Flat affect
A reduction in the display of emotions through facial expressions, gestures, and speech
intonation.
Functional capacity
The ability to engage in self-care (cook, clean, bathe), work, attend school, and/or engage in
social relationships.
Hallucinations
Perceptual experiences that occur even when there is no stimulus in the outside world
generating the experiences. They can be auditory, visual, olfactory (smell), gustatory (taste),
or somatic (touch).
Magnetic resonance imaging
A set of techniques that uses strong magnets to measure either the structure of the brain (e.
g., gray matter and white matter) or how the brain functions when a person performs cognitive
tasks (e.g., working memory or episodic memory) or other types of tasks.
Neurodevelopmental
Processes that influence how the brain develops either in utero or as the child is growing up.
Positron emission tomography
A technique that uses radio-labelled ligands to measure the distribution of different
neurotransmitter receptors in the brain or to measure how much of a certain type of
neurotransmitter is released when a person is given a specific type of drug or does a
particularly cognitive task.
Processing speed
The speed with which an individual can perceive auditory or visual information and respond
to it.
Psychopathology
Illnesses or disorders that involve psychological or psychiatric symptoms.
Working memory
The ability to maintain information over a short period of time, such as 30 seconds or less.

458

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

References
APA. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders, Fifth Edition (5th ed.).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association.
Barch, D. M., & Ceaser, A. E. (2012). Cognition in schizophrenia: Core psychological and neural
mechanisms. Trends in Cognitive Science, 16, 27–34.
Barch, D. M., & Dowd, E. C. (2010). Goal representations and motivational drive in
schizophrenia: The role of prefrontal-striatal interactions. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36(5), 919–
934. doi: sbq068 [pii] 10.1093/schbul/sbq068
Barch, D. M., Carter, C. S., & Cohen, J. D. (2003). Context processing deficit in schizophrenia:
Diagnostic specificity, 4-week course, and relationships to clinical symptoms. Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 112, 132–143.
Barch, D. M., Carter, C. S., Macdonald, A., Sabb, F. W., Noll, D. C., & Cohen, J. D. (1999). Prefrontal
cortex and context processing in medication-naive first-episode patients with
schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 36(1–3), 217–218.
Batstra, L., & Frances, A. (2012). Diagnostic inflation: Causes and a suggested cure. The Journal
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 200(6), 474–479. doi: 10.1097/NMD.0b013e318257c4a2
Boos, H. B., Aleman, A., Cahn, W., Pol, H. H., & Kahn, R. S. (2007). Brain volumes in relatives of
patients with schizophrenia: A meta-analysis. Archives of General Psychiatry, 64(3), 297–304.
Bora, E., Fornito, A., Radua, J., Walterfang, M., Seal, M., Wood, S. J., . . . Pantelis, C. (2011).
Neuroanatomical abnormalities in schizophrenia: A multimodal voxelwise meta-analysis
and meta-regression analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 127(1–3), 46–57. doi: 10.1016/j.
schres.2010.12.020
Bora, E., Yucel, M., & Pantelis, C. (2009a). Cognitive functioning in schizophrenia, schizoaffective
disorder and affective psychoses: Meta-analytic study. The British Journal of Psychiatry: The
Journal of Mental Science, 195(6), 475–482. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.108.055731
Bora, E., Yucel, M., & Pantelis, C. (2009b). Theory of mind impairment in schizophrenia: Metaanalysis. Schizophrenia Research, 109(1–3), 1–9. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.12.020
Bourque, F., van der Ven, E., & Malla, A. (2011). A meta-analysis of the risk for psychotic
disorders among first- and second-generation immigrants. Psychological Medicine, 41(5),
897–910. doi: 10.1017/S0033291710001406
Bowie, C. R., Leung, W. W., Reichenberg, A., McClure, M. M., Patterson, T. L., Heaton, R. K., &
Harvey, P. D. (2008). Predicting schizophrenia patients' real-world behavior with specific
neuropsychological and functional capacity measures. Biological Psychiatry, 63(5), 505–511.
doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.05.022

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

459

Bowie, C. R., Reichenberg, A., Patterson, T. L., Heaton, R. K., & Harvey, P. D. (2006). Determinants
of real-world functional performance in schizophrenia subjects: Correlations with
cognition, functional capacity, and symptoms. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 163(3),
418–425. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.163.3.418
Brans, R. G., van Haren, N. E., van Baal, G. C., Schnack, H. G., Kahn, R. S., & Hulshoff Pol, H. E.
(2008). Heritability of changes in brain volume over time in twin pairs discordant for
schizophrenia. Archives of General Psychiatry, 65(11), 1259–1268. doi: 10.1001/
archpsyc.65.11.1259
Cannon, M., Jones, P. B., & Murray, R. M. (2002). Obstetric complications and schizophrenia:
Historical and meta-analytic review. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 159(7), 1080–1092.
Cannon, T. D., Cadenhead, K., Cornblatt, B., Woods, S. W., Addington, J., Walker, E., . . . Heinssen,
R. (2008). Prediction of psychosis in youth at high clinical risk: A multisite longitudinal study
in North America. Archives of General Psychiatry, 65(1), 28–37.
Carpenter, W. T., Jr., & Davis, J. M. (2012). Another view of the history of antipsychotic drug
discovery and development. Molecular Psychiatry, 17(12), 1168–1173. doi: 10.1038/
mp.2012.121
Casadio, P., Fernandes, C., Murray, R. M., & Di Forti, M. (2011). Cannabis use in young people:
The risk for schizophrenia. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews. doi: S0149-7634(11)00073X [pii] 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.04.007
Cohen, A. S., & Minor, K. S. (2010). Emotional experience in patients with schizophrenia
revisited: Meta-analysis of laboratory studies. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36(1), 143–150. doi:
10.1093/schbul/sbn061
Corlett, P. R., Honey, G. D., & Fletcher, P. C. (2007). From prediction error to psychosis: Ketamine
as a pharmacological model of delusions. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 21(3), 238–252.
doi: 21/3/238 [pii] 10.1177/0269881107077716
Corlett, P. R., Honey, G. D., Aitken, M. R., Dickinson, A., Shanks, D. R., Absalom, A. R., . . . Fletcher,
P. C. (2006). Frontal responses during learning predict vulnerability to the psychotogenic
effects of ketamine: Linking cognition, brain activity, and psychosis. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 63(6), 611–621. doi: 63/6/611 [pii] 10.1001/archpsyc.63.6.611
Corlett, P. R., Murray, G. K., Honey, G. D., Aitken, M. R., Shanks, D. R., Robbins, T. W., . . . Fletcher,
P. C. (2007a). Disrupted prediction-error signal in psychosis: Evidence for an associative
account of delusions. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 130(Pt 9), 2387–2400. doi: 10.1093/brain/
awm173
Corlett, P. R., Murray, G. K., Honey, G. D., Aitken, M. R., Shanks, D. R., Robbins, T. W., . . . Fletcher,
P. C. (2007b). Disrupted prediction-error signal in psychosis: Evidence for an associative

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

460

account of delusions. Brain, 130(Pt 9), 2387–2400. doi: awm173 [pii] 10.1093/brain/awm173
Dominguez Mde, G., Viechtbauer, W., Simons, C. J., van Os, J., & Krabbendam, L. (2009). Are
psychotic psychopathology and neurocognition orthogonal? A systematic review of their
associations. Psychological Bulletin, 135(1), 157–171. doi: 10.1037/a0014415
Eack, S. M., Greenwald, D. P., Hogarty, S. S., & Keshavan, M. S. (2010). One-year durability of
the effects of cognitive enhancement therapy on functional outcome in early schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Research, 120(1–3), 210–216. doi: S0920-9964(10)01222-3 [pii] 10.1016/j.
schres.2010.03.042
Eack, S. M., Greenwald, D. P., Hogarty, S. S., Cooley, S. J., DiBarry, A. L., Montrose, D. M., &
Keshavan, M. S. (2009). Cognitive enhancement therapy for early-course schizophrenia:
effects of a two-year randomized controlled trial. Psychiatr Serv, 60(11), 1468–1476. doi:
60/11/1468 [pii] 10.1176/appi.ps.60.11.1468
Eack, S. M., Hogarty, G. E., Cho, R. Y., Prasad, K. M., Greenwald, D. P., Hogarty, S. S., & Keshavan,
M. S. (2010). Neuroprotective effects of cognitive enhancement therapy against gray matter
loss in early schizophrenia: Results from a 2-year randomized controlled trial. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 67(7), 674–682. doi: 2010.63 [pii] 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.63
Eack, S. M., Pogue-Geile, M. F., Greenwald, D. P., Hogarty, S. S., & Keshavan, M. S. (2010).
Mechanisms of functional improvement in a 2-year trial of cognitive enhancement therapy
for early schizophrenia. Psychological Medicine, 1–9. doi: S0033291710001765 [pii] 10.1017/
S0033291710001765
Fett, A. K., Viechtbauer, W., Dominguez, M. D., Penn, D. L., van Os, J., & Krabbendam, L. (2011).
The relationship between neurocognition and social cognition with functional outcomes
in schizophrenia: A meta-analysis. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 35(3), 573–588.
doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2010.07.001
Fioravanti, M., Carlone, O., Vitale, B., Cinti, M. E., & Clare, L. (2005). A meta-analysis of cognitive
deficits in adults with a diagnosis of schizophrenia. Neuropsychology Review, 15(2), 73–95.
doi: 10.1007/s11065-005-6254-9
Fletcher, P. C., Frith, C. D., Grasby, P. M., Shallice, T., Frackowiak, R. S. J., & Dolan, R. J. (1995).
Brain systems for encoding and retrieval of auditory-verbal memory: An in vivo study in
humans. Brain, 118, 401–416.
Forbes, N. F., Carrick, L. A., McIntosh, A. M., & Lawrie, S. M. (2009). Working memory in
schizophrenia: A meta-analysis. Psychological Medicine, 39(6), 889–905. doi: 10.1017/
S0033291708004558
Fusar-Poli, P., & Yung, A. R. (2012). Should attenuated psychosis syndrome be included in
DSM-5? Lancet, 379(9816), 591–592. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61507-9

461

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

Fusar-Poli, P., McGuire, P., & Borgwardt, S. (2012). Mapping prodromal psychosis: A critical
review of neuroimaging studies. European Psychiatry: The Journal of the Association of
European Psychiatrists, 27(3), 181–191. doi: 10.1016/j.eurpsy.2011.06.006
Fusar-Poli, P., Perez, J., Broome, M., Borgwardt, S., Placentino, A., Caverzasi, E., . . . McGuire, P.
(2007). Neurofunctional correlates of vulnerability to psychosis: A systematic review and
meta-analysis. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 31(4), 465–484.
Gejman, P. V., Sanders, A. R., & Kendler, K. S. (2011). Genetics of schizophrenia: New findings
and challenges. Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics. doi: 10.1146/annurevgenom-082410-101459
Gottesman, I. I., & Shields, J. (1967). A polygenic theory of schizophrenia. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 58(1), 199–205.
Green, M. F. (2006). Cognitive impairment and functional outcome in schizophrenia and bipolar
disorder. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 67 Suppl 9, 3–8; discussion 36–42.
Heckers, S., & Konradi, C. (2010). Hippocampal pathology in schizophrenia. Current Topics in
Behavioral Neurosciences, 4, 529–553.
Hoe, M., Nakagami, E., Green, M. F., & Brekke, J. S. (2012). The causal relationships between
neurocognition, social cognition, and functional outcome over time in schizophrenia: A
latent

difference

score

approach.

Psychological

Medicine,

1–13.

doi:

10.1017/

S0033291712000578
Hogarty, G. E., Greenwald, D. P., & Eack, S. M. (2006). Durability and mechanism of effects of
cognitive enhancement therapy. Psychiatric Services, 57(12), 1751–1757. doi: 57/12/1751
[pii] 10.1176/appi.ps.57.12.1751
Jensen, J., & Kapur, S. (2009). Salience and psychosis: Moving from theory to practise.
Psychological Medicine, 39(2), 197–198. doi: 10.1017/S0033291708003899
Jensen, J., Willeit, M., Zipursky, R. B., Savina, I., Smith, A. J., Menon, M., . . . Kapur, S. (2008). The
formation of abnormal associations in schizophrenia: Neural and behavioral evidence.
Neuropsychopharmacology: Official Publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology,
33(3), 473–479. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301437
Kapur, S. (2003). Psychosis as a state of aberrant salience: A framework linking biology,
phenomenology, and pharmacology in schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160
(1), 13–23.
Kapur, S., Mizrahi, R., & Li, M. (2005). From dopamine to salience to psychosis—linking biology,
pharmacology and phenomenology of psychosis. Schizophrenia Research, 79(1), 59–68. doi:
10.1016/j.schres.2005.01.003
Karlsgodt, K. H., van Erp, T. G., Poldrack, R. A., Bearden, C. E., Nuechterlein, K. H., & Cannon,

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

462

T. D. (2008). Diffusion tensor imaging of the superior longitudinal fasciculus and working
memory in recent-onset schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry, 63(5), 512–518.
Kerr, S. L., & Neale, J. M. (1993). Emotion perception in schizophrenia: Specific deficit or further
evidence of generalized poor performance? Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 102(2), 312–318.
Kim, J. J., Kwon, J. S., Park, H. J., Youn, T., Kang, D. H., Kim, M. S., . . . Lee, M. C. (2003). Functional
disconnection between the prefrontal and parietal cortices during working memory
processing in schizophrenia: A [15O]H20 PET study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 160, 919–
923.
Kim, Y., Zerwas, S., Trace, S. E., & Sullivan, P. F. (2011). Schizophrenia genetics: Where next?
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37(3), 456–463. doi: sbr031 [pii] 10.1093/schbul/sbr031
Kohler, C. G., Walker, J. B., Martin, E. A., Healey, K. M., & Moberg, P. J. (2010). Facial emotion
perception in schizophrenia: A meta-analytic review. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 36(5), 1009–
1019. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbn192
Kring, A. M., & Moran, E. K. (2008). Emotional response deficits in schizophrenia: Insights from
affective science. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 34(5), 819–834.
Lieberman, J. A., Stroup, T. S., McEvoy, J. P., Swartz, M. S., Rosenheck, R. A., Perkins, D. O., . . .
Hsiao, J. K. (2005). Effectiveness of antipsychotic drugs in patients with chronic
schizophrenia. The New England Journal of Medicine, 353(12), 1209–1223. doi: 10.1056/
NEJMoa051688
Llerena, K., Strauss, G. P., & Cohen, A. S. (2012). Looking at the other side of the coin: A metaanalysis of self-reported emotional arousal in people with schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Research, 142(1–3), 65–70. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2012.09.005
Lopez-Munoz, F., Alamo, C., Cuenca, E., Shen, W. W., Clervoy, P., & Rubio, G. (2005). History of
the discovery and clinical introduction of chlorpromazine. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry:
Official Journal of the American Academy of Clinical Psychiatrists, 17(3), 113–135.
Luzi, S., Morrison, P. D., Powell, J., di Forti, M., & Murray, R. M. (2008). What is the mechanism
whereby cannabis use increases risk of psychosis? Neurotoxicity Research, 14(2–3), 105–112.
doi: 10.1007/BF03033802
MacDonald, A. W., III, Thermenos, H. W., Barch, D. M., & Seidman, L. J. (2009). Imaging genetic
liability to schizophrenia: Systematic review of FMRI studies of patients' nonpsychotic
relatives. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 35(6), 1142–1162.
Mamah, D., Mbwayo, A., Mutiso, V., Barch, D. M., Constantino, J. N., Nsofor, T., . . . Ndetei, D.
M. (2012). A survey of psychosis risk symptoms in Kenya. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 53(5),
516–524. doi: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2011.08.003
March, D., Hatch, S. L., Morgan, C., Kirkbride, J. B., Bresnahan, M., Fearon, P., & Susser, E. (2008).

463

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

Psychosis and place. Epidemiologic Reviews, 30, 84–100. doi: 10.1093/epirev/mxn006
Mesholam-Gately, R. I., Giuliano, A. J., Goff, K. P., Faraone, S. V., & Seidman, L. J. (2009).
Neurocognition in first-episode schizophrenia: A meta-analytic review. Neuropsychology, 23
(3), 315–336. doi: 10.1037/a0014708
Meyer-Lindenberg, A., Poline, J., Kohn, P. D., Holt, J. L., Egan, M. F., Weinberger, D. R., & Berman,
K. F. (2001). Evidence for abnormal cortical functional connectivity during working memory
in schizophrenia. American Journal of Psychiatry, 158, 1809–1817.
Miller, B., Messias, E., Miettunen, J., Alaraisanen, A., Jarvelin, M. R., Koponen, H., . . . Kirkpatrick,
B. (2011). Meta-analysis of paternal age and schizophrenia risk in male versus female
offspring. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37(5), 1039–1047. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbq011
Minzenberg, M. J., Laird, A. R., Thelen, S., Carter, C. S., & Glahn, D. C. (2009). Meta-analysis of
41 functional neuroimaging studies of executive function in schizophrenia. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 66(8), 811–822. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.91
Murray, G. K., Corlett, P. R., Clark, L., Pessiglione, M., Blackwell, A. D., Honey, G., . . . Fletcher, P.
C. (2008). Substantia nigra/ventral tegmental reward prediction error disruption in
psychosis. Molecular Psychiatry, 13(3), 267–276.
Ndetei, D. M., Muriungi, S. K., Owoso, A., Mutiso, V. N., Mbwayo, A. W., Khasakhala, L. I., . . .
Mamah, D. (2012). Prevalence and characteristics of psychotic-like experiences in Kenyan
youth. Psychiatry Research, 196(2–3), 235–242. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2011.12.053
Nuechterlein, K. H., Subotnik, K. L., Green, M. F., Ventura, J., Asarnow, R. F., Gitlin, M. J., . . .
Mintz, J. (2011). Neurocognitive predictors of work outcome in recent-onset schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 37 Suppl 2, S33–40. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbr084
Olabi, B., Ellison-Wright, I., McIntosh, A. M., Wood, S. J., Bullmore, E., & Lawrie, S. M. (2011). Are
there progressive brain changes in schizophrenia? A meta-analysis of structural magnetic
resonance

imaging

studies.

Biological

Psychiatry,

70(1),

88–96.

doi:

10.1016/j.

biopsych.2011.01.032
Owen, M. J., Craddock, N., & O'Donovan, M. C. (2010). Suggestion of roles for both common
and rare risk variants in genome-wide studies of schizophrenia. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 67(7), 667–673. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2010.69
Preti, A., & Cella, M. (2010). Randomized-controlled trials in people at ultra high risk of
psychosis: a review of treatment effectiveness. Schizophrenia Research, 123(1), 30–36. doi:
10.1016/j.schres.2010.07.026
Ragland, J. D., Laird, A. R., Ranganath, C., Blumenfeld, R. S., Gonzales, S. M., & Glahn, D. C.
(2009). Prefrontal activation deficits during episodic memory in schizophrenia. American
Journal of Psychiatry, 166(8), 863–874.

Schizophrenia Spectrum Disorders

464

Repovs, G., & Barch, D. M. (2012). Working memory related brain network connectivity in
individuals with schizophrenia and their siblings. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 137.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00137
Rutter, M., Kim-Cohen, J., & Maughan, B. (2006). Continuities and discontinuities in
psychopathology between childhood and adult life. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, and Aallied Disciplines, 47(3–4), 276–295. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7610.2006.01614.x
Schlosser, R., Gesierich, T., Kaufmann, B., Vucurevic, G., Hunsche, S., Gawehn, J., & Stoeter, P.
(2003). Altered effective connectivity during working memory performance in
schizophrenia: A study with fMRI and structural equation modeling. Neuroimage, 19(3), 751–
763.
Snitz, B. E., Macdonald, A. W., 3rd, & Carter, C. S. (2006). Cognitive deficits in unaffected firstdegree relatives of schizophrenia patients: A meta-analytic review of putative
endophenotypes. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 32(1), 179–194.
Squire, L.R. (1992). Memory and the hippocampus: A synthesis from findings with rats,
monkeys, and humans. Psychological Review, 99, 195–231.
Sullivan, P. F., Kendler, K. S., & Neale, M. C. (2003). Schizophrenia as a complex trait: Evidence
from a meta-analysis of twin studies. Archives of General Psychiatry, 60(12), 1187–1192. doi:
10.1001/archpsyc.60.12.1187
Ventura, J., Hellemann, G. S., Thames, A. D., Koellner, V., & Nuechterlein, K. H. (2009). Symptoms
as mediators of the relationship between neurocognition and functional outcome in
schizophrenia: a meta-analysis. Schizophrenia Research, 113(2–3), 189–199. doi: 10.1016/j.
schres.2009.03.035
Ventura, J., Thames, A. D., Wood, R. C., Guzik, L. H., & Hellemann, G. S. (2010). Disorganization
and reality distortion in schizophrenia: a meta-analysis of the relationship between positive
symptoms and neurocognitive deficits. Schizophrenia Research, 121(1–3), 1–14. doi:
10.1016/j.schres.2010.05.033
Ventura, J., Wood, R. C., & Hellemann, G. S. (2011). Symptom domains and neurocognitive
functioning can help differentiate social cognitive processes in schizophrenia: A metaanalysis. Schizophrenia Bulletin. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbr067
Verdoux, H., & van Os, J. (2002). Psychotic symptoms in non-clinical populations and the
continuum of psychosis. Schizophrenia Research, 54(1–2), 59–65.
van Hooren, S., Versmissen, D., Janssen, I., Myin-Germeys, I., a Campo, J., Mengelers, R., . . .
Krabbendam, L. (2008). Social cognition and neurocognition as independent domains in
psychosis. Schizophrenia Research, 103(1–3), 257–265. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.02.022

Chapter 14: Therapy

26
Therapeutic Orientations
Hannah Boettcher, Stefan G. Hofmann & Q. Jade Wu

In the past century, a number of psychotherapeutic orientations have gained popularity for
treating mental illnesses. This module outlines some of the best-known therapeutic
approaches and explains the history, techniques, advantages, and disadvantages associated
with each. The most effective modern approach is cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT). We also
discuss

psychoanalytic

therapy,

person-centered

therapy,

and

mindfulness-based

approaches. Drug therapy and emerging new treatment strategies will also be briefly explored.

Learning Objectives

•
•

Become familiar with the most widely practiced approaches to psychotherapy.
For each therapeutic approach, consider: history, goals, key techniques, and empirical
support.

•

Consider the impact of emerging treatment strategies in mental health.

Introduction
The history of mental illness can be traced as far back as 1500 BCE, when the ancient Egyptians
noted cases of “distorted concentration” and “emotional distress in the heart or mind” (Nasser,
1987). Today, nearly half of all Americans will experience mental illness at some point in their
lives, and mental health problems affect more than one-quarter of the population in any given
year (Kessler et al., 2005). Fortunately, a range of psychotherapies exist to treat mental
illnesses. This module provides an overview of some of the best-known schools of thought in

467

Therapeutic Orientations

psychotherapy.
Currently, the most effective approach is
called Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT);
however,

other

approaches,

such

as

psychoanalytic therapy, person-centered
therapy, and mindfulness-based therapies
are also used—though the effectiveness of
these treatments aren’t as clear as they are
for CBT. Throughout this module, note the
advantages and disadvantages of each
approach, paying special attention to their
support by empirical research.
CBT is an approach to treating mental illness that involves work
with a therapist as well as homework assignments between
sessions. It has proven to be very effective for virtually all
psychiatric illnesses.

[Image:

Research Report Series:

Psychoanalysis and
Psychodynamic Therapy

Therapeutic Community. Wikimedia Commons]

The earliest organized therapy for mental disorders was psychoanalysis. Made famous in the
early 20th century by one of the best-known clinicians of all time, Sigmund Freud, this approach
stresses that mental health problems are rooted in unconscious conflicts and desires. In order
to resolve the mental illness, then, these unconscious struggles must be identified and
addressed. Psychoanalysis often does this through exploring one’s early childhood
experiences that may have continuing repercussions on one’s mental health in the present
and later in life. Psychoanalysis is an intensive, long-term approach in which patients and
therapists may meet multiple times per week, often for many years.

History of Psychoanalytic Therapy
Freud initially suggested that mental health problems arise from efforts to push inappropriate
sexual urges out of conscious awareness (Freud, 1895/1955). Later, Freud suggested more
generally that psychiatric problems are the result of tension between different parts of the
mind: the id, the superego, and the ego. In Freud’s structural model, the id represents pleasuredriven unconscious urges (e.g., our animalistic desires for sex and aggression), while the
superego is the semi-conscious part of the mind where morals and societal judgment are
internalized (e.g., the part of you that automatically knows how society expects you to behave).
The ego—also partly conscious—mediates between the id and superego. Freud believed that
bringing unconscious struggles like these (where the id demands one thing and the superego

468

Therapeutic Orientations

another) into conscious awareness would relieve the stress of the conflict (Freud, 1920/1955)
—which became the goal of psychoanalytic therapy.
Although psychoanalysis is still practiced today, it has largely been replaced by the more
broadly defined psychodynamic therapy. This latter approach has the same basic tenets as
psychoanalysis, but is briefer, makes more of an effort to put clients in their social and
interpersonal context, and focuses more on relieving psychological distress than on changing
the person.

Techniques in Psychoanalysis
Psychoanalysts and psychodynamic therapists
employ several techniques to explore patients’
unconscious mind. One common technique is
called

free association. Here, the patient

shares any and all thoughts that come to mind,
without attempting to organize or censor
them in any way. For example, if you took a
pen and paper and just wrote down whatever
came into your head, letting one thought lead
to the next without allowing conscious
criticism to shape what you were writing, you
would be doing free association. The analyst
then uses his or her expertise to discern
patterns or underlying meaning in the
patient’s thoughts.
Sometimes, free association exercises are
applied specifically to childhood recollections.
Building on the work of Josef Breuer and others, Sigmund

That is, psychoanalysts believe a person’s

Freud developed psychotherapeutic theories and techniques

childhood relationships with caregivers often

that

determine the way that person relates to

became

widely

known

as

psychoanalysis

psychoanalytic therapy. [Photo: Psychology Pictures]

or

others,

and

predicts

later

psychiatric

difficulties. Thus, exploring these childhood
memories, through free association or otherwise, can provide therapists with insights into a
patient’s psychological makeup.
Because we don’t always have the ability to consciously recall these deep memories,

Therapeutic Orientations

469

psychoanalysts also discuss their patients’ dreams. In Freudian theory, dreams contain not
only manifest (or literal) content, but also latent (or symbolic) content (Freud, 1900; 1955). For
example, someone may have a dream that his/her teeth are falling out—the manifest or actual
content of the dream. However, dreaming that one’s teeth are falling out could be a reflection
of the person’s unconscious concern about losing his or her physical attractiveness—the latent
or metaphorical content of the dream. It is the therapist’s job to help discover the latent
content underlying one’s manifest content through dream analysis.
In psychoanalytic and psychodynamic therapy, the therapist plays a receptive role—
interpreting the patient’s thoughts and behavior based on clinical experience and
psychoanalytic theory. For example, if during therapy a patient begins to express unjustified
anger toward the therapist, the therapist may recognize this as an act of transference. That is,
the patient may be displacing feelings for people in his or her life (e.g., anger toward a parent)
onto the therapist. At the same time, though, the therapist has to be aware of his or her own
thoughts and emotions, for, in a related process, called countertransference, the therapist may
displace his/her own emotions onto the patient.
The key to psychoanalytic theory is to have patients uncover the buried, conflicting content
of their mind, and therapists use various tactics—such as seating patients to face away from
them—to promote a freer self-disclosure. And, as a therapist spends more time with a patient,
the therapist can come to view his or her relationship with the patient as another reflection
of the patient’s mind.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Psychoanalytic Therapy
Psychoanalysis was once the only type of psychotherapy available, but presently the number
of therapists practicing this approach is decreasing around the world. Psychoanalysis is not
appropriate for some types of patients, including those with severe psychopathology or
mental retardation. Further, psychoanalysis is often expensive because treatment usually
lasts many years. Still, some patients and therapists find the prolonged and detailed analysis
very rewarding.
Perhaps the greatest disadvantage of psychoanalysis and related approaches is the lack of
empirical support for their effectiveness. The limited research that has been conducted on
these treatments suggests that they do not reliably lead to better mental health outcomes (e.
g., Driessen et al., 2010). And, although there are some reviews that seem to indicate that
long-term psychodynamic therapies might be beneficial (e.g., Leichsenring & Rabung, 2008),
other researchers have questioned the validity of these reviews. Nevertheless, psychoanalytic

470

Therapeutic Orientations

theory was history’s first attempt at formal treatment of mental illness, setting the stage for
the more modern approaches used today.

Humanistic and Person-Centered Therapy
One of the next developments in therapy for mental illness, which arrived in the mid-20th
century, is called humanistic or person-centered therapy (PCT). Here, the belief is that mental
health problems result from an inconsistency between patients’ behavior and their true
personal identity. Thus, the goal of PCT is to create conditions under which patients can
discover their self-worth, feel comfortable exploring their own identity, and alter their behavior
to better reflect this identity.

History of Person-Centered Therapy
PCT was developed by a psychologist named Carl Rogers,
during a time of significant growth in the movements of
humanistic

theory

and

human

potential.

These

perspectives were based on the idea that humans have
an inherent drive to realize and express their own
capabilities and creativity. Rogers, in particular, believed
that all people have the potential to change and improve,
and that the role of therapists is to foster selfunderstanding in an environment where adaptive
change is most likely to occur (Rogers, 1951). Rogers
suggested that the therapist and patient must engage in
a genuine, egalitarian relationship in which the therapist
is nonjudgmental and empathetic. In PCT, the patient
should experience both a vulnerability to anxiety, which
Carl Rogers, the father of Person Centered
Therapy (CPT). [Image: Didius at nl.wikipedia

motivates the desire to change, and an appreciation for
the therapist’s support.

- wikimedia commons]

Techniques in Person-Centered Therapy
Humanistic and person-centered therapy, like psychoanalysis, involves a largely unstructured
conversation between the therapist and the patient. Unlike psychoanalysis, though, a therapist
using PCT takes a passive role, guiding the patient toward his or her own self-discovery.
Rogers’s original name for PCT was non-directive therapy, and this notion is reflected in the

471

Therapeutic Orientations

flexibility found in PCT. Therapists do not try to change patients’ thoughts or behaviors directly.
Rather, their role is to provide the therapeutic relationship as a platform for personal growth.
In these kinds of sessions, the therapist tends only to ask questions and doesn’t provide any
judgment or interpretation of what the patient says. Instead, the therapist is present to provide
a safe and encouraging environment for the person to explore these issues for him- or herself.
An important aspect of the PCT relationship is the therapist’s unconditional positive regard
for the patient’s feelings and behaviors. That is, the therapist is never to condemn or criticize
the patient for what s/he has done or thought; the therapist is only to express warmth and
empathy. This creates an environment free of approval or disapproval, where patients come
to appreciate their value and to behave in ways that are congruent with their own identity.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Person-Centered Therapy
One key advantage of person-centered therapy is that it is highly acceptable to patients. In
other words, people tend to find the supportive, flexible environment of this approach very
rewarding. Furthermore, some of the themes of PCT translate well to other therapeutic
approaches. For example, most therapists of any orientation find that clients respond well to
being treated with nonjudgmental empathy. The main disadvantage to PCT, however, is that
findings about its effectiveness are mixed. One possibility for this could be that the treatment
is primarily based on unspecific treatment factors. That is, rather than using therapeutic
techniques that are specific to the patient and the mental problem (i.e., specific treatment
factors), the therapy focuses on techniques that can be applied to anyone (e.g., establishing
a good relationship with the patient) (Cuijpers et al., 2012; Friedli, King, Lloyd, & Horder, 1997).
Similar to how “one-size-fits-all” doesn’t really fit every person, PCT uses the same practices
for everyone, which may work for some people but not others. Further research is necessary
to evaluate its utility as a therapeutic approach.

Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
Although both psychoanalysis and PCT are still used today, another therapy, cognitivebehavioral therapy (CBT), has gained more widespread support and practice. CBT refers to
a family of therapeutic approaches whose goal is to alleviate psychological symptoms by
changing their underlying cognitions and behaviors. The premise of CBT is that thoughts,
behaviors, and emotions interact and contribute to various mental disorders. For example,
let’s consider how a CBT therapist would view a patient who compulsively washes her hands
for hours every day. First, the therapist would identify the patient’s maladaptive thought: “If
I don’t wash my hands like this, I will get a disease and die.” The therapist then identifies how

472

Therapeutic Orientations

this maladaptive thought leads to a maladaptive emotion: the feeling of anxiety when her
hands aren’t being washed. And finally, this maladaptive emotion leads to the maladaptive
behavior: the patient washing her hands for hours every day.
CBT is a present-focused therapy (i.e., focused on the “now” rather than causes from the past,
such as childhood relationships) that uses behavioral goals to improve one’s mental illness.
Often, these behavioral goals involve between-session homework assignments. For example,
the therapist may give the hand-washing patient a worksheet to take home; on this worksheet,
the woman is to write down every time she feels the urge to wash her hands, how she deals
with the urge, and what behavior she replaces that urge with. When the patient has her next
therapy session, she and the therapist review her “homework” together. CBT is a relatively
brief intervention of 12 to 16 weekly sessions, closely tailored to the nature of the
psychopathology and treatment of the specific mental disorder. And, as the empirical data
shows, CBT has proven to be highly efficacious for virtually all psychiatric illnesses (Hofmann,
Asnaani, Vonk, Sawyer, & Fang, 2012).

Pattern of thoughts, feelings, and behaviors addressed through cognitivebehavioral therapy.

History of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
CBT developed from clinical work conducted in the mid-20th century by Dr. Aaron T. Beck, a

473

Therapeutic Orientations

psychiatrist, and Albert Ellis, a psychologist. Beck used the term automatic thoughts to refer
to the thoughts depressed patients report experiencing spontaneously. He observed that
these thoughts arise from three belief systems, or schemas: beliefs about the self, beliefs
about the world, and beliefs about the future. In treatment, therapy initially focuses on
identifying automatic thoughts (e.g., “If I don’t wash my hands constantly, I’ll get a disease”),
testing their validity, and replacing maladaptive thoughts with more adaptive thoughts (e.g.,
“Washing my hands three times a day is sufficient to prevent a disease”). In later stages of
treatment, the patient’s maladaptive schemas are examined and modified. Ellis (1957) took
a comparable approach, in what he called rational-emotive-behavioral therapy (REBT), which
also encourages patients to evaluate their own thoughts about situations.

Techniques in CBT
Beck and Ellis strove to help patients identify maladaptive appraisals, or the untrue judgments
and evaluations of certain thoughts. For example, if it’s your first time meeting new people,
you may have the automatic thought, “These people won’t like me because I have nothing
interesting to share.” That thought itself
is not what’s troublesome; the appraisal
(or evaluation) that it might have merit is
what’s troublesome. The goal of CBT is to
help people make adaptive, instead of
maladaptive, appraisals (e.g., “I do know
interesting things!”). This technique of
reappraisal, or cognitive restructuring,
is a fundamental aspect of CBT. With
cognitive restructuring, it is the therapist’s
job to help point out when a person has
an inaccurate or maladaptive thought, so
that the patient can either eliminate it or
modify it to be more adaptive.
In addition to thoughts, though, another
important treatment target of CBT is
maladaptive behavior. Every time a
person engages in maladaptive behavior
(e.g., never speaking to someone in new
situations), he or she reinforces the
validity of the maladaptive thought, thus

474

Therapeutic Orientations

maintaining or perpetuating the psychological illness. In treatment, the therapist and patient
work together to develop healthy behavioral habits (often tracked with worksheet-like
homework), so that the patient can break this cycle of maladaptive thoughts and behaviors.
For many mental health problems, especially anxiety disorders, CBT incorporates what is
known as exposure therapy. During exposure therapy, a patient confronts a problematic
situation and fully engages in the experience instead of avoiding it. For example, imagine a
man who is terrified of spiders. Whenever he encounters one, he immediately screams and
panics. In exposure therapy, the man would be forced to confront and interact with spiders,
rather than simply avoiding them as he usually does. The goal is to reduce the fear associated
with the situation through extinction learning, a neurobiological and cognitive process by which
the patient “unlearns” the irrational fear. For example, exposure therapy for someone terrified
of spiders might begin with him looking at a cartoon of a spider, followed by him looking at
pictures of real spiders, and later, him handling a plastic spider. After weeks of this incremental
exposure, the patient may even be able to hold a live spider. After repeated exposure (starting
small and building one’s way up), the patient experiences less physiological fear and
maladaptive thoughts about spiders, breaking his tendency for anxiety and subsequent
avoidance.

Advantages and Disadvantages of CBT
CBT interventions tend to be relatively brief, making them cost-effective for the average
consumer. In addition, CBT is an intuitive treatment that makes logical sense to patients. It
can also be adapted to suit the needs of many different populations. One disadvantage,
however, is that CBT does involve significant effort on the patient’s part, because the patient
is an active participant in treatment. Therapists often assign “homework” (e.g., worksheets
for recording one’s thoughts and behaviors) between sessions to maintain the cognitive and
behavioral habits the patient is working on. The greatest strength of CBT is the abundance of
empirical support for its effectiveness. Studies have consistently found CBT to be equally or
more effective than other forms of treatment, including medication and other therapies
(Butler, Chapman, Forman, & Beck, 2006; Hofmann et al., 2012). For this reason, CBT is
considered a first-line treatment for many mental disorders.

Acceptance and Mindfulness-Based Approaches
Unlike the preceding therapies, which were developed in the 20th century, this next one was
born out of age-old Buddhist and yoga practices. Mindfulness, or a process that tries to
cultivate a nonjudgmental, yet attentive, mental state, is a therapy that focuses on one’s

475

Therapeutic Orientations

awareness of bodily sensations, thoughts, and the outside environment. Whereas other
therapies work to modify or eliminate these sensations and thoughts, mindfulness focuses
on nonjudgmentally accepting them (Kabat-Zinn, 2003; Baer, 2003). For example, whereas
CBT may actively confront and work to change a maladaptive thought, mindfulness therapy
works to acknowledge and accept the thought, understanding that the thought is spontaneous
and not what the person truly believes. There are two important components of mindfulness:
(1) self-regulation of attention, and (2) orientation toward the present moment (Bishop et al.,
2004). Mindfulness is thought to improve mental health because it draws attention away from
past and future stressors, encourages acceptance of troubling thoughts and feelings, and
promotes physical relaxation.

Techniques in Mindfulness-Based Therapy
Psychologists have adapted the practice of mindfulness as a form of psychotherapy, generally
called mindfulness-based therapy (MBT). Several types of MBT have become popular in recent
years, including mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) (e.g., Kabat-Zinn, 1982) and
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy (MBCT) (e.g., Segal, Williams, & Teasdale, 2002).
MBSR uses meditation, yoga, and attention to
physical experiences to reduce stress. The hope
is that reducing a person’s overall stress will allow
that person to more objectively evaluate his or
her thoughts. In MBCT, rather than reducing one’s
general stress to address a specific problem,
attention is focused on one’s thoughts and their
associated emotions. For example, MBCT helps
prevent relapses in depression by encouraging
patients

to

evaluate

their

own

thoughts

objectively and without value judgment (Baer,
2003). Although cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT) may seem similar to this, it focuses on
“pushing out” the maladaptive thought, whereas
mindfulness-based cognitive therapy focuses on
One of the most important advantages of mindfulness

“not getting caught up” in it. The treatments used

based therapy is its level of accessibility to patients.

in MBCT have been used to address a wide range

[Photo: wmacphail]

of illnesses, including depression, anxiety, chronic
pain, coronary artery disease, and fibromyalgia

(Hofmann, Sawyer, Witt & Oh, 2010).

Therapeutic Orientations

476

Mindfulness and acceptance—in addition to being therapies in their own right—have also
been used as “tools” in other cognitive-behavioral therapies, particularly in dialectical
behavior therapy (DBT) (e.g., Linehan, Amstrong, Suarez, Allmon, & Heard, 1991). DBT, often
used in the treatment of borderline personality disorder, focuses on skills training. That is, it
often employs mindfulness and cognitive behavioral therapy practices, but it also works to
teach its patients “skills” they can use to correct maladaptive tendencies. For example, one
skill DBT teaches patients is called distress tolerance—or, ways to cope with maladaptive
thoughts and emotions in the moment. For example, people who feel an urge to cut
themselves may be taught to snap their arm with a rubber band instead. The primary
difference between DBT and CBT is that DBT employs techniques that address the symptoms
of the problem (e.g., cutting oneself) rather than the problem itself (e.g., understanding the
psychological motivation to cut oneself). CBT does not teach such skills training because of
the concern that the skills—even though they may help in the short-term—may be harmful
in the long-term, by maintaining maladaptive thoughts and behaviors.
DBT is founded on the perspective of a dialectical worldview. That is, rather than thinking of
the world as “black and white,” or “only good and only bad,” it focuses on accepting that some
things can have characteristics of both “good” and “bad.” So, in a case involving maladaptive
thoughts, instead of teaching that a thought is entirely bad, DBT tries to help patients be less
judgmental of their thoughts (as with mindfulness-based therapy) and encourages change
through therapeutic progress, using cognitive-behavioral techniques as well as mindfulness
exercises.
Another form of treatment that also uses mindfulness techniques is acceptance and
commitment therapy (ACT) (Hayes, Strosahl, & Wilson, 1999). In this treatment, patients are
taught to observe their thoughts from a detached perspective (Hayes et al., 1999). ACT
encourages patients not to attempt to change or avoid thoughts and emotions they observe
in themselves, but to recognize which are beneficial and which are harmful. However, the
differences among ACT, CBT, and other mindfulness-based treatments are a topic of
controversy in the current literature.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Mindfulness-Based Therapy
Two key advantages of mindfulness-based therapies are their acceptability and accessibility
to patients. Because yoga and meditation are already widely known in popular culture,
consumers of mental healthcare are often interested in trying related psychological therapies.
Currently, psychologists have not come to a consensus on the efficacy of MBT, though growing
evidence supports its effectiveness for treating mood and anxiety disorders. For example,

477

Therapeutic Orientations

one review of MBT studies for anxiety and depression found that mindfulness-based
interventions generally led to moderate symptom improvement (Hofmann et al., 2010).

Emerging Treatment Strategies
With growth in research and technology,
psychologists have been able to develop
new treatment strategies in recent years.
Often,

these

approaches

focus

on

enhancing existing treatments, such as
cognitive-behavioral therapies, through
the use of technological advances. For
example, internet- and mobile-delivered
therapies make psychological treatments
more available, through smartphones
and online access. Clinician-supervised
online CBT modules allow patients to
Recent improvements in video chat technology along with the

access treatment from home on their own

proliferation of mobile devices like smartphones and tablets has

schedule—an opportunity particularly

made online delivery of therapy more commonplace. [Photo:
rbieber]

important for patients with less geographic
or socioeconomic access to traditional

treatments. Furthermore, smartphones help extend therapy to patients’ daily lives, allowing
for symptom tracking, homework reminders, and more frequent therapist contact.
Another benefit of technology is cognitive bias modification. Here, patients are given
exercises, often through the use of video games, aimed at changing their problematic thought
processes. For example, researchers might use a mobile app to train alcohol abusers to avoid
stimuli related to alcohol. One version of this game flashes four pictures on the screen—three
alcohol cues (e.g., a can of beer, the front of a bar) and one health-related image (e.g., someone
drinking water). The goal is for the patient to tap the healthy picture as fast as s/he can. Games
like these aim to target patients’ automatic, subconscious thoughts that may be difficult to
direct through conscious effort. That is, by repeatedly tapping the healthy image, the patient
learns to “ignore” the alcohol cues, so when those cues are encountered in the environment,
they will be less likely to trigger the urge to drink. Approaches like these are promising because
of their accessibility, however they require further research to establish their effectiveness.
Yet another emerging treatment employs CBT-enhancing pharmaceutical agents. Theseare
drugs used to improve the effects of therapeutic interventions. Based on research from animal

478

Therapeutic Orientations

experiments, researchers have found that certain drugs influence the biological processes
known to be involved in learning. Thus, if people take these drugs while going through
psychotherapy, they are better able to “learn” the techniques for improvement. For example,
the antibiotic d-cycloserine improves treatment for anxiety disorders by facilitating the
learning processes that occur during exposure therapy. Ongoing research in this exciting area
may prove to be quite fruitful.

Pharmacological Treatments
Up until this point, all the therapies we have discussed have been talk-based or meditative
practices. However, psychiatric medications are also frequently used to treat mental disorders,
including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, depression, and anxiety disorders. Psychiatric drugs
are commonly used, in part, because they can be prescribed by general medical practitioners,
whereas only trained psychologists are qualified to deliver effective psychotherapy. While
drugs and CBT therapies tend to be almost equally effective, choosing the best intervention
depends on the disorder and individual being treated, as well as other factors—such as
treatment availability and comorbidity (i.e., having multiple mental or physical disorders at
once). Although many new drugs have been introduced in recent decades, there is still much
we do not understand about their mechanism in the brain. Further research is needed to
refine our understanding of both pharmacological and behavioral treatments before we can
make firm claims about their effectiveness.

Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy
In discussing therapeutic orientations, it is important to note that some clinicians incorporate
techniques from multiple approaches, a practice known as integrative or eclectic
psychotherapy. For example, a therapist may employ distress tolerance skills from DBT (to
resolve short-term problems), cognitive reappraisal from CBT (to address long-standing
issues), and mindfulness-based meditation from MBCT (to reduce overall stress). And, in fact,
between 13% and 42% of therapists have identified their own approaches as integrative or
eclectic (Norcross & Goldfried, 2005).

Conclusion
Throughout human history we have had to deal with mental illness in one form or another.
Over time, several schools of thought have emerged for treating these problems. Although
various therapies have been shown to work for specific individuals, cognitive behavioral

Therapeutic Orientations

479

therapy is currently the treatment most widely supported by empirical research. Still, practices
like psychodynamic therapies, person-centered therapy, mindfulness-based treatments, and
acceptance and commitment therapy have also shown success. And, with recent advances in
research and technology, clinicians are able to enhance these and other therapies to treat
more patients more effectively than ever before. However, what is important in the end is
that people actually seek out mental health specialists to help them with their problems. One
of the biggest deterrents to doing so is that people don’t understand what psychotherapy
really entails. Through understanding how current practices work, not only can we better
educate people about how to get the help they need, but we can continue to advance our
treatments to be more effective in the future.

480

Therapeutic Orientations

Discussion Questions
1. Psychoanalytic theory is no longer the dominant therapeutic approach, because it lacks
empirical support. Yet many consumers continue to seek psychoanalytic or psychodynamic
treatments. Do you think psychoanalysis still has a place in mental health treatment? If so,
why?
2. What might be some advantages and disadvantages of technological advances in
psychological treatment? What will psychotherapy look like 100 years from now?
3. Some people have argued that all therapies are about equally effective, and that they all
affect change through common factors such as the involvement of a supportive therapist.
Does this claim sound reasonable to you? Why or why not?
4. When choosing a psychological treatment for a specific patient, what factors besides the
treatment’s demonstrated efficacy should be taken into account?

481

Therapeutic Orientations

Vocabulary
Acceptance and commitment therapy
A therapeutic approach designed to foster nonjudgmental observation of one’s own mental
processes.
Automatic thoughts
Thoughts that occur spontaneously; often used to describe problematic thoughts that
maintain mental disorders.
Cognitive bias modification
Using exercises (e.g., computer games) to change problematic thinking habits.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)
A family of approaches with the goal of changing the thoughts and behaviors that influence
psychopathology.
Comorbidity
Describes a state of having more than one psychological or physical disorder at a given time.
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)
A treatment often used for borderline personality disorder that incorporates both cognitivebehavioral and mindfulness elements.
Dialectical worldview
A perspective in DBT that emphasizes the joint importance of change and acceptance.
Exposure therapy
A form of intervention in which the patient engages with a problematic (usually feared)
situation without avoidance or escape.
Free association
In psychodynamic therapy, a process in which the patient reports all thoughts that come to
mind without censorship, and these thoughts are interpreted by the therapist.
Integrative ​or eclectic psychotherapy​
Also called integrative psychotherapy, this term refers to approaches combining multiple
orientations (e.g., CBT with psychoanalytic elements).

Therapeutic Orientations

482

Integrative or ​eclectic psychotherapy
Also called integrative psychotherapy, this term refers to approaches combining multiple
orientations (e.g., CBT with psychoanalytic elements).
Mindfulness
A process that reflects a nonjudgmental, yet attentive, mental state.
Mindfulness-based therapy
A form of psychotherapy grounded in mindfulness theory and practice, often involving
meditation, yoga, body scan, and other features of mindfulness exercises.
Person-centered therapy
A therapeutic approach focused on creating a supportive environment for self-discovery.
Psychoanalytic therapy
Sigmund Freud’s therapeutic approach focusing on resolving unconscious conflicts.
Psychodynamic therapy
Treatment applying psychoanalytic principles in a briefer, more individualized format.
Reappraisal, or ​Cognitive restructuring
The process of identifying, evaluating, and changing maladaptive thoughts in psychotherapy.
Schema
A mental representation or set of beliefs about something.
Unconditional positive regard
In person-centered therapy, an attitude of warmth, empathy and acceptance adopted by the
therapist in order to foster feelings of inherent worth in the patient.

483

Therapeutic Orientations

References
Baer, R. (2003). Mindfulness training as a clinical intervention: A conceptual and empirical
review. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 10, 125–143.
Bishop, S. R., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Anderson, N. D., Carmody, J., Segal, Z. V., Abbey,
S., Speca, M., Velting, D., & Devins, G. (2004). Mindfulness: A proposed operational definition.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 11, 230–241.
Butler, A. C., Chapman, J. E., Forman, E. M., & Beck, A. T. (2006). The empirical status of cognitive
behavioral therapy: A review of meta-analyses. Clinical Psychology Review, 26, 17–31.
Cuijpers, P., Driessen, E., Hollon, S.D., van Oppen, P., Barth, J., & Andersson, G. (2012). The
efficacy of non-directive supportive therapy for adult depression: A meta-analysis. Clinical
Psychology Review, 32, 280–291.
Driessen, E., Cuijpers, P., de Maat, S. C. M., Abbass, A. A., de Jonghe, F., & Dekker, J. J. M. (2010).
The efficacy of short-term psychodynamic psychotherapy for depression: A meta-analysis.
Clinical Psychology Review, 30, 25–36.
Ellis, A. (1957). Rational psychotherapy and individual psychology. Journal of Individual
Psychology, 13, 38–44.
Freud, S. (1955). Studies on hysteria. London, UK: Hogarth Press (Original work published 1895).
Freud, S. (1955). The interpretation of dreams. London, UK: Hogarth Press (Original work
published 1900).
Freud. S. (1955). Beyond the pleasure principle. H London, UK: Hogarth Press (Original work
published 1920).
Friedli, K., King, M. B., Lloyd, M., & Horder, J. (1997). Randomized controlled assessment of
non-directive psychotherapy versus routine general-practitioner care. Lancet, 350,\n1662–
1665.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K., & Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. New\
nYork, NY: Guilford Press.
Hofmann, S. G., Asnaani, A., Vonk, J. J., Sawyer, A. T., & Fang, A. (2012). The efficacy of cognitive
behavioral therapy: A review of meta-analyses. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 36, 427–440.
Hofmann, S. G., Sawyer, A. T., Witt, A., & Oh, D. (2010). The effect of mindfulness-based therapy
on anxiety and depression: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 78, 169–183
Kabat-Zinn J. (2003). Mindfulness-based interventions in context: Past, present, and future.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 10, 144–156.

Therapeutic Orientations

484

Kabat-Zinn, J. (1982). An outpatient program in behavioral medicine for chronic pain patients\
nbased on the practice of mindfulness meditation: Theoretical considerations and
preliminary results. General Hospital Psychiatry, 4, 33–47.
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Lifetime
prevalence and age of onset distribution of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 593–602.
Leichsenring, F., & Rabung, S. (2008). Effectiveness of long-term psychodynamic
psychotherapy: A meta-analysis. Journal of the American Medical Association, 300,1551–1565.
Linehan, M. M., Amstrong, H.-E., Suarez, A., Allmon, D., & Heard, H. L. (1991). Cognitivebehavioral treatment of chronically suicidal borderline patients. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 48, 1060–1064.
Nasser, M. (1987). Psychiatry in ancient Egypt. Bulletin of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, 11,
420-422.
Norcross, J. C. & Goldfried, M. R. (2005). Handbook of Psychotherapy Integration. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Rogers, C. (1951). Client-Centered Therapy. Cambridge, MA: Riverside Press.
Segal, Z. V., Williams, J. M. G., & Teasdale, J. D. (2002). Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy\nfor
Depression: A New Approach to Preventing Relapse. New York, NY: Guilford Press.

27
Psychopharmacology
Susan Barron

Psychopharmacology is the study of how drugs affect behavior. If a drug changes your
perception, or the way you feel or think, the drug exerts effects on your brain and nervous
system. We call drugs that change the way you think or feel psychoactive or psychotropic
drugs, and almost everyone has used a psychoactive drug at some point (yes, caffeine counts).
Understanding some of the basics about psychopharmacology can help us better understand
a wide range of things that interest psychologists and others.

For example, the

pharmacological treatment of certain neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson’s disease
tells us something about the disease itself. The pharmacological treatments used to treat
psychiatric conditions such as schizophrenia or depression have undergone amazing
development since the 1950s, and the drugs used to treat these disorders tell us something
about what is happening in the brain of individuals with these conditions.

Finally,

understanding something about the actions of drugs of abuse and their routes of
administration can help us understand why some psychoactive drugs are so addictive. In this
module, we will provide an overview of some of these topics as well as discuss some current
controversial areas in the field of psychopharmacology.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•
•

How do the majority of psychoactive drugs work in the brain?
How does the route of administration affect how rewarding a drug might be?
Why is grapefruit dangerous to consume with many psychotropic medications?
Why might individualized drug doses based on genetic screening be helpful for treating
conditions like depression?

•

Why is there controversy regarding pharmacotherapy for children, adolescents, and the
elderly?

486

Psychopharmacology

Introduction
Psychopharmacology, the study of how drugs affect the brain and behavior, is a relatively new
science, although people have probably been taking drugs to change how they feel from early
in human history (consider the of eating fermented fruit, ancient beer recipes, chewing on
the leaves of the cocaine plant for stimulant properties as just some examples). The word
psychopharmacology itself tells us that this is a field that bridges our understanding of behavior
(and brain) and pharmacology, and the range of topics included within this field is extremely
broad.
Virtually any drug that changes the way you feel
does this by altering how neurons communicate
with each other. Neurons (more than 100 billion
in your nervous system) communicate with
each other by releasing a chemical (neurotransmitter)
across a tiny space between two neurons (the
synapse). When the neurotransmitter crosses
the synapse, it binds to a postsynaptic receptor
(protein) on the receiving neuron and the
message may then be transmitted onward.
Obviously, neurotransmission is far more

Drugs that alter our feelings and behavior do so by

complicated than this – links at the end of this

affecting the communication between neurons in the

module can provide some useful background if

brain. [Photo: Curtis Gregory Perry]

you want more detail – but the first step is
understanding that virtually all psychoactive drugs interfere with or alter how neurons
communicate with each other.
There are many neurotransmitters.

Some of the most important in terms of

psychopharmacological treatment and drugs of abuse are outlined in Table 1. The neurons
that release these neurotransmitters, for the most part, are localized within specific circuits
of the brain that mediate these behaviors. Psychoactive drugs can either increase activity at
the synapse (these are called agonists) or reduce activity at the synapse (antagonists).
Different drugs do this by different mechanisms, and some examples of agonists and
antagonists are presented in Table 2. For each example, the drug’s trade name, which is the
name of the drug provided by the drug company, and generic name (in parentheses) are
provided.
A very useful link at the end of this module shows the various steps involved in

Psychopharmacology

Table 1

neurotransmission and some ways drugs can alter this.

Table 2

487

488

Psychopharmacology

Table 2 provides examples of drugs and their primary mechanism of action, but it is very
important to realize that drugs also have effects on other neurotransmitters. This contributes
to the kinds of side effects that are observed when someone takes a particular drug. The
reality is that no drugs currently available work only exactly where we would like in the brain
or only on a specific neurotransmitter. In many cases, individuals are sometimes prescribed
one psychotropic drug but then may also have to take additional drugs to reduce the side
effects caused by the initial drug. Sometimes individuals stop taking medication because the
side effects can be so profound.

Pharmacokinetics: What Is It – Why Is It Important?
While this section may sound more like pharmacology, it is important to realize how important
pharmacokinetics can be when considering psychoactive drugs. Pharmacokinetics refers to
how the body handles a drug that we take. As mentioned earlier, psychoactive drugs exert
their effects on behavior by altering neuronal communication in the brain, and the majority
of drugs reach the brain by traveling in the blood. The acronym ADME is often used with A
standing for absorption (how the drug gets into the blood), Distribution (how the drug gets
to the organ of interest – in this module, that is the brain), Metabolism (how the drug is broken
down so it no longer exerts its psychoactive effects), and Excretion (how the drug leaves the
body). We will talk about a couple of these to show their importance for considering
psychoactive drugs.

Drug Administration
There are many ways to take drugs, and
these routes of drug administration can
have a significant impact on how quickly
that drug reaches brain.

The most

common route of administration is oral
administration, which is relatively slow
and – perhaps surprisingly – often the
most variable and complex route of
administration.

Drugs

enter

the

stomach and then get absorbed by the
blood supply and capillaries that line the
A drug delivered by IV reaches the brain more quickly than if the drug

small intestine. The rate of absorption

is taken orally. While rapid delivery has advantages, there are also

can be affected by a variety of factors

risks involved with IV administration. [Photo: Bart Heird]

including the quantity and the type of

489

Psychopharmacology

food in the stomach (e.g., fats vs. proteins). This is why the medicine label for some drugs
(like antibiotics) may specifically state foods that you should or should NOT consume within
an hour of taking the drug because they can affect the rate of absorption. Two of the most
rapid routes of administration include inhalation (i.e., smoking or gaseous anesthesia) and
intravenous (IV) in which the drug is injected directly into the vein and hence the blood supply.
Both of these routes of administration can get the drug to brain in less than 10 seconds. IV
administration also has the distinction of being the most dangerous because if there is an
adverse drug reaction, there is very little time to administer any antidote, as in the case of an
IV heroin overdose.
Why might how quickly a drug gets to the brain be important? If a drug activates the reward
circuits in the brain AND it reaches the brain very quickly, the drug has a high risk for abuse
and addiction. Psychostimulants like amphetamine or cocaine are examples of drugs that
have high risk for abuse because they are agonists at DA neurons involved in reward AND
because these drugs exist in forms that can be either smoked or injected intravenously. Some
argue that cigarette smoking is one of the hardest addictions to quit, and although part of
the reason for this may be that smoking gets the nicotine into the brain very quickly (and
indirectly acts on DA neurons), it is a more complicated story. For drugs that reach the brain
very quickly, not only is the drug very addictive, but so are the cues associated with the drug
(see Rohsenow, Niaura, Childress, Abrams, & Monti, 1990). For a crack user, this could be the
pipe that they use to smoke the drug. For a cigarette smoker, however, it could be something
as normal as finishing dinner or waking up in the morning (if that is when the smoker usually
has a cigarette). For both the crack user and the cigarette smoker, the cues associated with
the drug may actually cause craving that is alleviated by (you guessed it) – lighting a cigarette
or using crack (i.e., relapse). This is one of the reasons individuals that enroll in drug treatment
programs, especially out-of-town programs, are at significant risk of relapse if they later find
themselves in proximity to old haunts, friends, etc. But this is much more difficult for a cigarette
smoker. How can someone avoid eating? Or avoid waking up in the morning, etc. These
examples help you begin to understand how important the route of administration can be
for psychoactive drugs.

Drug Metabolism
Metabolism involves the breakdown of psychoactive drugs, and this occurs primarily in the
liver. The liver produces enzymes (proteins that speed up a chemical reaction), and these
enzymes help catalyze a chemical reaction that breaks down psychoactive drugs. Enzymes
exist in “families,” and many psychoactive drugs are broken down by the same family of
enzymes, the cytochrome P450 superfamily. There is not a unique enzyme for each drug;

490

Psychopharmacology

rather, certain enzymes can break down a wide variety of drugs. Tolerance to the effects of
many drugs can occur with repeated exposure; that is, the drug produces less of an effect
over time, so more of the drug is needed to get the same effect. This is particularly true for
sedative drugs like alcohol or opiate-based painkillers. Metabolic tolerance is one kind of
tolerance and it takes place in the liver. Some drugs (like alcohol) cause enzyme induction –
an increase in the enzymes produced by the liver. For example, chronic drinking results in
alcohol being broken down more quickly, so the alcoholic needs to drink more to get the same
effect – of course, until so much alcohol is consumed that it damages the liver (alcohol can
cause fatty liver or cirrhosis).

Recent Issues Related to Psychotropic Drugs and Metabolism
Grapefruit Juice and Metabolism
Certain types of food in the stomach can alter the
rate of drug absorption, and other foods can also
alter the rate of drug metabolism. The most well
known is grapefruit juice.

Grapefruit juice

suppresses cytochrome P450 enzymes in the
liver, and these liver enzymes normally break
down a large variety of drugs (including some of
the psychotropic drugs).

If the enzymes are

suppressed, drug levels can build up to
potentially toxic levels. In this case, the effects
can persist for extended periods of time after the
consumption of grapefruit juice. As of 2013, there
are at least 85 drugs shown to adversely interact
Grapefruit can interfere with enzymes in the liver that

with grapefruit juice (Bailey, Dresser, & Arnold,

help the body to process certain drugs. [Photo:

2013). Some psychotropic drugs that are likely

woodleywonderworks]

to

interact

with

grapefruit

juice

include

carbamazepine (Tegretol), prescribed for bipolar
disorder; diazepam (Valium), used to treat anxiety, alcohol withdrawal, and muscle spasms;
and fluvoxamine (Luvox), used to treat obsessive compulsive disorder and depression. A link
at the end of this module gives the latest list of drugs reported to have this unusual interaction.

Individualized Therapy, Metabolic Differences, and Potential Prescribing
Approaches for the Future

Psychopharmacology

491

Mental illnesses contribute to more disability in western countries than all other illnesses
including cancer and heart disease. Depression alone is predicted to be the second largest
contributor to disease burden by 2020 (World Health Organization, 2004). The numbers of
people affected by mental health issues are pretty astonishing, with estimates that 25% of
adults experience a mental health issue in any given year, and this affects not only the
individual but their friends and family. One in 17 adults experiences a serious mental illness
(Kessler, Chiu, Demler, & Walters, 2005). Newer antidepressants are probably the most
frequently prescribed drugs for treating mental health issues, although there is no “magic
bullet” for treating depression or other conditions. Pharmacotherapy with psychological
therapy may be the most beneficial treatment approach for many psychiatric conditions, but
there are still many unanswered questions. For example, why does one antidepressant help
one individual yet have no effect for another? Antidepressants can take 4 to 6 weeks to start
improving depressive symptoms, and we don’t really understand why. Many people do not
respond to the first antidepressant prescribed and may have to try different drugs before
finding something that works for them. Other people just do not improve with antidepressants
(Ioannidis, 2008). As we better understand why individuals differ, the easier and more rapidly
we will be able to help people in distress.
One area that has received interest recently has to do with an individualized treatment
approach. We now know that there are genetic differences in some of the cytochrome P450
enzymes and their ability to break down drugs. The general population falls into the following
4 categories: 1) ultra-extensive metabolizers break down certain drugs (like some of the current
antidepressants) very, very quickly, 2) extensive metabolizers are also able to break down drugs
fairly quickly, 3) intermediate metabolizers break down drugs more slowly than either of the
two above groups, and finally 4) poor metabolizers break down drugs much more slowly than
all of the other groups. Now consider someone receiving a prescription for an antidepressant –
what would the consequences be if they were either an ultra-extensive metabolizer or a poor
metabolizer? The ultra-extensive metabolizer would be given antidepressants and told it will
probably take 4 to 6 weeks to begin working (this is true), but they metabolize the medication
so quickly that it will never be effective for them. In contrast, the poor metabolizer given the
same daily dose of the same antidepressant may build up such high levels in their blood
(because they are not breaking the drug down), that they will have a wide range of side effects
and feel really badly – also not a positive outcome. What if – instead – prior to prescribing an
antidepressant, the doctor could take a blood sample and determine which type of
metabolizer a patient actually was? They could then make a much more informed decision
about the best dose to prescribe. There are new genetic tests now available to better
individualize treatment in just this way. A blood sample can determine (at least for some
drugs) which category an individual fits into, but we need data to determine if this actually is
effective for treating depression or other mental illnesses (Zhou, 2009). Currently, this genetic

492

Psychopharmacology

test is expensive and not many health insurance plans cover this screen, but this may be an
important component in the future of psychopharmacology.

Other Controversial Issues
Juveniles and Psychopharmacology
A recent Centers for Disease Control (CDC) report has suggested that as many as 1 in 5 children
between the ages of 5 and 17 may have some type of mental disorder (e.g., ADHD, autism,
anxiety, depression) (CDC, 2013). The incidence of bipolar disorder in children and adolescents
has also increased 40 times in the past decade (Moreno, Laje, Blanco, Jiang, Schmidt, & Olfson,
2007), and it is now estimated that 1 in 88 children have been diagnosed with an autism
spectrum disorder (CDC, 2011). Why has there been such an increase in these numbers?
There is no single answer to this important question. Some believe that greater public
awareness has contributed to increased teacher and parent referrals. Others argue that the
increase stems from changes in criterion currently used for diagnosing. Still others suggest
environmental factors, either prenatally or postnatally, have contributed to this upsurge.
We do not have an answer, but the question does
bring up an additional controversy related to how
we should treat this population of children and
adolescents. Many psychotropic drugs used for
treating psychiatric disorders have been tested in
adults, but few have been tested for safety or
efficacy with children or adolescents. The most wellestablished psychotropics prescribed for children
and adolescents are the psychostimulant drugs
used for treating attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), and there are clinical data on how
effective these drugs are. However, we know far less
about the safety and efficacy in young populations
of the drugs typically prescribed for treating anxiety,
depression, or other psychiatric disorders.

The

young brain continues to mature until probably well
after age 20, so some scientists are concerned that
drugs that alter neuronal activity in the developing

There are concerns about both the safety and

brain could have significant consequences. There

efficacy of drugs like Prozac for children and teens.

is an obvious need for clinical trials in children and

[Photo:zaza_bj]

493

Psychopharmacology

adolescents to test the safety and effectiveness of many of these drugs, which also brings up
a variety of ethical questions about who decides what children and adolescents will participate
in these clinical trials, who can give consent, who receives reimbursements, etc.

The Elderly and Psychopharmacology
Another population that has not typically been included in clinical trials to determine the
safety or effectiveness of psychotropic drugs is the elderly. Currently, there is very little highquality evidence to guide prescribing for older people – clinical trials often exclude people
with multiple comorbidities (other diseases, conditions, etc.), which are typical for elderly
populations (see Hilmer and Gnjidict, 2008; Pollock, Forsyth, & Bies, 2008). This is a serious
issue because the elderly consume a disproportionate number of the prescription meds
prescribed. The term polypharmacy refers to the use of multiple drugs, which is very common
in elderly populations in the United States. As our population ages, some estimate that the
proportion of people 65 or older will reach 20% of the U.S. population by 2030, with this group
consuming 40% of the prescribed medications. As shown in Table 3 (from Schwartz and
Abernethy, 2008), it is quite clear why the typical clinical trial that looks at the safety and
effectiveness of psychotropic drugs can be problematic if we try to interpret these results for
an elderly population.

Table 3. Characteristics if clinical trial subjects vs. actual patients. (Reprinted by permission
from Schwartz & Abernethy, 2008.)

Psychopharmacology

494

Metabolism of drugs is often slowed considerably for elderly populations, so less drug can
produce the same effect (or all too often, too much drug can result in a variety of side effects).
One of the greatest risk factors for elderly populations is falling (and breaking bones), which
can happen if the elderly person gets dizzy from too much of a drug. There is also evidence
that psychotropic medications can reduce bone density (thus worsening the consequences
if someone falls) (Brown & Mezuk, 2012). Although we are gaining an awareness about some
of the issues facing pharmacotherapy in older populations, this is a very complex area with
many medical and ethical questions.
This module provided an introduction of some of the important areas in the field of
psychopharmacology. It should be apparent that this module just touched on a number of
topics included in this field. It should also be apparent that understanding more about
psychopharmacology is important to anyone interested in understanding behavior and that
our understanding of issues in this field has important implications for society.

495

Psychopharmacology

Outside Resources
Video: Neurotransmission
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FR4S1BqdFG4
Web: Description of how some drugs work and the brain areas involved - 1
http://www.drugabuse.gov/news-events/nida-notes/2007/10/impacts-drugs-neurotransmission
Web: Description of how some drugs work and the brain areas involved - 2
http://learn.genetics.utah.edu/content/addiction/drugs/mouse.html
Web: Information about how neurons communicate and the reward pathways
http://learn.genetics.utah.edu/ontent/addiction/reward/neurontalk.html
Web: National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
http://www.niaaa.nih.gov/
Web: National Institute of Drug Abuse
http://www.drugabuse.gov/
Web: National Institute of Mental Health
http://www.nimh.nih.gov/index.shtml
Web: Neurotransmission
http://science.education.nih.gov/supplements/nih2/addiction/activities/lesson2_neurotransmission.htm
Web: Report of the Working Group on Psychotropic Medications for Children and
Adolescents: Psychopharmacological, Psychosocial, and Combined Interventions for
Childhood Disorders: Evidence Base, Contextual Factors, and Future Directions (2008):
http://www.apa.org/pi/families/resources/child-medications.pdf.
Web: Ways drugs can alter neurotransmission
http://bioserv.fiu.edu/~waltercm/b/addicitions/dopamine.htm

Discussion Questions
1. What are some of the issues surrounding prescribing medications for children and

Psychopharmacology

496

adolescents? How might this be improved?
2. What are some of the factors that can affect relapse to an addictive drug?
3. How might prescribing medications for depression be improved in the future to increase
the likelihood that a drug would work and minimize side effects?

497

Psychopharmacology

Vocabulary
Agonists
A drug that increases or enhances a neurotransmitter’s effect.
Antagonist
A drug that blocks a neurotransmitter’s effect.
Enzyme
A protein produced by a living organism that allows or helps a chemical reaction to occur.
Enzyme induction
Process through which a drug can enhance the production of an enzyme.
Metabolism
Breakdown of substances.
Neurotransmitter
A chemical substance produced by a neuron that is used for communication between neurons.
Pharmacokinetics
The action of a drug through the body, including absorption, distribution, metabolism, and
excretion.
Polypharmacy
The use of many medications.
Psychoactive drugs
A drug that changes mood or the way someone feels.
Psychotropic drug
A drug that changes mood or emotion, usually used when talking about drugs prescribed for
various mental conditions (depression, anxiety, schizophrenia, etc.).
Synapse
The tiny space separating neurons.

498

Psychopharmacology

References
Bailey D. G., Dresser G., & Arnold J. M. (2013). Grapefruit-medication interactions: forbidden
fruit or avoidable consequences? Canadian Medical Association Journal, 185, 309–316.
Brown, M. J., & Mezuk, B. (2012). Brains, bones, and aging: psychotropic medications and bone
health among older adults. Current Osteoporosis Reports, 10, 303–311.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2011) Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders –
autism and developmental disabilities monitoring network, 14 sites, United States, 2008.
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 61(SS03) 1–19.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

(2013) Mental health surveillance among

children – United States, 2005—2011. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 62 Suppl, 1-35.
Hilmer, N., & Gnjidict, D. (2008). The effects of polypharmacy in older adults. Clinical
Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 85, 86–88.
Ioannidis, J. P. A. (2008). Effectiveness of antidepressants: an evidence myth constructed from
a thousand randomized trials? Philosophy, Ethics and Humanities in Medicine, 3,14.
Kessler, R. C., Chiu, W. T., Demler, O., & Walters, E. E. (2005). Prevalence, severity, and
comorbidity of twelve-month DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey
Replication (NCS-R). Archives of General Psychiatry, 62, 617–627.
Moreno, C., Laje, G., Blanco, C., Jiang, H., Schmidt, A. B., & Olfson, M., (2007). National trends
in the outpatient diagnosis and treatment of bipolar disorder in youth. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 64(9), 1032–1039.
Pollock, B. G., Forsyth, C. E., & Bies, R. R. (2008). The critical role of clinical pharmacology in
geriatric psychopharmacology. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 85, 89–93.
Rohsenow, D. J., Niaura, R. S., Childress, A. R., Abrams, D. B., &, Monti, P. M. (1990). Cue reactivity
in addictive behaviors: Theoretical and treatment implications. International Journal of
Addiction, 25, 957–993.
Schwartz, J. B., & Abernethy, D. R. (2008). Aging and medications: Past, present, future. Clinical
Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 85, 3–10.
World Health Organization. (2004). Promoting mental health: concepts, emerging evidence,
practice (Summary Report). Geneva, Switzerland: Author. Retrieved from
http://www.who.int/mental_health/evidence/en/promoting_mhh.pdf
Zhou, S. F. (2009). Polymorphism of human cytochrome P450 2D6 and its clinical significance:
Part II. Clinical Pharmacokinetics, 48, 761–804.

Chapter 15: Social Psychology

28
Prejudice, Discrimination, and
Stereotyping
Susan T. Fiske

People are often biased against others outside of their own social group, showing prejudice
(emotional bias), stereotypes (cognitive bias), and discrimination (behavioral bias). In the past,
people used to be more explicit with their biases, but during the 20th century, when it became
less socially acceptable to exhibit bias, such things like prejudice, stereotypes, and
discrimination became more subtle (automatic, ambiguous, and ambivalent). In the 21st
century, however, with social group categories even more complex, biases may be
transforming once again.

Learning Objectives

•
•
•

Distinguish prejudice, stereotypes, and discrimination.
Distinguish old-fashioned, blatant biases from contemporary, subtle biases.
Understand old-fashioned biases such as social dominance orientation and right-wing.
authoritarianism.

•
•

Understand subtle, unexamined biases that are automatic, ambiguous, and ambivalent.
Understand 21st century biases that may break down as identities get more complicated.

Introduction
Even in one’s own family, everyone wants to be seen for who they are, not as “just another

501

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

typical X.” But still, people put
other people into groups, using
that

label

to

inform

their

evaluation of the person as a
whole—a process that can result
in serious consequences.

This

module focuses on biases against
social groups, which social psych­
ologists

sort

into

emotional

prejudices, mental stereotypes,
and behavioral discrimination.
These three aspects of bias are
related, but they each can occur
You are a complex individual, full of different dreams, beliefs, identities, and
more that help make you unique. You don’t want to be labeled just by your

separately

from

the

others

gender or race or religion. But as complex as we perceive ourselves to be,

(Dovidio & Gaertner, 2010; Fiske,

we often define others merely by their most distinct social group, and

1998). For example, sometimes

unfortunately having biases against these social groups is part of human

people have a negative, emotional

psychology. [Photo: leg0fenris]

reaction

to

a

social

group

(prejudice) without knowing even
the most superficial reasons to dislike them (stereotypes).
This module shows that today’s biases are not yesterday’s biases in many ways, but at the
same time, they are troublingly similar. First, we’ll discuss old-fashioned biases that might
have belonged to our grandparents and great-grandparents—or even the people nowadays
who have yet to leave those wrongful times. Next, we will discuss late 20th century biases
that affected our parents and still linger today. Finally, we will talk about today’s 21st century
biases that challenge fairness and respect for all.

Old-fashioned Biases: Almost Gone
You would be hard pressed to find someone today who openly admits they don’t believe in
equality. Regardless of one’s demographics, most people believe everyone is entitled to the
same, natural rights. However, as much as we now collectively believe this, not too far back
in our history, this ideal of equality was an unpracticed sentiment. Of all the countries in the
world, only a few have equality in their constitution, and those who do, originally defined it
for a select group of people.
At the time, old-fashioned biases were simple: people openly put down those not from their

502

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

own group. For example, just 80 years ago, American college students unabashedly thought
Turkish people were “cruel, very religious, and treacherous” (Katz & Braly, 1933). So where did
they get those ideas, assuming that most of them had never met anyone from Turkey? Oldfashioned stereotypes were overt, unapologetic, and expected to be shared by others—what
we now call “blatant biases.”
Blatant biases are conscious beliefs, feelings, and behavior that people are perfectly willing
to admit, which mostly express hostility toward other groups (outgroups) while unduly favoring
one’s own group (in-group). For example, organizations that preach contempt for other races
(and praise for their own) is an example of a blatant bias. And scarily, these blatant biases
tend to run in packs: People who openly hate one outgroup also hate many others. To illustrate
this pattern, we turn to two personality scales next.

Social Dominance Orientation
Social

dominance

orientation

(SDO)

describes a belief that group hierarchies are
inevitable in all societies and are even a good
idea to maintain order and stability
(Sidanius & Pratto, 1999). Those who score
high on SDO believe that some groups are
inherently better than others, and because
of this, there is no such thing as group
“equality.” At the same time, though, SDO is
not just about being personally dominant
and controlling of others; SDO describes a
preferred arrangement of groups with some
on top (preferably one’s own group) and
some on the bottom. For example, someone
high in SDO would likely be upset if someone
from an outgroup moved into his or her

People with a social dominance orientation are more likely to
be attracted to certain types of careers, such as law

neighborhood. It’s not that the person high

enforcement, that maintain group hierarchies. [Photo:

in SDO wants to “control” what this outgroup

canonsnapper]

member does; it’s that moving into this “nice
neighborhood” disrupts the social hierarchy the person high in SDO believes in (i.e. living in
a nice neighborhood denotes one’s place in the social hierarchy—a place reserved for one’s
in-group members).

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

503

Although research has shown that people higher in SDO are more likely to be politically
conservative, there are other traits that more strongly predict one’s SDO. For example,
researchers have found that those who score higher on SDO are usually lower than average
on tolerance, empathy, altruism, and community orientation. In general, those high in SDO
have a strong belief in work ethic—that hard work always pays off and leisure is a waste of
time. People higher on SDO tend to choose and thrive in occupations that maintain existing
group hierarchies (police, prosecutors, business), compared to those lower in SDO, who tend
to pick more equalizing occupations (social work, public defense, psychology).
The point is that SDO—a preference for inequality as normal and natural—also predicts
endorsing the superiority of certain groups: men, native-born residents, heterosexuals, and
believers in the dominant religion. This means seeing women, minorities, homosexuals, and
non-believers as inferior. Understandably, the first list of groups tend to score higher on SDO,
while the second group tends to score lower. For example, the SDO gender difference (men
higher, women lower) appears all over the world.
At its heart, SDO rests on a fundamental belief that the world is tough and competitive with
only a limited number of resources. Thus, those high in SDO see groups as battling each other
for these resources, with winners at the top of the social hierarchy and losers at the bottom
(see Table 1).

Table 1. Old-Fashioned Biases

Right-wing Authoritarianism
Right-wing authoritarianism (RWA) focuses on value conflicts, whereas SDO focuses on the
economic ones. That is, RWA endorses respect for obedience and authority in the service of
group conformity (Altemeyer, 1988). Returning to an example from earlier, the homeowner

504

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

who’s high in SDO may dislike the outgroup member moving into his or her neighborhood
because it “threatens” one’s economic resources (e.g. lowering the value of one’s house; fewer
openings in the school; etc.). Those high in RWA may equally dislike the outgroup member
moving into the neighborhood but for different reasons. Here, it’s because this outgroup
member brings in values or beliefs that the person high in RWA disagrees with, thus
“threatening” the collective values of his or her group. RWA respects group unity over individual
preferences, wanting to maintain group values in the face of differing opinions. Despite its
name, though, RWA is not necessarily limited to people on the right (conservatives). Like SDO,
there does appear to be an association between this personality scale (i.e. the preference for
order, clarity, and conventional values) and conservative beliefs. However, regardless of
political ideology, RWA focuses on groups’ competing frameworks of values. Extreme scores
on RWA predict biases against outgroups while demanding in-group loyalty and conformity
Notably, the combination of high RWA and high SDO predicts joining hate groups that openly
endorse aggression against minority groups, immigrants, homosexuals, and believers in nondominant religions (Altemeyer, 2004).

20th Century Biases: Subtle but Significant
Fortunately, old-fashioned biases
have diminished over the 20th
century and into the 21st century.
Openly expressing prejudice is like
blowing

second-hand

cigarette

smoke in someone’s face: It’s just
not done any more in most circles,
and if it is, people are readily
criticized for their behavior. Still,
these biases exist in people; they’re
just less in view than before. These
subtle biases are unexamined and
sometimes unconscious but real in
their

consequences.

They

are

automatic, ambiguous, and ambivalent,
but nonetheless biased, unfair, and
An actual screenshot from an IAT (Implicit Association Test) that is designed
to test a person’s reaction time (measured in milliseconds) to an array of
stimuli that are presented on the screen. This particular item is testing an

disrespectful

to

the

belief

equality.

individual’s unconscious reaction towards members of various ethnic
groups. [Image: Courtesy of Anthony Greenwald from Project Implicit]

Automatic Biases

in

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

505

Most people like themselves well enough, and most people identify themselves as members
of certain groups but not others. Logic suggests, then, that because we like ourselves, we
therefore like the groups we associate with more, whether those groups are our hometown,
school, religion, gender, or ethnicity. Liking yourself and your groups is human nature. The
larger issue, however, is that own-group preference often results in liking other groups less.
And whether you recognize this “favoritism” as wrong, this trade-off is relatively automatic,
that is, unintended, immediate, and irresistible.
Social psychologists have developed several ways to measure this relatively automatic owngroup preference, the most famous being the Implicit Association Test (IAT;Greenwald, Banaji,
Rudman, Farnham, Nosek, & Mellott, 2002; Greenwald, McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998). The test
itself is rather simple and you can experience it yourself if you Google “implicit” or go
to understandingprejudice.org. Essentially, the IAT is done on the computer and measures how
quickly you can sort words or pictures into different categories. For example, if you were asked
to categorize “ice cream” as good or bad, you would quickly categorize it as good. However,
imagine if every time you ate ice cream, you got a brain freeze. When it comes time to categorize
ice cream as good or bad, you may still categorize it as “good,” but you will likely be a little
slower in doing so compared to someone who has nothing but positive thoughts about ice
cream. Related to group biases, people may explicitly claim they don’t discriminate against
outgroups—and this is very likely true. However, when they’re given this computer task to
categorize people from these outgroups, that automatic or unconscious hesitation (a result
of having mixed evaluations about the outgroup) will show up in the test. And as countless
studies have revealed, people are mostly faster at pairing their own group with good
categories, compared to pairing others’ groups. In fact, this finding generally holds regardless
if one’s group is measured according race, age, religion, nationality, and even temporary,
insignificant memberships.
This all-too-human tendency would remain a mere interesting discovery except that people’s
reaction time on the IAT predicts actual feelings about individuals from other groups, decisions
about them, and behavior toward them, especially nonverbal behavior (Greenwald, Poehlman,
Uhlmann, & Banaji, 2009). For example, although a job interviewer may not be “blatantly
biased,” his or her “automatic or implicit biases” may result in unconsciously acting distant
and indifferent, which can have devastating effects on the hopeful interviewee’s ability to
perform well (Word, Zanna, & Cooper, 1973). Although this is unfair, sometimes the automatic
associations—often driven by society’s stereotypes—trump our own, explicit values (Devine,
1989). And sadly, this can result in consequential discrimination, such as allocating fewer
resources to disliked outgroups (Rudman & Ashmore, 2009). See Table 2 for a summary of
this section and the next two sections on subtle biases.

506

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

Table 2: Subtle Biases

Ambiguous Biases
As the IAT indicates, people’s biases often stem
from the spontaneous tendency to favor their own,
at the expense of the other. Social identity theory
(Tajfel, Billig, Bundy, & Flament, 1971) describes
this tendency to favor one’s own in-group over
another’s outgroup. And as a result, outgroup
disliking stems from this in-group liking (Brewer &
Brown, 1998). For example, if two classes of
children want to play on the same soccer field, the
classes will come to dislike each other not because
of any real, objectionable traits about the other
group. The dislike originates from each class’s
favoritism toward itself and the fact that only one
group can play on the soccer field at a time. With
this preferential perspective for one’s own group,
people are not punishing the other one so much
as neglecting it in favor of their own. However, to
justify this preferential treatment, people will often
exaggerate the differences between their in-group
and the outgroup. In turn, people see the outgroup
Whether we are aware of it or not (and usually we're

as more similar in personality than they are. This

not), we sort the world into "us" and "them"

results in the perception that “they” really differ

categories. We are more likely to treat with bias or

from us, and “they” are all alike. Spontaneously,

discrimination anyone we feel is outside our own
group. [Photo: id-iom]

people categorize people into groups just as we
categorize furniture or food into one type or

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

507

another. The difference is that we people inhabit categories ourselves, as self-categorization
theory points out (Turner, 1975). Because the attributes of group categories can be either
good or bad, we tend to favor the groups with people like us and incidentally disfavor the
others. In-group favoritism is an ambiguous form of bias because it disfavors the outgroup
by exclusion. For example, if a politician has to decide between funding one program or
another, s/he may be more likely to give resources to the group that more closely represents
his in-group. And this life-changing decision stems from the simple, natural human tendency
to be more comfortable with people like yourself.
A specific case of comfort with the ingroup is called aversive racism, so-called because people
do not like to admit their own racial biases to themselves or others (Dovidio & Gaertner, 2010).
Tensions between, say, a White person’s own good intentions and discomfort with the perhaps
novel situation of interacting closely with a Black person may cause the White person to feel
uneasy, behave stiffly, or be distracted. As a result, the White person may give a good excuse
to avoid the situation altogether and prevent any awkwardness that could have come from
it. However, such a reaction will be ambiguous to both parties and hard to interpret. That is,
was the White person right to avoid the situation so that neither person would feel
uncomfortable? Indicators of aversive racism correlate with discriminatory behavior, despite
being the ambiguous result of good intentions gone bad.

Bias Can Be Complicated - Ambivalent Biases
Not all stereotypes of outgroups are all bad. For example, ethnic Asians living in the United
States are commonly referred to as the “model minority” because of their perceived success
in areas such as education, income, and social stability. Another example includes people
who feel benevolent toward traditional women but hostile toward nontraditional women. Or
even ageist people who feel respect toward older adults but, at the same time, worry about
the burden they place on public welfare programs. A simple way to understand these mixed
feelings, across a variety of groups, results from the Stereotype Content Model (Fiske, Cuddy,
& Glick, 2007).
When people learn about a new group, they first want to know if its intentions of the people
in this group are for good or ill. Like the guard at night: “Who goes there, friend or foe?” If the
other group has good, cooperative intentions, we view them as warm and trustworthy and
often consider them part of “our side.” However, if the other group is cold and competitive or
full of exploiters, we often view them as a threat and treat them accordingly. After learning
the group’s intentions, though, we also want to know whether they are competent enough to
act on them (if they are incompetent, or unable, their intentions matter less). These two simple

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

508

dimensions—warmth and competence—together map how groups relate to each other in
society.

Figure 1: Stereotype Content Model - 4 kinds of stereotypes that
form from perceptions of competence and warmth

There are common stereotypes of people from all sorts of categories and occupations that
lead them to be classified along these two dimensions. For example, a stereotypical
“housewife” would be seen as high in warmth but lower in competence. This is not to suggest
that actual housewives are not competent, of course, but that they are not widely admired
for their competence in the same way as scientific pioneers, trendsetters, or captains of
industry. At another end of the spectrum are homeless people and drug addicts, stereotyped
as not having good intentions (perhaps exploitative for not trying to play by the rules), and
likewise being incompetent (unable) to do anything useful. These groups reportedly make
society more disgusted than any other groups do.
Some group stereotypes are mixed, high on one dimension and low on the other. Groups
stereotyped as competent but not warm, for example, include rich people and outsiders good
at business. These groups that are seen as “competent but cold” make people feel some envy,
admitting that these others may have some talent but resenting them for not being “people
like us.” The “model minority” stereotype mentioned earlier includes people with this excessive
competence but deficient sociability.

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

509

The other mixed combination is high warmth but low competence. Groups who fit this
combination include older people and disabled people. Others report pitying them, but only
so long as they stay in their place. In an effort to combat this negative stereotype, disabilityand elderly-rights activists try to eliminate that pity, hopefully gaining respect in the process.
Altogether, these four kinds of stereotypes and their associated emotional prejudices (pride,
disgust, envy, pity) occur all over the world for each of society’s own groups. These maps of
the group terrain predict specific types of discrimination for specific kinds of groups,
underlining how bias is not exactly equal opportunity.

Figure 2: Combinations of perceived warmth and confidence and
the associated behaviors/emotional prejudices.

Conclusion: 21st Century Prejudices
As the world becomes more interconnected—more collaborations between countries, more
intermarrying between different groups—more and more people are encountering greater
diversity of others in everyday life. Just ask yourself if you’ve ever been asked, “What are you?”
Such a question would be preposterous if you were only surrounded by members of your
own group. Categories, then, are becoming more and more uncertain, unclear, volatile, and
complex (Bodenhausen & Peery, 2009). People’s identities are multifaceted, intersecting
across gender, race, class, age, region, and more. Identities are not so simple, but maybe as

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

510

the 21st century unfurls, we will recognize each other by the content of our character instead
of the cover on our outside.

511

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

Outside Resources
Web: Website exploring the causes and consequences of prejudice.
http://www.understandingprejudice.org/

Discussion Questions
1. Do you know more people from different kinds of social groups than your parents did?
2. How often do you hear people criticizing groups without knowing anything about them?
3. Take the IAT. Could you feel that some associations are easier than others?
4. What groups illustrate ambivalent biases, seemingly competent but cold, or warm but
incompetent?
5. Do you or someone you know believe that group hierarchies are inevitable? Desirable?
6. How can people learn to get along with people who seem different from them?

512

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

Vocabulary
Automatic bias
Automatic biases are unintended, immediate, and irresistible.
Aversive racism
Aversive racism is unexamined racial bias that the person does not intend and would reject,
but that avoids inter-racial contact.
Blatant biases
Blatant biases are conscious beliefs, feelings, and behavior that people are perfectly willing
to admit, are mostly hostile, and openly favor their own group.
Discrimination
Discrimination is behavior that advantages or disadvantages people merely based on their
group membership.
Implicit Association Test
Implicit Association Test (IAT) measures relatively automatic biases that favor own group
relative to other groups.
Prejudice
Prejudice is an evaluation or emotion toward people merely based on their group
membership.
Right-wing authoritarianism
Right-wing authoritarianism (RWA) focuses on value conflicts but endorses respect for
obedience and authority in the service of group conformity.
Self-categorization theory
Self-categorization theory develops social identity theory’s point that people categorize
themselves, along with each other into groups, favoring their own group.
Social dominance orientation
Social dominance orientation (SDO) describes a belief that group hierarchies are inevitable in
all societies and even good, to maintain order and stability.
Social identity theory

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

513

Social identity theory notes that people categorize each other into groups, favoring their own
group.
Stereotype Content Model
Stereotype Content Model shows that social groups are viewed according to their perceived
warmth and competence.
Stereotypes
Stereotype is a belief that characterizes people based merely on their group membership.
Subtle biases
Subtle biases are automatic, ambiguous, and ambivalent, but real in their consequences.

514

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

References
Altemeyer, B. (2004). Highly dominating, highly authoritarian personalities. The Journal of Social
Psychology, 144(4), 421-447. doi:10.3200/SOCP.144.4.421-448
Altemeyer, B. (1988). Enemies of freedom: Understanding right-wing authoritarianism. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bodenhausen, G. V., & Peery, D. (2009). Social categorization and stereotyping in vivo: The
VUCA challenge. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 3(2), 133-151. doi:10.1111/
j.1751-9004.2009.00167.x
Brewer, M. B., & Brown, R. J. (1998). Intergroup relations. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey
(Eds.), The handbook of social psychology, Vols. 1 and 2 (4th ed.) (pp. 554-594). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Devine, P. G. (1989). Stereotypes and prejudice: Their automatic and controlled components.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56(1), 5-18. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.56.1.5
Dovidio, J. F., & Gaertner, S. L. (2010). Intergroup bias. In S. T. Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey
(Eds.), Handbook of social psychology, Vol. 2 (5th ed.) (pp. 1084-1121). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley.
Fiske, S. T. (1998). Stereotyping, prejudice, and discrimination. In D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G.
Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social psychology, Vols. 1 and 2 (4th ed.) (pp. 357-411). New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Fiske, S. T., Cuddy, A. J. C., & Glick, P. (2007). Universal dimensions of social cognition: Warmth
and competence. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(2), 77-83. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2006.11.005
Greenwald, A. G., Banaji, M. R., Rudman, L. A., Farnham, S. D., Nosek, B. A., & Mellott, D. S.
(2002). A unified theory of implicit attitudes, stereotypes, self-esteem, and self-concept.
Psychological Review, 109(1), 3-25. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.109.1.3
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998). Measuring individual differences
in implicit cognition: The implicit association test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
74(6), 1464-1480. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.74.6.1464
Greenwald, A. G., Poehlman, T. A., Uhlmann, E. L., & Banaji, M. R. (2009). Understanding and
using the Implicit Association Test: III. Meta-analysis of predictive validity. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 97(1), 17-41. doi:10.1037/a0015575
Katz, D., & Braly, K. (1933). Racial stereotypes of one hundred college students. The Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 28(3), 280-290. doi:10.1037/h0074049
Rudman, L. A., & Ashmore, R. D. (2007). Discrimination and the implicit association test. Group
Processes & Intergroup Relations, 10(3), 359-372. doi:10.1177/1368430207078696

Prejudice, Discrimination, and Stereotyping

515

Sidanius, J., & Pratto, F. (1999). Social dominance: An intergroup theory of social hierarchy and
oppression. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tajfel, H., Billig, M. G., Bundy, R. P., & Flament, C. (1971). Social categorization and intergroup
behaviour. European Journal of Social Psychology, 1(2), 149-178. doi:10.1002/
ejsp.2420010202
Turner, J. C. (1975). Social comparison and social identity: Some prospects for intergroup
behaviour. European Journal of Social Psychology, 5(1), 5-34. doi:10.1002/ejsp.2420050102
Word, C. O., Zanna, M. P., & Cooper, J. (1974). The nonverbal mediation of self-fulfilling
prophecies in interracial interaction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 10(2),
109-120. doi:10.1016/0022-1031(74)90059-6

29
Persuasion: So Easily Fooled
Robert V. Levine

This module introduces several major principles in the process of persuasion. It offers an
overview of the different paths to persuasion. It then describes how mindless processing
makes us vulnerable to undesirable persuasion and some of the “tricks” that may be used
against us.

Learning Objectives

•
•

Recognize the difference between the central and peripheral routes to persuasion.
Understand the concepts of trigger features, fixed action patterns, heuristics, and mindless
thinking, and how these processes are essential to our survival but, at the same time, leave
us vulnerable to exploitation.

•
•

Understand some common “tricks” persuasion artists may use to take advantage of us.
Use this knowledge to make you less susceptible to unwanted persuasion.

Introduction
Have you ever tried to swap seats with a stranger on an airline? Ever negotiated the price of
a car? Ever tried to convince someone to recycle, quit smoking, or make a similar change in
health behaviors? If so, you are well versed with how persuasion can show up in everyday life.
Persuasion has been defined as “the process by which a message induces change in beliefs,
attitudes, or behaviors” (Myers, 2011). Persuasion can take many forms. It may, for example,

517

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

differ in whether it targets public compliance or private acceptance, is short-term or longterm, whether it involves slowly escalating commitments or sudden interventions and, most
of all, in the benevolence of its intentions. When persuasion is well-meaning, we might call it
education. When it is manipulative, it might be called mind control (Levine, 2003).
Whatever the content, however, there
is a similarity to the form of the
persuasion process itself. As the
advertising commentator Sid Bernstein
once observed, “Of course, you sell
candidates for political office the same
way you sell soap or sealing wax or
whatever; because, when you get right
down to it, that’s the only way anything
is sold” (Levine, 2003).
Persuasion is one of the most studied
The instruments of persuasion work the same for selling products or
politicians. [Image: Brian]

of all social psychology phenomena.
This module provides an introduction
to several of its most important

components.

Two Paths to Persuasion
Persuasion theorists distinguish between the central and peripheral routes to persuasion
(Petty & Cacioppo, 1986). The central route employs direct, relevant, logical messages. This
method rests on the assumption that the audience is motivated, will think carefully about
what is presented, and will react on the basis of your arguments. The central route is intended
to produce enduring agreement. For example, you might decide to vote for a particular political
candidate after hearing her speak and finding her logic and proposed policies to be convincing.
The peripheral route, on the other hand, relies on superficial cues that have little to do with
logic. The peripheral approach is the salesman’s way of thinking. It requires a target who isn’t
thinking carefully about what you are saying. It requires low effort from the target and often
exploits rule-of-thumb heuristics that trigger mindless reactions (see below). It may be
intended to persuade you to do something you do not want to do and might later be sorry
you did. Advertisements, for example, may show celebrities, cute animals, beautiful scenery,
or provocative sexual images that have nothing to do with the product. The peripheral

518

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

approach is also common in the darkest of persuasion programs, such as those of dictators
and cult leaders. Returning to the example of voting, you can experience the peripheral route
in action when you see a provocative, emotionally charged political advertisement that tugs
at you to vote a particular way.

Triggers and Fixed Action Patterns
The central route emphasizes objective communication of information. The peripheral route
relies on psychological techniques. These techniques may take advantage of a target’s not
thinking carefully about the message. The process mirrors a phenomenon in animal behavior
known as fixed action patterns (FAPs). These are sequences of behavior that occur in exactly
the same fashion, in exactly the same order, every time they’re elicited. Cialdini (2008)
compares it to a prerecorded tape that is turned on and, once it is, always plays to its finish.
He describes it is as if the animal were turning on a tape recorder (Cialdini, 2008). There is the
feeding tape, the territorial tape, the migration tape, the nesting tape, the aggressive tape—
each sequence ready to be played when a situation calls for it.
In humans fixed action patterns include many of the activities we engage in while mentally
on "auto-pilot." These behaviors are so automatic that it is very difficult to control them. If
you ever feed a baby, for instance, nearly everyone mimics each bite the baby takes by opening
and closing their own mouth! If two people near you look up and point you will automatically
look up yourself. We also operate in a reflexive, non-thinking way when we make many
decisions. We are more likely, for example, to be less critical about medical advice dispensed
from a doctor than from a friend who read an interesting article on the topic in a popular
magazine.
A notable characteristic of fixed action patterns is how they are activated. At first glance, it
appears the animal is responding to the overall situation. For example, the maternal tape
appears to be set off when a mother sees her hungry baby, or the aggressive tape seems to
be activated when an enemy invades the animal’s territory. It turns out, however, that the on/
off switch may actually be controlled by a specific, minute detail of the situation—maybe a
sound or shape or patch of color. These are the hot buttons of the biological world—what
Cialdini refers to as “trigger features” and biologists call “releasers.”
Humans are not so different. Take the example of a study conducted on various ways to
promote a campus bake sale for charity (Levine, 2003). Simply displaying the cookies and
other treats to passersby did not generate many sales (only 2 out of 30 potential customers
made a purchase). In an alternate condition, however, when potential customers were asked

519

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

to "buy a cookie for a good cause" the
number rose to 12 out of 30. It seems
that the phrase "a good cause"
triggered a willingness to act. In fact,
when the phrase "a good cause" was
paired

with

a

locally-recognized

charity (known for its food-for-thehomeless program) the numbers held
steady at 14 out of 30. When a fictional
good cause was used instead (the
make believe "Levine House") still 11
out of 30 potential customers made
Certain triggers can cause people to switch into an automatic pattern
of behavior. In an experiment, potential customers were more easily
persuaded to buy when they heard the words "for a good cause." [Photo:
Alameda County Library]

purchases and not one asked about
the purpose or nature of the cause.
The phrase "for a good cause" was an
influential enough hot button that the

exact cause didn't seem to matter.
The effectiveness of peripheral persuasion relies on our frequent reliance on these sorts of
fixed action patterns and trigger features. These mindless, rules-of-thumb are generally
effective shortcuts for coping with the overload of information we all must confront. They
serve as heuristics—mental shortcuts-- that enable us to make decisions and solve problems
quickly and efficiently. They also, however, make us vulnerable to uninvited exploitation
through the peripheral route of persuasion.

The Source of Persuasion: The Triad of Trustworthiness
Effective persuasion re­
quires trusting the source
of the communication.
Studies have identified
three characteristics that
lead to trust: perceived
authority, honesty, and
likability.
When the source appears
to have any or all of

520

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

these characteristics, people not only are more willing to agree to their request but are willing
to do so without carefully considering the facts. We assume we are on safe ground and are
happy to shortcut the tedious process of informed decision making. As a result, we are more
susceptible to messages and requests, no matter their particular content or how peripheral
they may be.

Authority
From earliest childhood, we learn to rely on authority figures for sound decision making
because their authority signifies status and power, as well as expertise. These two facets often
work together. Authorities such as parents and teachers are not only our primary sources of
wisdom while we grow up, but they control us and our access to the things we want. In
addition, we have been taught to believe that respect for authority is a moral virtue. As adults,
it is natural to transfer this respect to society’s designated authorities, such as judges, doctors,
bosses, and religious leaders. We assume their positions give them special access to
information and power. Usually we are correct, so that our willingness to defer to authorities
becomes a convenient shortcut to sound decision making. Uncritical trust in authority may,
however, lead to bad decisions. Perhaps the most famous study ever conducted in social
psychology demonstrated that, when conditions were set up just so, two-thirds of a sample
of psychologically normal men were willing to administer potentially lethal shocks to a stranger
when an apparent authority in a laboratory coat ordered them to do so (Milgram, 1974; Burger,
2009).
Uncritical trust in authority can be problematic for several reasons. First, even if the source
of the message is a legitimate, well-intentioned authority, they may not always be correct.
Second, when respect for authority becomes mindless, expertise in one domain may be
confused with expertise in general. To assume there is credibility when a successful actor
promotes a cold remedy, or when a psychology professor offers his views about politics, can
lead to problems. Third, the authority may not be legitimate. It is not difficult to fake a college
degree or professional credential or to buy an official-looking badge or uniform.

Honesty
Honesty is the moral dimension of trustworthiness. Persuasion professionals have long
understood how critical it is to their efforts. Marketers, for example, dedicate exorbitant
resources to developing and maintaining an image of honesty. A trusted brand or company
name becomes a mental shortcut for consumers. It is estimated that some 50,000 new
products come out each year. Forrester Research, a marketing research company, calculates

521

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

that children have seen almost six million ads by the age of 16. An established brand name
helps us cut through this volume of information. It signals we are in safe territory. “The real
suggestion to convey,” advertising leader Theodore MacManus observed in 1910, “is that the
man manufacturing the product is an honest man, and the product is an honest product, to
be preferred above all others” (Fox, 1997).

Likability
If we know that celebrities aren’t really experts, and that
they are being paid to say what they’re saying, why do their
endorsements sell so many products? Ultimately, it is
because we like them. More than any single quality, we
trust people we like. Roger Ailes, a public relations adviser
to Presidents Reagan and George H.W. Bush, observed: “If
you could master one element of personal communication
that is more powerful than anything . . . it is the quality of
being likeable. I call it the magic bullet, because if your
audience likes you, they’ll forgive just about everything else
you do wrong. If they don’t like you, you can hit every rule
right on target and it doesn’t matter.”
The mix of qualities that make a person likable are complex
People tend to favor products that are

and often do not generalize from one situation to another.

associated with people they like. This is the

One clear finding, however, is that physically attractive

key ingredient to celebrity endorsements.

people tend to be liked more. In fact, we prefer them to a

While there are a lot of factors that can

disturbing extent: Various studies have shown we perceive

contribute to likability, being physically

attractive people as smarter, kinder, stronger, more

attractive is right at the top of the list in
terms of importance.
Biard]

[Photo: Georges

successful, more socially skilled, better poised, better
adjusted, more exciting, more nurturing, and, most
important, of higher moral character. All of this is based

on no other information than their physical appearance (e.g., Dion, Berscheid, & Walster,
1972).

Manipulating the Perception of Trustworthiness
The perception of trustworthiness is highly susceptible to manipulation. Levine (2003) lists
some of the most common psychological strategies that are used to achieve this effect:

522

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

Testimonials and Endorsement
This technique employs someone who people already trust to testify about the product or
message being sold. The technique goes back to the earliest days of advertising when satisfied
customers might be shown describing how a patent medicine cured their life-long battle with
“nerves” or how Dr. Scott’s Electric Hair Brush healed their baldness (“My hair (was) falling out,
and I was rapidly becoming bald, but since using the brush a thick growth of hair has made
its appearance, quite equal to that I had before previous to its falling out,” reported a satisfied
customer in an 1884 ad for the product). Similarly, Kodak had Prince Henri D’Orleans and
others endorse the superior quality of their camera (“The results are marvellous[sic]. The
enlargements which you sent me are superb,“ stated Prince Henri D’Orleans in a 1888 ad).
Celebrity endorsements are a frequent feature in commercials aimed at children. The practice
has aroused considerable ethical concern, and research shows the concern is warranted. In
a study funded by the Federal Trade Commission, more than 400 children ages 8 to 14 were
shown one of various commercials for a model racing set. Some of the commercials featured
an endorsement from a famous race car driver, some included real racing footage, and others
included neither. Children who watched the celebrity endorser not only preferred the toy cars
more but were convinced the endorser was an expert about the toys. This held true for children
of all ages. In addition, they believed the toy race cars were bigger, faster, and more complex
than real race cars they saw on film. They were also less likely to believe the commercial was
staged (Ross et al., 1984).

Presenting the Message as Education
The message may be framed as objective information. Salespeople, for example, may try to
convey the impression they are less interested in selling a product than helping you make the
best decision. The implicit message is that being informed is in everyone’s best interest,
because they are confident that when you understand what their product has to offer that

523

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

you will conclude it is the best choice. Levine (2003) describes how, during training for a job
as a used car salesman, he was instructed: “If the customer tells you they do not want to be
bothered by a salesperson, your response is ‘I’m not a salesperson, I’m a product consultant.
I don’t give prices or negotiate with you. I’m simply here to show you our inventory and help
you find a vehicle that will fit your needs.’”

Word of Mouth
Imagine you read an ad that claims a new restaurant has the best food in your city. Now,
imagine a friend tells you this new restaurant has the best food in the city. Who are you more
likely to believe? Surveys show we turn to people around us for many decisions. A 1995 poll
found that 70% of Americans rely on personal advice when selecting a new doctor. The same
poll found that 53% of moviegoers are influenced by the recommendation of a person they
know. In another survey, 91% said they’re likely to use another person’s recommendation
when making a major purchase.
Persuasion professionals may exploit these tendencies. Often, in fact, they pay for the surveys.
Using this data, they may try to disguise their message as word of mouth from your peers.
For example, Cornerstone Promotion, a leading marketing firm that advertises itself as underthe-radar marketing specialists, sometimes hires children to log into chat rooms and pretend
to be fans of one of their clients or pays students to throw parties where they subtly circulate
marketing material among their classmates.

The Maven
More persuasive yet, however, is to involve peers face-to-face. Rather than over-investing in
formal advertising, businesses and organizations may plant seeds at the grassroots level
hoping that consumers themselves will then spread the word to each other. The seeding
process begins by identifying so-called information hubs—individuals the marketers believe
can and will reach the most other people.
The seeds may be planted with established opinion leaders. Software companies, for example,
give advance copies of new computer programs to professors they hope will recommend it
to students and colleagues. Pharmaceutical companies regularly provide travel expenses and
speaking fees to researchers willing to lecture to health professionals about the virtues of
their drugs. Hotels give travel agents free weekends at their resorts in the hope they’ll later
recommend them to clients seeking advice.

524

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

There is a Yiddish word, maven, which refers to a person who’s an expert or a connoisseur,
as in a friend who knows where to get the best price on a sofa or the co-worker you can turn
to for advice about where to buy a computer. They (a) know a lot of people, (b) communicate
a great deal with people, (c) are more likely than others to be asked for their opinions, and (d)
enjoy spreading the word about what they know and think. Most important of all, they are
trusted. As a result, mavens are often targeted by persuasion professionals to help spread
their message.

Other Tricks of Persuasion
There are many other mindless, mental shortcuts—heuristics and fixed action patterns—that
leave us susceptible to persuasion. A few examples:

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

"Free Gifts" & Reciprocity
Social Proof
Getting a Foot-in-the-Door
A Door-in-the-Face
"And That's Not All"
The Sunk Cost Trap
Scarcity & Psychological Reactance

Reciprocity
“There is no duty more indispensable than that of returning a kindness,” wrote Cicero. Humans
are motivated by a sense of equity and fairness. When someone does something for us or
gives us something, we feel obligated to return the favor in kind. It triggers one of the most
powerful of social norms, the reciprocity rule, whereby we feel compelled to repay, in equitable
value, what another person has given to us.
Gouldner (1960), in his seminal study of the reciprocity rule, found it appears in every culture.
It lays the basis for virtually every type of social relationship, from the legalities of business
arrangements to the subtle exchanges within a romance. A salesperson may offer free gifts,
concessions, or their valuable time in order to get us to do something for them in return. For
example, if a colleague helps you when you’re busy with a project, you might feel obliged to
support her ideas for improving team processes. You might decide to buy more from a supplier
if they have offered you an aggressive discount. Or, you might give money to a charity

525

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

fundraiser who has given you a flower in the street (Cialdini, 2008; Levine, 2003).

Social Proof
If everyone is doing it, it must be right. People are more likely to work late if others on their
team are doing the same, to put a tip in a jar that already contains money, or eat in a restaurant
that is busy. This principle derives from two extremely powerful social forces—social
comparison and conformity. We compare our behavior to what others are doing and, if there
is a discrepancy between the other person and ourselves, we feel pressure to change (Cialdini,
2008).
The principle of social proof is so
common that it easily passes unnoticed.
Advertisements, for example, often
consist of little more than attractive
social models appealing to our desire to
be one of the group. For example, the
German candy company Haribo suggests
that when you purchase their products
you are joining a larger society of
satisfied customers: “Kids and grownups love it so-- the happy world of
Haribo”. Sometimes social cues are

While few people really like to wait in long lines, we might do it

presented with such specificity that it is

anyway in certain situations. If enough people are willing to wait it

as if the target is being manipulated by a

(usually) is a sign that there is something worth having at the end.

puppeteer—for example, the laugh

A line in front of a restaurant, movie, etc. is social proof that will

tracks

likely influence other people to try. [Photo: mattdaily]

on

situation

comedies

that

instruct one not only when to laugh but
how to laugh. Studies find these techniques work. Fuller and Skeehy-Skeffington (1974), for
example, found that audiences laughed longer and more when a laugh track accompanied
the show than when it did not, even though respondents knew the laughs they heard were
connived by a technician from old tapes that had nothing to do with the show they were
watching. People are particularly susceptible to social proof (a) when they are feeling uncertain,
and (b) if the people in the comparison group seem to be similar to ourselves. As P.T. Barnum
once said, “Nothing draws a crowd like a crowd.”

Commitment and Consistency

526

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

Westerners have a desire to both feel and be perceived to act consistently. Once we have
made an initial commitment, it is more likely that we will agree to subsequent commitments
that follow from the first. Knowing this, a clever persuasion artist might induce someone to
agree to a difficult-to-refuse small request and follow this with progressively larger requests
that were his target from the beginning. The process is known as getting a foot in the door
and then slowly escalating the commitments.
Paradoxically, we are less likely to say “No” to a large request than we are to a small request
when it follows this pattern. This can have costly consequences. Levine (2003), for example,
found ex-cult members tend to agree with the statement: “Nobody ever joins a cult. They just
postpone the decision to leave.”

A Door in the Face
Some techniques bring a paradoxical approach to the escalation sequence by pushing a
request to or beyond its acceptable limit and then backing off. In the door-in-the-face
(sometimes called the reject-then-compromise) procedure, the persuader begins with a large
request they expect will be rejected. They want the door to be slammed in their face. Looking
forlorn, they now follow this with a smaller request, which, unknown to the customer, was
their target all along.
In one study, for example, Mowen and Cialdini (1980), posing as representatives of the fictitious
“California Mutual Insurance Co.,” asked university students walking on campus if they’d be
willing to fill out a survey about safety in the home or dorm. The survey, students were told,
would take about 15 minutes. Not surprisingly, most of the students declined—only one out
of four complied with the request. In another condition, however, the researchers door-inthe-faced them by beginning with a much larger request. “The survey takes about two hours,”
students were told. Then, after the subject declined to participate, the experimenters retreated
to the target request: “. . . look, one part of the survey is particularly important and is fairly
short. It will take only 15 minutes to administer.” Almost twice as many now complied.

And That’s Not All!
The that’s-not-all technique also begins with the salesperson asking a high price. This is
followed by several seconds’ pause during which the customer is kept from responding. The
salesperson then offers a better deal by either lowering the price or adding a bonus product.
That’s-not-all is a variation on door-in-the-face. Whereas the latter begins with a request that
will be rejected, however, that’s-not-all gains its influence by putting the customer on the

527

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

fence, allowing them to waver and then offering them a comfortable way off.
Burger (1986) demonstrated the technique in a series of field experiments. In one study, for
example, an experimenter-salesman told customers at a student bake sale that cupcakes cost
75 cents. As this price was announced, another salesman held up his hand and said, “Wait a
second,” briefly consulted with the first salesman, and then announced (“that’s-not-all”) that
the price today included two cookies. In a control condition, customers were offered the
cupcake and two cookies as a package for 75 cents right at the onset. The bonus worked
magic: Almost twice as many people bought cupcakes in the that’s-not-all condition (73%)
than in the control group (40%).

The Sunk Cost Trap
Sunk cost is a term used in economics referring to nonrecoverable investments of time or
money. The trap occurs when a person’s aversion to loss impels them to throw good money
after bad, because they don’t want to waste their earlier investment. This is vulnerable to
manipulation. The more time and energy a cult recruit can be persuaded to spend with the
group, the more “invested” they will feel, and, consequently, the more of a loss it will feel to
leave that group. Consider the advice of billionaire investor Warren Buffet: “When you find
yourself in a hole, the best thing you can do is stop digging” (Levine, 2003).

Scarcity and Psychological Reactance
People tend to perceive things as more
attractive when their availability is limited,
or when they stand to lose the opportunity
to acquire them on favorable terms (Cialdini,
2008). Anyone who has encountered a
willful child is familiar with this principle. In
a classic study, Brehm & Weinraub (1977),
for example, placed 2-year-old boys in a
room with a pair of equally attractive toys.
One of the toys was placed next to a
People may be more attracted to an opportunity when supplies

plexiglass wall; the other was set behind the

or time is limited. [Photo: watz]

plexiglass. For some boys, the wall was 1 foot
high, which allowed the boys to easily reach

over and touch the distant toy. Given this easy access, they showed no particular preference
for one toy or the other. For other boys, however, the wall was a formidable 2 feet high, which

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

528

required them to walk around the barrier to touch the toy. When confronted with this wall
of inaccessibility, the boys headed directly for the forbidden fruit, touching it three times as
quickly as the accessible toy.
Research shows that much of that 2-year-old remains in adults, too. People resent being
controlled. When a person seems too pushy, we get suspicious, annoyed, often angry, and
yearn to retain our freedom of choice more than before. Brehm (1966) labeled this the principle
of psychological reactance.
The most effective way to circumvent psychological reactance is to first get a foot in the door
and then escalate the demands so gradually that there is seemingly nothing to react against.
Hassan (1988), who spent many years as a higher-up in the “Moonies” cult, describes how
they would shape behaviors subtly at first, then more forcefully. The material that would make
up the new identity of a recruit was doled out gradually, piece by piece, only as fast as the
person was deemed ready to assimilate it. The rule of thumb was to “tell him only what he
can accept.” He continues: “Don’t sell them [the converts] more than they can handle . . . . If
a recruit started getting angry because he was learning too much about us, the person working
on him would back off and let another member move in .....”

Defending Against Unwelcome Persuasion
The most commonly used approach to help people defend against unwanted persuasion is
known as the “inoculation” method. Research has shown that people who are subjected to
weak versions of a persuasive message are less vulnerable to stronger versions later on, in
much the same way that being exposed to small doses of a virus immunizes you against fullblown attacks. In a classic study by McGuire (1964), subjects were asked to state their opinion
on an issue. They were then mildly attacked for their position and then given an opportunity
to refute the attack. When later confronted by a powerful argument against their initial
opinion, these subjects were more resistant than were a control group. In effect, they
developed defenses that rendered them immune.
Sagarin and his colleagues have developed a more aggressive version of this technique that
they refer to as “stinging” (Sagarin, Cialdini, Rice, & Serna, 2002). Their studies focused on the
popular advertising tactic whereby well-known authority figures are employed to sell products
they know nothing about, for example, ads showing a famous astronaut pontificating on Rolex
watches. In a first experiment, they found that simply forewarning people about the
deviousness of these ads had little effect on peoples’ inclination to buy the product later. Next,
they stung the subjects. This time, they were immediately confronted with their gullibility.

529

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

“Take a look at your answer to the first question. Did you find the ad to be even somewhat
convincing? If so, then you got fooled. ... Take a look at your answer to the second question.
Did you notice that this ‘stockbroker’ was a fake?” They were then asked to evaluate a new set
of ads. The sting worked. These subjects were not only more likely to recognize the
manipulativeness of deceptive ads; they were also less likely to be persuaded by them.
Anti-vulnerability trainings such as these can be helpful. Ultimately, however, the most
effective defense against unwanted persuasion is to accept just how vulnerable we are. One
must, first, accept that it is normal to be vulnerable and, second, to learn to recognize the
danger signs when we are falling prey. To be forewarned is to be forearmed.

Conclusion
This module has provided a brief introduction to the psychological processes and subsequent
“tricks” involved in persuasion. It has emphasized the peripheral route of persuasion because
this is when we are most vulnerable to psychological manipulation. These vulnerabilities are
side effects of “normal” and usually adaptive psychological processes. Mindless heuristics
offer shortcuts for coping with a hopelessly complicated world. They are necessities for human
survival. All, however, underscore the dangers that accompany any mindless thinking.

530

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

Outside Resources
Book: Ariely, D. (2008). Predictably irrational. New York, NY: Harper.
Book: Cialdini, R. B. (2008). Influence: Science and practice (5th ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn and
Bacon.
Book: Gass, R., & Seiter, J. (2010). Persuasion, social influence, and compliance gaining (4th
ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Book: Kahneman, D. (2012). Thinking fast and slow. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Book: Levine, R. (2006). The power of persuasion: how we\'re bought and sold. Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley
http://www.amazon.com/The-Power-Persuasion-Were-Bought/dp/0471763179
Book: Tavris, C., & Aronson, E. (2011). Mistakes were made (but not by me). New York, NY:
Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Student Video 1: Kyle Ball and Brandon Do's 'Principles of Persuasion'. This is a studentmade video highlighting 6 key principles of persuasion that we encounter in our everyday
lives. It was one of the winning entries in the 2015 Noba Student Video Award.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Orkt0wiEGt4
Student Video 2: 'Persuasion', created by Jake Teeny and Ben Oliveto, compares the central
and peripheral routes to persuasion and also looks at how techniques of persuasion such
as Scarcity and Social Proof influence our consumer choices. It was one of the winning
entries in the 2015 Noba Student Video Award.
https://vimeo.com/123205124
Student Video 3: 'Persuasion in Advertising' is a humorous look at the techniques used by
companies to try to convince us to buy their products. The video was created by the team
of Edward Puckering, Chris Cameron, and Kevin Smith. It was one of the winning entries
in the 2015 Noba Student Video Award.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B-UnkWGCKzU
Video: A brief, entertaining interview with the celebrity pickpocket shows how easily we
can be fooled. See A Pickpocket’s Tale at

531

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/culture/2013/01/video-the-art-of-pickpocketing.html
Video: Cults employ extreme versions of many of the principles in this module. An excellent
documentary tracing the history of the Jonestown cult is the PBS “American Experience”
production, Jonestown: The Life and Death of Peoples Temple at
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/features/introduction/jonestown-introduction/
Video: Philip Zimbardo’s now-classic video, Quiet Rage, offers a powerful, insightful
description of his famous Stanford prison study
http://www.prisonexp.org/documentary.htm
Video: The documentary Outfoxed provides an excellent example of how persuasion can
be masked as news and education.
http://www.outfoxed.org/
Video: The video, The Science of Countering Terrorism: Psychological Perspectives, a talk
by psychologist Fathali Moghaddam, is an excellent introduction to the process of terrorist
recruitment and thinking
http://sciencestage.com/v/32330/fathali-moghaddam-science-cafe-the-science-of-counterin­
g-terrorism-psychological-perspectives.html

Discussion Questions
1. Imagine you are commissioned to create an ad to sell a new beer. Can you give an example
of an ad that would rely on the central route? Can you give an example of an ad that would
rely on the peripheral route?
2. The reciprocity principle can be exploited in obvious ways, such as giving a customer a free
sample of a product. Can you give an example of a less obvious way it might be exploited?
What is a less obvious way that a cult leader might use it to get someone under his or her
grip?
3. Which “trick” in this module are you, personally, most prone to? Give a personal example
of this. How might you have avoided it?

532

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

Vocabulary
Central route to persuasion
Persuasion that employs direct, relevant, logical messages.
Fixed action patterns (FAPs)
Sequences of behavior that occur in exactly the same fashion, in exactly the same order, every
time they are elicited.
Foot in the door
Obtaining a small, initial commitment.
Gradually escalating commitments
A pattern of small, progressively escalating demands is less likely to be rejected than a single
large demand made all at once.
Heuristics
Mental shortcuts that enable people to make decisions and solve problems quickly and
efficiently.
Peripheral route to persuasion
Persuasion that relies on superficial cues that have little to do with logic.
Psychological reactance
A reaction to people, rules, requirements, or offerings that are perceived to limit freedoms.
Social proof
The mental shortcut based on the assumption that, if everyone is doing it, it must be right.
The norm of reciprocity
The normative pressure to repay, in equitable value, what another person has given to us.
The rule of scarcity
People tend to perceive things as more attractive when their availability is limited, or when
they stand to lose the opportunity to acquire them on favorable terms.
The triad of trust
We are most vulnerable to persuasion when the source is perceived as an authority, as honest

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

and likable.
Trigger features
Specific, sometimes minute, aspects of a situation that activate fixed action patterns.

533

534

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

References
Barrett, D. (2010). Supernormal stimuli: How primal urges overran their evolutionary purpose.
New York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Brehm, J. W. (1966). A theory of psychological reactance. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Brehm, S. S., & Weinraub, M. (1977). Physical barriers and psychological reactance: Two-yearolds’ responses to threats to freedom. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 830–
836.
Burger, J. M. (2009). Replicating Milgram: Would people still obey today? American Psychologist,
64(1), 1–11.
Burger, J. M. (1986). Increasing compliance by improving the deal: The that’s-not-all technique.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 277–283.
Cialdini, R. B. (2008). Influence: Science and practice (5th ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
Dion, K., Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. (1972). What is beautiful is good. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 24, 285–290
Fox, Stephen (1997). The mirror makers: A history of American advertising and its creators.
Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Fuller, R. G., & Sheehy-Skeffington, A. (1974). Effects of group laughter on responses to
humorous materials: A replication and extension. Psychological Reports, 35, 531–534.
Gouldner, A. W. (1960). The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary statement. American Sociological
Review, 25, 161–178.
Hassan, S. (1988). Combating cult mind control. Rochester, VT: Park Street Press.
Levine, R. (2003). The power of persuasion: How we’re bought and sold. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Levine, R. (2003). The power of persuasion: How we're bought and sold. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons
McGuire, W. (1964). Inducing resistance to persuasion: Some contemporary approaches. In
L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 1, p. 306). New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Milgram, S. (1974). Obedience to authority: An experimental view. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Mowen, J. C., & Cialdini, R. B. (1980). On implementing the door-in-the-face compliance
technique in a business context. Journal of Marketing Research, 17, 253–258.
Myers, David (2011). Social psychology (10th ed.). New York, NY: Worth.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion. In L.

Persuasion: So Easily Fooled

535

Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 19, pp. 123–205). San Diego,
CA: Academic Press.
Ross, R. P., Campbell, T., Wright, J. C., Huston, A. C., Rice, M. L., & Turk, P. (1984). When celebrities
talk, children listen: An experimental analysis of children’s responses to TV ads with celebrity
endorsement. Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 5, 185–202.
Sagarin, B. J., Cialdini, R. B., Rice, W. E., & Serna, S. B. (2002). Dispelling the illusion of
invulnerability: The motivations and mechanisms of resistance to persuasion. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 526–541.

30
Conformity and Obedience
Jerry M. Burger

We often change our attitudes and behaviors to match the attitudes and behaviors of the
people around us. One reason for this conformity is a concern about what other people think
of us. This process was demonstrated in a classic study in which college students deliberately
gave wrong answers to a simple visual judgment task rather than go against the group. Another
reason we conform to the norm is because other people often have information we do not,
and relying on norms can be a reasonable strategy when we are uncertain about how we are
supposed to act. Unfortunately, we frequently misperceive how the typical person acts, which
can contribute to problems such as the excessive binge drinking often seen in college students.
Obeying orders from an authority figure can sometimes lead to disturbing behavior. This
danger was illustrated in a famous study in which participants were instructed to administer
painful electric shocks to another person in what they believed to be a learning experiment.
Despite vehement protests from the person receiving the shocks, most participants continued
the procedure when instructed to do so by the experimenter. The findings raise questions
about the power of blind obedience in deplorable situations such as atrocities and genocide.
They also raise concerns about the ethical treatment of participants in psychology
experiments.

Learning Objectives

•

Become aware of how widespread conformity is in our lives and some of the ways each of
us changes our attitudes and behavior to match the norm.

•
•

Understand the two primary reasons why people often conform to perceived norms.
Appreciate how obedience to authority has been examined in laboratory studies and some
of the implications of the findings from these investigations.

•

Consider some of the remaining issues and sources of controversy surrounding Milgram’s

537

Conformity and Obedience

obedience studies.

Introduction
When he was a teenager, my son often enjoyed looking at photographs of me and my wife
taken when we were in high school. He laughed at the hairstyles, the clothing, and the kind
of glasses people wore “back then.” And when he was through with his ridiculing, we would
point out that no one is immune to fashions and fads and that someday his children will
probably be equally amused by his high school photographs and the trends he found so
normal at the time.
Everyday observation confirms that we often adopt the actions and attitudes of the people
around us. Trends in clothing, music, foods, and entertainment are obvious. But our views on
political issues, religious questions, and lifestyles also reflect to some degree the attitudes of
the people we interact with. Similarly, decisions about behaviors such as smoking and drinking
are influenced by whether the people we spend time with engage in these activities.
Psychologists refer to this widespread tendency to act and think like the people around us as
conformity.

Fashion trends serve as good, and sometimes embarrassing, examples of
our own susceptibility to conformity. [Photo: messtiza]

538

Conformity and Obedience

Conformity
What causes all this conformity? To start, humans may possess an inherent tendency to imitate
the actions of others. Although we usually are not aware of it, we often mimic the gestures,
body posture, language, talking speed, and many other behaviors of the people we interact
with. Researchers find that this mimicking increases the connection between people and
allows our interactions to flow more smoothly (Chartrand & Bargh, 1999).
Beyond this automatic tendency to imitate others, psychologists have identified two primary
reasons for conformity. The first of these is normative influence. When normative influence
is operating, people go along with the crowd because they are concerned about what others
think of them. We don’t want to look out of step or become the target of criticism just because
we like different kinds of music or dress differently than everyone else. Fitting in also brings
rewards such as camaraderie and compliments.
How powerful is normative influence? Consider a classic study conducted many years ago by
Solomon Asch (1956). The participants were male college students who were asked to engage
in a seemingly simple task. An experimenter standing several feet away held up a card that
depicted one line on the left side and three lines on the right side. The participant’s job was
to say aloud which of the three lines on the right was the same length as the line on the left.
Sixteen cards were presented one at a time, and the correct answer on each was so obvious
as to make the task a little boring. Except for one thing. The participant was not alone. In fact,
there were six other people in the room who also gave their answers to the line-judgment
task aloud. Moreover, although they pretended to be fellow participants, these other
individuals were, in fact, confederates working with the experimenter. The real participant
was seated so that he always gave his answer after hearing what five other “participants” said.
Everything went smoothly until the third trial, when inexplicably the first “participant” gave
an obviously incorrect answer. The mistake might have been amusing, except the second
participant gave the same answer. As did the third, the fourth, and the fifth participant.
Suddenly the real participant was in a difficult situation. His eyes told him one thing, but five
out of five people apparently saw something else.
It’s one thing to wear your hair a certain way or like certain foods because everyone around
you does. But, would participants intentionally give a wrong answer just to conform with the
other participants? The confederates uniformly gave incorrect answers on 12 of the 16 trials,
and 76 percent of the participants went along with the norm at least once and also gave the
wrong answer. In total, they conformed with the group on one-third of the 12 test trials.
Although we might be impressed that the majority of the time participants answered honestly,

539

Conformity and Obedience

most psychologists find it remarkable that so
many college students caved in to the pressure
of the group rather than do the job they had
volunteered to do. In almost all cases, the
participants knew they were giving an incorrect
answer, but their concern for what these other
people

might

be

thinking

about

them

overpowered their desire to do the right thing.
Variations of Asch’s procedures have been
conducted numerous times (Bond, 2005; Bond
Examples of the cards used in the Asch experiment. How
powerful is the normative influence? Would you be tempted
to give a clearly incorrect answer, like many participants in
the Asch experiment did, to better match the thoughts of
a group of peers? [Image: wikimedia commons]

& Smith, 1996). We now know that the findings
are easily replicated, that there is an increase
in conformity with more confederates (up to
about five), that teenagers are more prone to
conforming than are adults, and that people

conform significantly less often when they believe the confederates will not hear their
responses (Berndt, 1979; Bond, 2005; Crutchfield, 1955; Deutsch & Gerard, 1955). This last
finding is consistent with the notion that participants change their answers because they are
concerned about what others think of them. Finally, although we see the effect in virtually
every culture that has been studied, more conformity is found in collectivist countries such
as Japan and China than in individualistic countries such as the United States (Bond & Smith,
1996). Compared with individualistic cultures, people who live in collectivist cultures place a
higher value on the goals of the group than on individual preferences. They also are more
motivated to maintain harmony in their interpersonal relations.
The other reason we sometimes go along with the crowd is that people are often a source of
information. Psychologists refer to this process as informational influence. Most of us, most
of the time, are motivated to do the right thing. If society deems that we put litter in a proper
container, speak softly in libraries, and tip our waiter, then that’s what most of us will do. But
sometimes it’s not clear what society expects of us. In these situations, we often rely on
descriptive norms (Cialdini, Reno, & Kallgren, 1990). That is, we act the way most people—or
most people like us—act. This is not an unreasonable strategy. Other people often have
information that we do not, especially when we find ourselves in new situations. If you have
ever been part of a conversation that went something like this,

“Do you think we should?”
“Sure. Everyone else is doing it.”,

540

Conformity and Obedience

you have experienced the power of informational influence.
However, it’s not always easy to obtain good descriptive norm information, which means we
sometimes rely on a flawed notion of the norm when deciding how we should behave. A good
example of how misperceived norms can lead to problems is found in research on binge
drinking among college students. Excessive drinking is a serious problem on many campuses
(Mita, 2009). There are many reasons why students binge drink, but one of the most important
is their perception of the descriptive norm. How much students drink is highly correlated with
how much they believe the average student drinks (Neighbors, Lee, Lewis, Fossos, & Larimer,
2007). Unfortunately, students aren’t very good at making this assessment. They notice the
boisterous heavy drinker at the party but fail to consider all the students not attending the
party. As a result, students typically overestimate the descriptive norm for college student
drinking (Borsari & Carey, 2003; Perkins, Haines, & Rice, 2005). Most students believe they
consume significantly less alcohol than the norm, a miscalculation that creates a dangerous
push toward more and more excessive alcohol consumption. On the positive side, providing
students with accurate information about drinking norms has been found to reduce
overindulgent drinking (Burger, LaSalvia, Hendricks, Mehdipour, & Neudeck, 2011; Neighbors,
Lee, Lewis, Fossos, & Walter, 2009).
Researchers have demonstrated the power of
descriptive norms in a number of areas.
Homeowners reduced the amount of energy they
used when they learned that they were
consuming more energy than their neighbors
(Schultz, Nolan, Cialdini, Goldstein, & Griskevicius,
2007). Undergraduates selected the healthy food
option when led to believe that other students
had made this choice (Burger et al., 2010). Hotel
guests were more likely to reuse their towels
when a hanger in the bathroom told them that
this is what most guests did (Goldstein, Cialdini,
Efforts to influence people to engage in healthier or

& Griskevicius, 2008). And more people began

more sustainable behaviors have benefitted from use

using the stairs instead of the elevator when

of the informational influence. For example, hotels have

informed that the vast majority of people took

been able to significantly increase the numbers of

the stairs to go up one or two floors (Burger &

people who re-use bath towels (reducing water and

Shelton, 2011).

energy use) by informing them on signs in their rooms
that re-using towels is a typical behavior of other hotel
guests. [Image: Tubetroll]

Obedience

541

Conformity and Obedience

Although we may be influenced by the people around us more than we recognize, whether
we conform to the norm is up to us. But sometimes decisions about how to act are not so
easy. Sometimes we are directed by a more powerful person to do things we may not want
to do. Researchers who study obedience are interested in how people react when given an
order or command from someone in a position of authority. In many situations, obedience
is a good thing. We are taught at an early age to obey parents, teachers, and police officers.
It’s also important to follow instructions from judges, firefighters, and lifeguards. And a military
would fail to function if soldiers stopped obeying orders from superiors. But, there is also a
dark side to obedience. In the name of “following orders” or “just doing my job,” people can
violate ethical principles and break laws. More disturbingly, obedience often is at the heart
of some of the worst of human behavior—massacres, atrocities, and even genocide.
It was this unsettling side of obedience that
led to some of the most famous and most
controversial research in the history of
psychology. Milgram (1963, 1965, 1974)
wanted to know why so many otherwise
decent German citizens went along with
the brutality of the Nazi leaders during the
Holocaust. “These inhumane policies may
have originated in the mind of a single
person,” Milgram (1963, p. 371) wrote, “but
they could only be carried out on a massive
scale if a very large number of persons
obeyed orders.”

Photographs of victims of Cambodian dictator Pol Pot. From
1975-79 the Khmer Rouge army obediently carried out orders to
execute tens of thousands of civilians. [Photo: Rusty Stewart]

To understand this obedience, Milgram conducted a series of laboratory investigations. In all
but one variation of the basic procedure, participants were men recruited from the community
surrounding Yale University, where the research was carried out. These citizens signed up for
what they believed to be an experiment on learning and memory. In particular, they were told
the research concerned the effects of punishment on learning. Three people were involved
in each session. One was the participant. Another was the experimenter. The third was a
confederate who pretended to be another participant.
The experimenter explained that the study consisted of a memory test and that one of the
men would be the teacher and the other the learner. Through a rigged drawing, the real
participant was always assigned the teacher’s role and the confederate was always the learner.
The teacher watched as the learner was strapped into a chair and had electrodes attached
to his wrist. The teacher then moved to the room next door where he was seated in front of

542

Conformity and Obedience

a large metal box the experimenter identified as a “shock generator.” The front of the box
displayed gauges and lights and, most noteworthy, a series of 30 levers across the bottom.
Each lever was labeled with a voltage figure, starting with 15 volts and moving up in 15-volt
increments to 450 volts. Labels also indicated the strength of the shocks, starting with “Slight
Shock” and moving up to “Danger: Severe Shock” toward the end. The last two levers were
simply labeled “XXX” in red.
Through a microphone, the teacher administered
a memory test to the learner in the next room.
The learner responded to the multiple-choice
items by pressing one of four buttons that were
barely within reach of his strapped-down hand.
If the teacher saw the correct answer light up on
his side of the wall, he simply moved on to the
next item. But if the learner got the item wrong,
the teacher pressed one of the shock levers and,
thereby, delivered the learner’s punishment. The
teacher was instructed to start with the 15-volt
lever and move up to the next highest shock for
each successive wrong answer.
In reality, the learner received no shocks. But he
did make a lot of mistakes on the test, which
forced the teacher to administer what he
Diagram of the Milgram Experiment. "E" = the
experimenter, "T" = the teacher, who was the focus of
the experiment, "L" = the learner, the person expected

believed to be increasingly strong shocks. The
purpose of the study was to see how far the

to receive the shocks but who was actually an actor

teacher would go before refusing to continue.

cooperating with the experimenter. [Image: "Milgram

The teacher’s first hint that something was amiss

experiment v2" by Fred the Oyster - wikimedia

came after pressing the 75-volt lever and hearing

commons]

through the wall the learner say “Ugh!” The
learner’s reactions became stronger and louder

with each lever press. At 150 volts, the learner yelled out, “Experimenter! That’s all. Get me
out of here. I told you I had heart trouble. My heart’s starting to bother me now. Get me out
of here, please. My heart’s starting to bother me. I refuse to go on. Let me out.”
The experimenter’s role was to encourage the participant to continue. If at any time the teacher
asked to end the session, the experimenter responded with phrases such as, “The experiment
requires that you continue,” and “You have no other choice, you must go on.” The experimenter
ended the session only after the teacher stated four successive times that he did not want to

Conformity and Obedience

543

continue. All the while, the learner’s protests became more intense with each shock. After 300
volts, the learner refused to answer any more questions, which led the experimenter to say
that no answer should be considered a wrong answer. After 330 volts, despite vehement
protests from the learner following previous shocks, the teacher heard only silence, suggesting
that the learner was now physically unable to respond. If the teacher reached 450 volts—the
end of the generator—the experimenter told him to continue pressing the 450 volt lever for
each wrong answer. It was only after the teacher pressed the 450-volt lever three times that
the experimenter announced that the study was over.
If you had been a participant in this research, what would you have done? Virtually everyone
says he or she would have stopped early in the process. And most people predict that very
few if any participants would keep pressing all the way to 450 volts. Yet in the basic procedure
described here, 65 percent of the participants continued to administer shocks to the very end
of the session. These were not brutal, sadistic men. They were ordinary citizens who
nonetheless followed the experimenter’s instructions to administer what they believed to be
excruciating if not dangerous electric shocks to an innocent person. The disturbing implication
from the findings is that, under the right circumstances, each of us may be capable of acting
in some very uncharacteristic and perhaps some very unsettling ways.

If you had been "a teacher" in the Milgram experiment, would you have behaved differently
than the majority who delivered what they thought were massive 450-volt shocks? [Photo:
Sharon Drummond]

Milgram conducted many variations of this basic procedure to explore some of the factors

Conformity and Obedience

544

that affect obedience. He found that obedience rates decreased when the learner was in the
same room as the experimenter and declined even further when the teacher had to physically
touch the learner to administer the punishment. Participants also were less willing to continue
the procedure after seeing other teachers refuse to press the shock levers, and they were
significantly less obedient when the instructions to continue came from a person they believed
to be another participant rather than from the experimenter. Finally, Milgram found that
women participants followed the experimenter’s instructions at exactly the same rate the
men had.
Milgram’s obedience research has been the subject of much controversy and discussion.
Psychologists continue to debate the extent to which Milgram’s studies tell us something
about atrocities in general and about the behavior of German citizens during the Holocaust
in particular (Miller, 2004). Certainly, there are important features of that time and place that
cannot be recreated in a laboratory, such as a pervasive climate of prejudice and
dehumanization. Another issue concerns the relevance of the findings. Some people have
argued that today we are more aware of the dangers of blind obedience than we were when
the research was conducted back in the 1960s. However, findings from partial and modified
replications of Milgram’s procedures conducted in recent years suggest that people respond
to the situation today much like they did a half a century ago (Burger, 2009).
Another point of controversy concerns the ethical treatment of research participants.
Researchers have an obligation to look out for the welfare of their participants. Yet, there is
little doubt that many of Milgram’s participants experienced intense levels of stress as they
went through the procedure. In his defense, Milgram was not unconcerned about the effects
of the experience on his participants. And in follow-up questionnaires, the vast majority of
his participants said they were pleased they had been part of the research and thought similar
experiments should be conducted in the future. Nonetheless, in part because of Milgram’s
studies, guidelines and procedures were developed to protect research participants from
these kinds of experiences. Although Milgram’s intriguing findings left us with many
unanswered questions, conducting a full replication of his experiment remains out of bounds
by today’s standards.
Social psychologists are fond of saying that we are all influenced by the people around us
more than we recognize. Of course, each person is unique, and ultimately each of us makes
choices about how we will and will not act. But decades of research on conformity and
obedience make it clear that we live in a social world and that—for better or worse—much
of what we do is a reflection of the people we encounter.

545

Conformity and Obedience

Outside Resources
Student Video: Christine N. Winston and Hemali Maher's 'The Milgram Experiment' gives
an excellent 3-minute overview of one of the most famous experiments in the history of
psychology. It was one of the winning entries in the 2015 Noba Student Video Award.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uVIUZwkM_G0
Video: An example of information influence in a field setting
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4yFeaS60nWk
Video: Scenes from a recent partial replication of Milgram’s obedience studies
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HwqNP9HRy7Y
Video: Scenes from a recent replication of Asch’s conformity experiment
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VgDx5g9ql1g
Web: Website devoted to scholarship and research related to Milgram’s obedience studies
http://www.stanleymilgram.com

Discussion Questions
1. In what ways do you see normative influence operating among you and your peers? How
difficult would it be to go against the norm? What would it take for you to not do something
just because all your friends were doing it?
2. What are some examples of how informational influence helps us do the right thing? How
can we use descriptive norm information to change problem behaviors?
3. Is conformity more likely or less likely to occur when interacting with other people through
social media as compared to face-to-face encounters?
4. When is obedience to authority a good thing and when is it bad? What can be done to
prevent people from obeying commands to engage in truly deplorable behavior such as
atrocities and massacres?
5. In what ways do Milgram’s experimental procedures fall outside the guidelines for research
with human participants? Are there ways to conduct relevant research on obedience to
authority without violating these guidelines?

546

Conformity and Obedience

Vocabulary
Conformity
Changing one’s attitude or behavior to match a perceived social norm.
Descriptive norm
The perception of what most people do in a given situation.
Informational influence
Conformity that results from a concern to act in a socially approved manner as determined
by how others act.
Normative influence
Conformity that results from a concern for what other people think of us.
Obedience
Responding to an order or command from a person in a position of authority.

547

Conformity and Obedience

References
Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and conformity: I. A minority of one against a
unanimous majority. Psychological Monographs, 70 (9, Whole No. 416).
Berndt, T. J. (1979). Developmental changes in conformity to peers and parents. Developmental
Psychology, 15, 608–616.
Bond, R. (2005). Group size and conformity. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 8, 331–354.
Bond, R., & Smith, P. B. (1996). Culture and conformity: A meta-analysis of studies using Asch’s
(1952b, 1956) line judgment task. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 111–137.
Borsari, B., & Carey, K. B. (2003). Descriptive and injunctive norms in college drinking: A metaanalytic integration. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 64, 331–341.
Burger, J. M. (2009). Replicating Milgram: Would people still obey today? American Psychologist,
64, 1–11.
Burger, J. M., & Shelton, M. (2011). Changing everyday health behaviors through descriptive
norm manipulations. Social Influence, 6, 69–77.
Burger, J. M., Bell, H., Harvey, K., Johnson, J., Stewart, C., Dorian, K., & Swedroe, M. (2010).
Nutritious or delicious? The effect of descriptive norm information on food choice. Journal
of Social and Clinical Psychology, 29, 228–242.
Burger, J. M., LaSalvia, C. T., Hendricks, L. A., Mehdipour, T., & Neudeck, E. M. (2011). Partying
before the party gets started: The effects of descriptive norms on pre-gaming behavior.
Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 33, 220–227.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon effect: The perception-behavior link and
social interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 893–910.
Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R. R., & Kallgren, C. A. (1990). A focus theory of normative conduct: Recycling
the concept of norms to reduce littering in public places. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 58, 1015–1026.
Crutchfield, R. S. (1955). Conformity and character. American Psychologist, 10, 191–198.
Deutsch, M., & Gerard, H. B. (1955). A study of normative and informational social influences
upon individual judgment. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51, 629–636.
Goldstein, N. J., Cialdini, R. B., & Griskevicius, V. (2008). A room with a viewpoint:Using social
norms to motivate environmental conservation in hotels. Journal of Consumer Research, 35,
472–482.
Milgram, S. (1974). Obedience to authority: An experimental view. New York, NY: Harper & Row.

Conformity and Obedience

548

Milgram, S. (1965). Some conditions of obedience and disobedience to authority. Human
Relations, 18, 57–76.
Milgram, S. (1963). Behavioral study of obedience. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
67, 371.
Miller, A. G. (2004). What can the Milgram obedience experiments tell us about the Holocaust?
Generalizing from the social psychology laboratory. In A. G. Miller (Ed.), The social psychology
of good and evil (pp. 193–239). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Mita, M. (2009). College binge drinking still on the rise. JAMA: Journal of the American Medical
Association, 302, 836–837.
Neighbors, C., Lee, C. M., Lewis, M. A., Fossos, N., & Larimer, M. E. (2007). Are social norms the
best predictor of outcomes among heavy-drinking college students? Journal of Studies on
Alcohol and Drugs, 68, 556–565.
Neighbors, C., Lee, C. M., Lewis, M. A., Fossos, N., & Walter, T. (2009). Internet-based
personalized feedback to reduce 21st-birthday drinking: A randomized controlled trial of
an even-specific prevention intervention. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77,
51–63.
Perkins, H. W., Haines, M. P., & Rice, R. (2005). Misperceiving the college drinking norm and
related problems: A nationwide study of exposure to prevention information, perceived
norms, and student alcohol misuse. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 66, 470–478.
Schultz, P. W., Nolan, J. M., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., & Griskevicius, V. (2007). The
constructive, destructive, and reconstructive power of social norms. Psychological Science,
18, 429–434.

Index

5α-reductase, 64

balance, 222

absolute threshold, 80

behavioral medicine, 244

acceptance and commitment therapy, 476

Behaviorism, 10

action potential, 42

biases, 270

adherence, 243

binocular disparity, 83

aggressive behavior, 67

binocular vision, 83

agnosia, 84

biofeedback, 240

agonists, 486

Biological vulnerabilities, 381

agoraphobia, 384

Biomedical Model of Health, 235

Agreeableness, 347

Biopsychosocial Model of Health, 235

alogia, 446

Blatant biases, 502

amnesia, 423

blocking, 112

anchor, 273

blood alcohol content (BAC), 143

anhedonia, 402

borderline personality disorder, 429

anhedonia/amotivation, 444

bottom-up processing, 81

anosmia, 90

bounded awareness, 275

antagonists, 486

bounded ethicality, 275

Anxiety, 380

bounded rationality, 270

anxiety disorders, 429

brain stem, 43

aromatase, 65

Broca’s Area, 47

attachment behavioral system, 301

catatonia, 444

attachment behaviors, 301

categorize, 116

attachment figure, 300

central, 517

attachment patterns, 303

Central Nervous System, 41

attributional styles, 408

cerebellum, 44

audience design, 285

cerebrum, 44

audition, 85

chemical senses, 89

auditory canal, 86

chromosomal sex, 64

auditory hair cells, 86

chronic disease, 234

autobiographical memory, 156

chronic stress, 408

automatic, 505

Chutes and Ladders, 322

automatic thoughts, 473

Circadian Rhythm, 140

aversive racism, 507

classical, 106

axon, 42

cochlea, 86

cognitive bias modification, 477

dendrites, 42

Cognitive failures, 428

dependent variable, 24

cognitive psychology, 10

Depressants, 142

cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), 471

depth perception, 316

commitment, 222

DES, 426

common ground, 284

descriptive norms, 539

comorbidity, 478

deviant peer contagion, 332

concrete operational reasoning stage, 318

diagnostic criteria, 447

concrete operations stage, 319

dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), 476

conditioned compensatory responses, 111

dialectical worldview, 476

conditioned response, 387

dichotic listening, 190

conditioned response (CR), 107

DID, 424

conditioned stimulus (CS), 107

differential susceptibility, 337

cones, 84

differential threshold, 81

conformity, 537

Diffuse Optical Imaging, 49

Confounds, 25

discontinuous., 317

Conscientiousness, 347

discrimination, 501

conscious, 217

discriminative stimulus, 115

consciousness, 7, 422

Disorganized behavior, 446

Consciousness, 133

disorganized speech, 446

conservation problems, 319

dissociation, 424

consolidation, 160

Dissociation, 138

context, 114

distinctiveness, 157

continuous, 317

dopamine, 452

continuous distributions, 345

dorsal pathway, 84

contralateral, 44

early adversity, 408

control, 238

ego defenses, 366

corpus callosum, 44

Ego-depletion, 224

correlation, 27

Electroencephalography (EEG), 48

cross-sectional designs, 427

Emotion-focused coping, 238

Crowds, 333

empiricism, 6

cue overload principle, 164

encoding, 156

cues, 134

encoding specificity principle, 163

cultural display rules, 209

endocrine glands, 56

daily hassles, 237

engrams, 160

dark adaptation, 84

enzyme induction, 490

defensive coping mechanism, 427

enzymes, 489

deliberative, 220

episodic memory, 155

Delusions, 444

episodic memory, 448

eugenics, 9

goal, 217

euphoria, 142

goal-directed, 118

experimenter expectations, 26

gonadal sex, 64

exposure therapy, 474

grandiosity, 402

external cues, 384

gustation, 89

extinction, 114

habit, 118

Extraversion, 346, 347

hallucinations, 445

extrinsic, 217

Hallucinogens, 142

facets, 350

health, 235

factor analysis, 347

health behaviors, 239, 241

false memories, 182

heuristics, 517

fantasy proneness, 428

heuristics, 271

fear conditioning, 111

HEXACO model, 351

feminization, 62

highlight, 222

fight or flight, 383

homophily, 332

Five-Factor Model, 347

Hormones, 56

fixed action patterns (FAPs), 518

hostility, 240

flashback, 388

hypersomnia, 402

flashbulb memory, 10, 157

hypnosis, 138

Flat affect, 446

hypnotherapy, 139

flavor, 91

Identity achievement, 334

Flexible Correction Model, 136

Identity diffusion, 334

foils, 180

implemental, 220

foot in the door, 526

Implicit Association Test, 505

Foreclosure, 334

implicit associations test, 135

formal operational reasoning stage, 318

inattentional blindness, 192

formal operations stage, 320

inattentional deafness, 193

framing, 274

independent variable, 24

free association, 468

individual differences, 9

frontal lobe, 45

Information processing theories, 316

functional capacity, 448

informational influence, 539

Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging

ingroup, 288

(fMRI), 48

insomnia, 429

functionalism, 8

instrumental, 108

g, 256

integrative or eclectic psychotherapy, 478

General Adaptation Syndrome, 237

intelligence, 256

general population, 424

internal bodily or somatic cues, 384

generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), 382

interoceptive avoidance, 384

Gestalt psychology, 10

interpersonal, 203

intrapersonal, 203

neurotransmitter, 486

intrinsic, 217

neurotransmitters, 42, 56

introspection, 7

nightmares, 430

IQ, 258

nociception, 89

jet lag, 140

nonconscious, 217

just noticeable difference (JND), 81

normative influence, 538

law of effect, 109

normed, 260

lexical hypothesis, 347

numerical magnitudes, 322

lexicon, 286

Nurture, 316

light adaptation, 84

obedience, 541

limbic system, 44

object permanence task, 318

linguistic intergroup bias, 288

object relations theory, 367

longitudinal study, 32

observational learning, 120

magnetic resonance imaging, 449

obsessive-compulsive disorder, 426

masculinization, 61

obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), 389

maternal behavior, 57

occipital lobe, 45

means, 218

Odorants, 90

mechanoreceptors, 88

olfaction, 89

melatonin, 140

olfactory epithelium, 90

memory traces, 160

Openness, 347

Metabolism, 489

operant, 108

mind–body connection, 235

operant conditioning, 108

Mindfulness, 136, 474

operational definitions, 24

mindfulness-based therapy, 475

opponent-process theory, 85

misinformation effect, 162, 178

ossicles, 86

mnemonic devices, 167

outgroups, 288

mock witnesses, 180

overconfident, 273

mood disorders, 429

oxytocin, 56

Moratorium, 334

panic disorder (PD), 384

motivation, 217

Parental behavior, 69

multimodal perception, 91

parietal lobe, 45

myelin sheath, 42

participant demand, 26

Nature, 316

paternal, 69

nervous system, 41

Pavlovian conditioning, 106

neural impulse, 7

perception, 80

neurodevelopmental, 451

peripheral, 517

neurons, 41

peripheral nervous system, 46

neuropsychoanalysis, 369

personality, 345

Neuroticism, 347

Personality traits, 345

person-centered therapy, 470

Psychological vulnerabilities, 381

person-situation debate, 353

psychomotor agitation, 402

phantom limb pain, 89

psychoneuroimmunology, 236

phantom limbs, 89

psychopathology, 446

Pharmacokinetics, 488

psychophysics, 7

phonemic awareness, 321

psychosexual stage model, 365

photo spreads, 180

psychosomatic medicine, 236

Piaget’s stage theory, 315

psychotropic drug, 488

pinna, 86

PTM, 426

placebo effect, 26

punishers, 109

polypharmacy, 493

qualitative changes, 317

positron emission tomography, 449

quantitative changes, 317

Positron Emission Tomography (PET), 48

quantitative law of effect, 116

posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), 387

quasi-experimental design, 31

prediction error, 113

random assignment, 25

prejudices, 501

reappraisal, or cognitive restructuring, 473

preoperational reasoning stage, 318

receptors, 57

preparedness, 113

reciprocity, 524

prevalence, 425

recoding, 158

prevention, 221

recurrent dreams, 430

primary auditory cortex, 87

reinforced, 383

primary somatosensory cortex, 88

reinforcer, 108

primary visual cortex, 84

reinforcer devaluation effect, 117

prime, 217

renewal effect, 114

priming, 134, 287

resilience, 237

principle of inverse effectiveness, 91

retardation, 402

Problem-focused coping, 238

retina, 83

processing speed, 448

retrieval, 156

progesterone, 69

retroactive interference, 161

progestin, 56

Right-wing authoritarianism, 503

progress, 221

rods, 84

prolactin, 56

SAD performance only, 386

promotion, 221

Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, 291

psychic causality, 363

schemas, 473

psychoactive drugs, 486

schemata, 181

psychoanalytic therapy, 468

schizophrenia, 429

psychodynamic therapy, 468

scholar-practitioner model, 12

Psychological control, 332

SCID-D, 424

psychological reactance, 528

scientist-practitioner model, 12

selective listening, 190

Specific vulnerabilities, 381

self-categorization theory, 507

split-brain, 44

self-control, 218

spontaneous recovery, 114

Self-efficacy, 239

standardized, 259

self-interest is bounded, 275

State, 424

self-regulation, 218

Stereotype Content Model, 507

self-report measure, 427

stereotype threat, 264

Semantic memory, 155

stereotypes, 501

sensation, 80

Stimulants, 143

sensorimotor stage, 318

stimulus control, 115

sensory adaptation, 82

storage, 156

sex determination, 64

strange situation, 302

sexual differentiation, 64

stress, 237

shape theory of olfaction, 90

stressors, 237

signal detection, 80

structural model, 366

situation models, 287

structuralism, 8

sleep deprivation, 430

subtle biases, 504

sleep paralysis, 429

suicidal ideation, 402

slowly escalating the commitments, 526

superadditive

social and cultural, 203

integration, 91

social anxiety disorder (SAD), 386

synapse, 486

social brain hypothesis, 288

synapses, 42

Social dominance orientation, 502

synaptic gap, 42

Social identity theory, 506

syntax, 286

Social integration, 239

System 1, 276

Social Learning Theory, 120

System 2, 276

social models, 120

target cells, 57

social networks, 289

tastants, 90

social proof, 525

taste aversion conditioning, 111

social referencing, 207

taste receptor cells, 90

social support, 239

temporal lobe, 45

social zeitgeber, 409

temporal resolution, 48

Sociocultural theories, 315

testosterone, 56

socioeconomic status, 405

thought-action fusion, 390

soma, 42

tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon, 10

Somatosensation, 87

top-down processing, 81

somatotopic map, 88

topographic model, 364

sound waves, 85

Trait, 424

spatial resolution, 48

trance states, 139

effect

of

multisensory

transduction, 80
trauma, 426
trichromatic theory, 85
trigger features, 518
tympanic membrane, 86
Type A Behavior, 240
Type B Behavior, 240
unconditional positive regard, 471
unconditioned response (UR), 107
unconditioned stimulus (US), 107
ventral pathway, 84
vestibular system, 87
vicarious reinforcement, 121
vivid dreams, 430
Weber’s Law, 81
willpower is bounded, 275
working memory, 448

