This page intentionally left blank

Introduction to Conservation Genetics
The biological diversity of the planet is being rapidly depleted due to the
direct and indirect consequences of human activity. As the size of animal
and plant populations decreases, loss of genetic diversity reduces their
ability to adapt to changes in the environment, with inbreeding and
reduced ﬁtness inevitable consequences for most species. This textbook provides a clear and comprehensive introduction to genetic principles and
practices involved in conservation. Topics covered include:
• evolutionary genetics of natural populations
• loss of genetic diversity in small populations
• inbreeding and loss of ﬁtness
• population fragmentation
• resolving taxonomic uncertainties
• genetic management of threatened species
• contributions of molecular genetics to conservation.
The text is presented in an easy-to-follow format, with main points and
terms clearly highlighted. Each chapter concludes with a concise summary,
which, together with worked examples and problems and answers, illuminates the key principles covered. Text boxes containing interesting case
studies and other additional information enrich the content throughout,
and over 100 beautiful pen-and-ink drawings help bring the material to life.
Written for advanced undergraduate and graduate students studying conservation, this book will be equally useful to practising conservation biologists and wildlife managers needing an accessible introduction to this
important ﬁeld.
The authors comprise a team with a range of skills and experience that
make them uniquely qualiﬁed to put together the ﬁrst teaching text on conservation genetics:
d i c k f r a n k h a m is Professor of Biology at Macquarie University, Sydney,
Australia. He began his career in quantitative genetics, achieving international recognition for his work on Drosophila before turning to conservation
genetics in the early 1990s. He has made a signiﬁcant contribution to the
establishment and advancement of the ﬁeld and has become one of the
major ﬁgures in the discipline.
jon ball ou is Population Manager at the Smithsonian Institution’s
National Zoological Park in Washington DC, USA and an adjunct member of
the faculty at the University of Maryland. His career has focused on developing the science underlying the practical management of small populations
of endangered or threatened species, both captive and wild. The results of
his studies have been instrumental in highlighting the key role played by
genetics in wildlife conservation and management.
david brisco e is Associate Professor of Biology at Macquarie University,
Sydney, Australia where he has been a close collaborator with Dick
Frankham on Drosophila research, as well as working with others on rock
wallabies, velvet worms and slime molds. An outstanding communicator,
his inspirational teaching enthuses students at all levels and reaches
beyond the academic sphere through television appearances and popular
books such as Biodiversity: Australia’s Living Wealth to which he contributed.

Introduction to
Conservation Genetics
Richard Frankham,
Macquarie University, Sydney

Jonathan D. Ballou
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC

and David A. Briscoe
Macquarie University, Sydney

Line drawings by

Karina H. McInness
Inkbyte, Melbourne

  
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge  , United Kingdom
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521630146
© R. Frankham, D. A. Briscoe, Smithsonian Institution 2002
This book is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place
without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published in print format 2002
-
-

---- eBook (EBL)
--- eBook (EBL)

-
-

---- hardback
--- hardback

-
-

---- paperback
--- paperback

Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of
s for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this book, and does not
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

Contents
Preface
Copyright acknowledgments

xiii
xx

Chapter 1 Introduction

1

‘The sixth extinction’
Why conserve biodiversity?
Endangered and extinct species
What is an endangered species?
What causes extinctions?
Recognition of genetic factors in conservation biology
What is conservation genetics?
How is genetics used to minimize extinctions?
Genetic versus demographic and environmental factors in
conservation biology
What do we need to know to genetically manage threatened
species?
Methodology in conservation genetics
Island theme
Sources of information
Summary
General bibliography
Problems
Practical exercises: Categorizing endangerment of species

2
2
3
6
7
9
9
11
16
16
18
19
19
19
20
21
22

Chapter 2 Genetics and extinction

23

Genetics and the fate of endangered species
Relationship between inbreeding and extinction
Inbreeding and extinction in the wild
Relationship between loss of genetic diversity and extinction
Summary
Further reading
Problems
Practical exercises: Computer projections

24
27
29
36
39
39
40
40

SECTION I EVOLUTIONARY GENETICS OF NATURAL
POPULATIONS
Chapter 3 Genetic diversity

45

Importance of genetic diversity
What is genetic diversity?
Measuring genetic diversity
Extent of genetic diversity

46
47
50
60

vi

CONTENTS

Low genetic diversity in endangered species
What genetic diversity determines evolutionary potential?
Variation over space and time
What explains differences in levels of genetic diversity?
Genetic differences among species
Summary
Further reading
Problems
Practical exercise: Measuring genetic diversity using
microsatellites

66

Chapter 4 Characterizing genetic diversity: single loci

72

Describing genetic diversity
Frequencies of alleles and genotypes
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
Expected heterozygosity
Deviations from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
Extensions of the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
More than one locus–linkage disequilibrium
Summary
Further reading
Problems

73

Chapter 5 Characterizing genetic diversity: quantitative
variation
Importance of quantitative characters
Properties of quantitative characters
Basis of quantitative genetic variation
Methods for detecting quantitative genetic variation
Partitioning genetic and environmental variation
Genotypeenvironment interaction
The need for contemporary comparisons and control
populations
Partitioning of quantitative genetic variation
Evolutionary potential and heritability
Susceptibility to inbreeding depression
Correlations between molecular and quantitative genetic
variation
Organization of quantitative genetic variation
Summary
Further reading
Problems

Chapter 6 Evolution in large populations. I. Natural
selection and adaptation
The need to evolve
Factors controlling the evolution of populations

67
67
68
68
68
69
70
70

73
75
78
84
86
90
93
94
94

96
97
98
100
103
105
106
108
108
111
120
122
122
123
123
124

126
127
131

CONTENTS

Selection
Selection on quantitative characters
Directional selection
Stabilizing selection
Disruptive selection
Summary
Further reading
Problems
Practical exercises: Computer simulations

Chapter 7 Evolution in large populations. II. Mutation,
migration and their interactions with selection

133
145
146
149
149
150
150
151
152

154

Factors controlling the evolution of populations
Importance of mutation, migration and their interactions with
selection in conservation
Origin and regeneration of genetic diversity
Mutation
Selective value of mutations
Mutation–selection balance and the mutation load
Migration
Migration–selection equilibria and clines
Summary
Further reading
Problems

155

Chapter 8 Evolution in small populations

175

Importance of small populations in conservation biology
Impact of small population size: chance effects
Inbreeding
Measuring population size
Selection in small populations
Mutation in small populations
Mutation–selection equilibrium in small populations
Computer simulation
Summary
Further reading
Problems
Practical exercises: Computer simulations

155
155
156
160
162
167
169
173
173
173

176
178
187
187
190
191
192
193
194
194
195
195

Chapter 9 Maintenance of genetic diversity

197

Conservation of genetic diversity
Fate of different classes of mutations
Maintenance of genetic diversity in large populations
Neutral mutations under random genetic drift
Selection intensities vary among characters
Balancing selection
Maintenance of genetic diversity in small populations

198
198
199
200
203
204
214

vii

viii

CONTENTS

Summary
Further reading
Problems
Practical exercises: Computer simulations

SECTION II

221
221
222
223

EFFECTS OF POPULATION SIZE REDUCTION

Chapter 10 Loss of genetic diversity in small populations

227

Changes in genetic diversity over time
Relationship between loss of genetic diversity and reduced
ﬁtness
Effects of sustained population size restrictions on genetic
diversity
Relationship between population size and genetic diversity in
wild populations
Effective population size
Measuring effective population size
Summary
Further reading
Problems
Practical exercises: Computer simulations

228

Chapter 11 Inbreeding

254

What is inbreeding?
Conservation concerns with inbreeding
Inbreeding coefﬁcient (F)
Genetic consequences of inbreeding
Inbreeding in small populations
Pedigrees
Breeding systems in nature
Regular systems of inbreeding
Mutation–selection balance with inbreeding
Inbreeding in polyploids
Relationship between inbreeding, heterozygosity, genetic
diversity and population size
Summary
Further reading
Problems

255

Chapter 12 Inbreeding depression

280

Inbreeding depression in naturally outbreeding species
Inbreeding depression in the wild
Inbreeding depression due to small population size
Inbreeding and extinction
Characteristics of inbreeding depression
Genetic basis of inbreeding depression
Purging

229
231
235
239
241
251
252
252
253

256
256
258
263
269
271
271
274
276
277
278
278
279

281
282
285
286
287
290
295

CONTENTS

Detecting and measuring inbreeding depression
Inbreeding and population viability
Recovering from inbreeding depression
Summary
Further reading
Problems

299

Chapter 13 Population fragmentation

309

Habitat fragmentation
Population fragmentation
Population structure
Completely isolated population fragments
Measuring population fragmentation: F statistics
Gene ﬂow among population fragments
Measuring gene ﬂow
Impacts of different population structures on reproductive
ﬁtness
Summary
Further reading
Problems

310

302
305
307
307
308

310
312
314
324
327
330
332
333
334
334

Chapter 14 Genetically viable populations

336

Shortage of space for threatened species
How large?
Retaining reproductive ﬁtness
Retaining evolutionary potential
How large are threatened populations?
What happens to species with Ne 500?
Retaining single locus diversity in the long term
Time to regenerate genetic diversity
Avoiding accumulation of new deleterious mutations
Genetic goals in the management of wild populations
Genetic goals in management of captive populations –
a compromise
The fallacy of small surviving populations
Summary
Further reading
Problems

337

SECTION III

339
339
341
343
344
348
349
349
351
352
356
357
358
358

FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE

Chapter 15 Resolving taxonomic uncertainties and deﬁning
management units
Importance of accurate taxonomy in conservation biology
What is a species?
Sub-species
Higher taxonomic categories

365
366
370
371
371

ix

x

CONTENTS

How do species arise?
Use of genetic markers in delineation of sympatric species
Use of genetic markers in delineation of allopatric species
Measuring differences between populations: genetic distance
Constructing phylogenetic trees
Outbreeding depression
Deﬁning management units within species
Summary
Further reading
Problems
Practical exercise: Building a phylogenetic tree

Chapter 16 Genetics and the management of wild
populations

372
375
376
379
382
385
388
392
392
393
394

395

Genetic issues in wild populations
Resolving taxonomy and management units
Increasing population size
Diagnosing genetic problems
Recovering small inbred populations with low genetic diversity
Genetic management of fragmented populations
Genetic issues in reserve design
Introgression and hybridization
Impacts of harvesting
Genetic management of species that are not outbreeding
diploids
Summary
Further reading
Problems

396

Chapter 17 Genetic management of captive populations

419

Why captive breed?
Stages in captive breeding and reintroduction
Founding captive populations
Growth of captive populations
Genetic management of captive populations
Current genetic management of captive populations
Captive management of groups
Ex situ conservation of plants
Reproductive technology and genome resource banks
Managing inherited diseases in endangered species
Summary
Further reading
Problems

420

Chapter 18 Genetic management for reintroduction

448

Reintroductions
Genetic changes in captivity that affect reintroduction success

449

399
399
401
401
404
410
411
412
414
416
417
417

422
423
426
427
429
439
441
441
443
445
446
446

452

CONTENTS

Genetic adaptation to captivity
Genetic management of reintroductions
How successful are reintroductions?
Supportive breeding
Case studies in captive breeding and reintroduction
Summary
Further reading
Problems

Chapter 19 Use of molecular genetics in forensics and to
understand species biology
Forensics: detecting illegal hunting and collecting
An understanding of species’ biology is critical to its
conservation
Gene trees and coalescence
Population size and demographic history
Gene ﬂow and population structure
Reintroduction and translocation
Reproduction, parentage, founder relationships and sexing
Disease
Diet
Summary
Further reading
Problems

Chapter 20 The broader context: population viability
analysis (PVA)

452
459
463
465
466
469
470
470

471
472
474
475
480
485
491
492
498
499
499
500
500

502

What causes endangerment and extinction?
Predicting extinction probabilities: population viability
analysis (PVA)
Recovering threatened populations
How useful are the predictions of PVA?
Lessons learned
Minimum viable population sizes (MVP)
Summary
Further reading
Problems
Practical exercises: Population viability analyses

503

Take home messages from this book

529

Revision problems
Glossary
Answers to problems
References
Index

506
516
520
523
524
526
526
527
527

531
533
546
567
607

xi

Preface
The World Conservation Union (IUCN), the primary international conservation body, recognizes the crucial need to conserve genetic diversity
as one of the three fundamental levels of biodiversity. This book provides the conceptual background for understanding the importance of
genetic diversity in avoidance of species extinctions.
Conservation genetics encompasses the following activities:
• genetic management of small populations to maximize retention of
genetic diversity and minimize inbreeding,
• resolution of taxonomic uncertainties and delineation of management units, and
• the use of molecular genetic analyses in forensics and to understand
species’ biology.

Purpose of the book
We have endeavoured to make this book appealing to a wide readership.
However it is primarily directed towards those encountering the discipline for the ﬁrst time, either through formal coursework or by selfinstruction.
Conservation genetics is a relatively young discipline. While it is
founded on more than a century of advances in evolutionary theory,
including population genetics, quantitative genetics and plant and
animal breeding, it has developed its own unique attributes, specialist
journals, etc. In particular, conservation genetics focuses on processes
within small and fragmented populations and on practical approaches
to minimize deleterious effects within them. It has implications for
organizations and individuals with very different immediate concerns.
These include zoo staff undertaking captive breeding programs, wildlife biologists and ecologists, planners and managers of National Parks,
water catchments and local government areas, foresters and farmers.
Perhaps of most importance to the future, conservation genetics is of
concern to a growing body of undergraduate and postgraduate students, to whom will fall much of the onus of implementing practical
measures. Their enthusiasm was a major stimulus to our preparing this
volume.
We have endeavoured to make Introduction to Conservation Genetics as
accessible as possible to this broad array of readers. At the time we began,
there were a number of excellent and scholarly texts on population,
quantitative and evolutionary genetics and conservation biology, but no
introductory textbook on conservation genetics. We have placed emphasis on general principles, rather than on detailed experimental procedures which can be found in specialist books, journals and conference
proceedings. We have assumed a basic knowledge of Mendelian genetics
and simple statistics. Conservation genetics is a quantitative discipline
as its strength lies in its predictions. We have restricted most use of mathematics to simple algebra to make it accessible to a wide audience.

Conservation genetics is the
theory and practice of genetics in
the preservation of species as
dynamic entities capable of evolving
to cope with environmental change
to minimize their risk of extinction

This book is intended to provide
an accessible introduction to
conservation genetics with an
emphasis on general principles

xiv

PREFACE

We trust that colleagues will ﬁnd this material suitable for a full tertiary course on conservation genetics. At the same time, we hope that it
will satisfy the needs of evolutionary geneticists and evolutionary ecologists seeking conservation examples to enthuse their students. Finally,
we have endeavoured to create an easily accessible and formalized reference book for both professional conservation geneticists and a wider
readership.

This book provides a broad
coverage of all strands of
conservation genetics

Précis of contents
We have encompassed all of the major facets that comprise conservation genetics, from the impacts of inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity, through taxonomic uncertainties and genetic management of
threatened species, to the use of molecular genetic analysis in forensics
and resolution of critical aspects of species’ biology. We conclude by
exploring connections between conservation genetics and the wider
ﬁeld of conservation biology.
Chapter 1 provides an overview of the contemporary conservation
context and the reasons why genetic theory and information are crucial
in management of endangered species. Chapter 2 explores the central
issues in the application of genetics to conservation biology. Inbreeding
reduces reproductive potential and survival and, thereby, increases
extinction risk in the short term, while loss of genetic diversity reduces
the long-term capacity of species to evolve in response to environmental changes.
We have divided the book into three subsequent sections; Section I
describes the evolutionary genetics of natural populations, Section II
explores the genetic consequences of reduced population size, and
Section III focuses on applications of genetic principles to management
of threatened and endangered species in wild, semi-wild and captive situations. The relationships of genetics with broader issues in conservation biology conclude this section.
Section I (Chapters 3–9) covers essential background material in evolutionary genetics. Chapter 3 deals with the extent of genetic diversity
and methods for measuring it. Special attention is paid to comparisons
of genetic diversity in endangered versus non-endangered species.
Chapters 4 and 5 describe methods and parameters used to characterize genetic diversity. As major genetic concerns in conservation biology
are centred on reproduction and survival in the short term (the effects
of inbreeding) and the long term (evolutionary potential and speciation), we have placed considerable emphasis on quantitative (continuously varying) characters, as reproductive ﬁtness is such a character
(Chapter 5). Molecular measures of genetic diversity, for which vast data
sets have accumulated, have a disturbingly limited ability to predict
quantitative genetic variation. The paramount importance placed on
the functional signiﬁcance of genetic diversity distinguishes conservation genetics from the related ﬁeld of molecular ecology, where selectively neutral variation is frequently favoured. Chapters 6 and 7
introduce factors affecting the amount and evolution of genetic diversity in large populations. The same processes in small populations,

PREFACE

including species of conservation concern, are detailed in Chapter 8.
Chance (stochastic) effects have a much greater impact on the fate of
genetic diversity in small, endangered populations than in very large
populations, where natural selection has far greater inﬂuence. Since
conservation genetics focuses on retention of evolutionary potential,
Chapter 9 examines the maintenance of genetic diversity.
Having established the basic principles, Section II concentrates on
the genetic implications of population size reduction, loss of genetic
diversity (Chapter 10), the deleterious consequences of inbreeding on
reproduction and survival (inbreeding depression) (Chapters 11 and 12),
and the genetic effects of population fragmentation (Chapter 13). The
section concludes with consideration of the population size required to
maintain the genetic viability of a population (Chapter 14).
Section III explores practical issues, genetic resolution of taxonomic
uncertainties and delineation of management units (Chapter 15), the
genetic management of wild (Chapter 16) and captive (Chapter 17) populations, and reintroduction (Chapter 18). Chapter 19 addresses the
developing use of molecular genetic analyses in forensics and resolution of cryptic aspects of species biology. Chapter 20 expands to a
broader picture, the integration of genetic, ecological and demographic
factors in conservation biology. In particular, we explore the concepts of
population viability analysis (PVA) using computer simulations. The
ﬁnal component, Take home messages presents a brief summary of the
contents of the book, followed by a Glossary.
Introduction to Conservation Genetics concentrates on naturally outbreeding species of plants and animals, with lesser attention to
self-fertilizing plants. Microbes have not been included, as little conservation effort has been directed towards them.
We have used examples from threatened species wherever possible.
However, most conceptual issues in conservation genetics have been
resolved using laboratory and domesticated species, non-threatened
but related species, or by combined analyses of data sets (typically small)
from many species (meta-analyses). Endangered species are clearly
unsuitable for experimentation.

Format
The book is profusely illustrated to make it visually attractive and to tap
the emotional commitment that many feel to conservation. To highlight signiﬁcant points and make it easy to revise, the main points of
each chapter are given in a box at the start of the chapter along with
Terms used in the chapter and a Summary is given at the end of each
chapter. Within chapters, the main points of each section are highlighted in small boxes. Much of the information is presented in ﬁgures,
as we ﬁnd that biology students respond better to those than to information in text or tables. In many ﬁgures, the message is highlighted in
italics. Numerous examples and case studies have been used to illustrate
the application of theory to real world conservation applications. These
have been chosen to be motivating and informative to our audience.
Case studies are given in Boxes throughout the book. Boxes are also used

Extensive effort has been made to
motivate readers by making the
book attractive, interesting,
informative and easy to follow

xv

xvi

PREFACE

The order of topics both within
and across chapters has been
designed to motivate students

Each chapter has been designed
to provide instructors with
material suitable for one lecture,
with additional information for
independent study

Worked examples and problems
with solutions are provided

Practical exercises are suggested
for many chapters

to provide additional or more difﬁcult information in a way that does
not impede the ﬂow of information for those who wish to skip such
detail.
We are deeply indebted to Karina McInnes, whose elegant drawings
add immeasurably to our words.
The text and format have been trialled on four cohorts of ﬁnal-year
undergraduate students at Macquarie University and extensively
reﬁned in response to their comments, and those from many colleagues.
The order of topics throughout the book, and within chapters, is
based on our teaching experience. We have chosen to introduce practical conservation issues as early as possible, with the details of parameter estimation etc. provided later. We hope that readers will ﬁnd it more
stimulating to appreciate why a parameter is important, before understanding how it is logically or mathematically derived. As an example,
Chapter 2 directly addresses the relationship between genetics and
extinction, and provides an overview of much of the later material,
prior to a detailed treatment of inbreeding (Chapters 11 and 12).
In presenting material, we have aimed for a balance between that
necessary for student lectures, and a comprehensive coverage for
advanced students and conservation professionals. The material in
each chapter is more than adequate for a single lecture, allowing
instructors to choose what they wish to emphasize in their course.
However the material in each chapter should not prove overwhelming
to their students. Some topics are too extensive for a single lecture. We
have therefore divided ‘Evolution in large populations’ into two chapters. We have also allowed some repetition of material, as this is inevitable if different chapters are to be comprehensible on a ‘stand-alone’
basis.
Everyone who has taught genetics recognizes that mastery of the discipline comes through active participation in problem-solving, rather
than passive absorption of facts. Worked Examples are given within the
text for most equations presented. Problem questions are posed at the
end of each chapter, together with Problem answers and Revision
problems at the end of the book.
Named species are used in many problem questions, to make them
more realistic. These are usually ﬁctitious problems, but reﬂect situations similar to those that have, or reasonably might have, occurred in
the named species. Real data are referenced where used.
Practical exercises are suggested at the end of chapters covering
topics where laboratory exercises are relevant. Most of these have been
trialled in our own teaching and are frequently computer exercises,
using readily available software. These have proved to be particularly
valuable in illuminating the relationship between inbreeding and
extinction (Chapter 2), evolutionary genetics of large and small populations (Chapters 6 and 8), maintenance of genetic diversity (Chapter 9),
loss of genetic diversity in small populations (Chapter 10) and the use of
population viability analysis in management of threatened species

PREFACE

(Chapter 20). Suggestions for molecular genetics practicals are given for
Chapters 3, 15 and 19.
Referencing is not intended to be exhaustive, nor to quote primary
papers. The references given to reviews and recent papers are sufﬁcient
to gain access to the most signiﬁcant literature. Space does not permit
direct reference to many other excellent studies by our colleagues. An
annotated list of General references, relevant to many chapters, is given
at the end of Chapter 1. Readers seeking further detail on speciﬁc topics
will ﬁnd an annotated list of suggested Further reading at the end of
each chapter. We have also included a sprinkling of related books
written for popular audiences. These may serve as an introduction to
some of the, often controversial, characters involved in conservation
biology, and the passions that motivate their work. In the interests of
balance, referencing and data presentation are more extensive for contentious topics.
As most of the principles of conservation genetics apply equally to
different eukaryotic species, we primarily use common names in the
text. Genus and species names in the Index are cross-referenced to
common names.

Controversies
The development of conservation genetics has been driven by what
many consider to be a global environmental crisis – ‘the sixth extinction’. As a consequence, many other dimensions, economic, political,
social, ethical and emotional, impact upon the ﬁeld. The fate of species,
populations and habitats are in the balance. We have ﬂagged these controversies and attempted to provide a balanced, up-to-date view, based
upon information available in mid-2000. Where feasible, we have consulted experts to corroborate facts and interpretations. Inevitably, some
readers will disagree with some of our views, but we trust that they will
accept that alternative interpretations are honestly given. New data will
alter perspectives in some cases. For example, the controversial red wolf
and northern spotted owl scenarios have changed during the time we
were writing the book. We hope that readers ﬁnd the book as stimulating to read as we found it to write, but not as tiring! Feedback, constructive criticism and suggestions will be deeply appreciated (email:
rfrankha@Rna.bio.mq.edu.au).
We will maintain a web site to post updated information, corrections, etc. (http://consgen.mq.edu.au/).
Acknowledgments
Our entries into conservation genetics were initiated by Kathy Ralls of
the Smithsonian National Zoo, Washington, DC. Subsequently we have
received much-needed support and encouragement from many colleagues, especially from Kathy Ralls, Georgina Mace, Bob Lacy, Rob
Fleischer, Stephen O’Brien, Michael Soulé and Ulie Seal. We owe a substantial intellectual debt to Douglas Falconer, author of Introduction to
Quantitative Genetics. RF and DAB trained using this textbook, and its

For clarity and brevity, referencing
is mainly restricted to reviews and
recent papers

xvii

xviii

PREFACE

successive editions have subsequently been major reference sources for
us. DAB is particularly appreciative of the mentorship and friendship
freely given, over 25 years, by Douglas and his colleagues in The Institute
of Animal Genetics, Edinburgh. Not surprisingly, we used Falconer’s
crisp but scholarly texts as models in our preparation of this book. RF
thanks Stuart Barker for his highly inﬂuential roles as undergraduate
lecturer, PhD supervisor, collaborator and mentor.
Our book could not have been written without the efforts of the students, staff and collaborators in the RF–DAB laboratory. Suzanne
Borlase carried out the ﬁrst experimental modelling of problems in conservation genetics using Drosophila. She has been followed by many
others, especially Margaret Montgomery and Lynn Woodworth who
with Edwin Lowe managed the pedigreed populations for the MVP
experiment that have been used in so many studies, including the tests
for mutational accumulation done by Dean Gilligan. Roderick Nurthen,
in his quiet and efﬁcient way, has supervised all our electrophoretic
work, while Phillip England developed microsatellites and supervised
their use. Barry Brook and Julian O’Grady conducted computer simulation studies on inbreeding and extinction and on the predictive accuracy of population viability analysis. David Reed completed two
important meta-analyses and kept the ‘Flyfarm’ running while this
book was in its ﬁnal throes. Jennifer Mickelberg took care of business at
the Zoo while JDB was in Australia completing the book
The support of our home institutions is gratefully acknowledged.
They have made it possible for us to be involved in researching the ﬁeld
and writing this book. The research work by RF and DAB was made possible by Australian Research Council and Macquarie University research
grants. RF acknowledges the hospitality of the Smithsonian National
Zoological Park during 1997 when the ﬁrst two drafts were written. JDB
also gratefully acknowledges the Smithsonian National Zoological Park
for providing a sabbatical to Macquarie University to ﬁnalize the preparation of this book. We thank Alan Crowden from Cambridge
University Press for his advice and assistance during the writing of the
book and to Jayne Aldhouse, Shana Coates, Anna Hodson and Maria
Murphy for facilitating the path to publication.
This book could not have been completed without the continued
support and forbearance of our wives Annette Lindsay, Vanessa Ballou
and Helen Briscoe, and families. Annette and Vanessa (plus Lara and
Grace) spent extended periods away from their home countries to facilitate its completion. Vanessa sorted and ﬁled our copious reference collection while Annette corrected the ﬁnal draft of the book.
We thank the students in the Conservation and Evolutionary
Genetics course at Macquarie University in 1998–2001. Their comments, criticisms and suggestions did much to improve the book, especially those from A. Corson, A. Gibberson, H. Ferguson, E. Laxton,
H. Macklin and R. Suwito. We are grateful to L. Bingaman-Lackey,
D. Cooper, N. Flesness, T. Foose, J. Groombridge, S. Haig, C. Lynch,
S. Medina, P. Pearce-Kelly and M. Whalley for supplying information,
and to M. Eldridge, R. Fleischer, J. Howard, T. Madsen, B. Pukazhenthi,

PREFACE

I. Saccheri, M. Sun, P. Sunnucks, R. Vrijenhoek, A. Young and G. Zegers
for supplying material for illustrations. The book was improved greatly
by comments on individual sections and chapters from A. Beattie,
L. Beheregaray, M. Burgman, D. Charlesworth, S. Haig, L. Mills (and his
class of students at University of Montana), S. O’Brien, K. Ralls,
I. Saccheri, P. Sunnucks, A. Taylor, B. Walsh, R. Wayne and A. Young.
S. Barker, B. Brook, M. Eldridge, B. Latter, J. O’Grady and D. Reed generously provided detailed comments on the whole text. We apologize to
those whose assistance we have omitted to record. We have not followed
all of their suggestions and some disagree with our conclusions on controversial issues. Any errors and omissions that remain are ours.

xix

Copyright acknowledgments
We are grateful to the following for kind permission to reproduce copyright material:
The Cambridge University Press for the elephant seal illustrations in
Box 8.2 and Ex. 10.5 and the chimpanzee image in Table 3.4 from ﬁgures
3–6 and 1–10, respectively, in Austin, C. R. and R. V. Short (1984) The
Evolution of Reproduction (illustrated by J. R. Fuller); The Kluwer Academic
Publishers for: Fig. 19.13 from ﬁgure 1 in Lens, L., P. Galbusera, T. Brooks,
E. Waiyaki and T. Schenck (1998) Highly skewed sex ratios in the critically endangered Taita thrush as revealed by CHD genes. Biodiversity and
Conservation 7: 869–873 and Fig. 3.3 from ﬁgure 2 page 10 from Avise, J.
Molecular Markers, Natural History and Evolution; The Oxford University
Press for: the ﬁgure in Box 3.1 from ﬁgure 3 in Gilbert, D. A., C. Packer,
A. E. Pusey, J. C. Stephens and S. J. O’Brien (1991) Analytical DNA ﬁngerprinting in lions: parentage, genetic diversity, and kinship. Journal of
Heredity 82: 378–386; the frontispiece Chapter 19 from ﬁgure 1 in Harry,
J. L. and D. A. Briscoe. 1988. Multiple paternity in the loggerhead turtle
(Caretta caretta). Journal of Heredity 79: 96–99; the frontispiece Chapter 6
from Plate 8.2 in Kettlewell, B (1973) The Evolution of Melanism; Fig. 19.11
from Fritsch, P. and L. H. Rieseberg (1966) The use of random ampliﬁed
polymorphic DNA in conservation genetics, in Molecular Genetic
Approaches in Conservation, ed. T. B. Smith and R. K. Wayne, copyright 1996
by Oxford University Press, Inc. Used by permission of Oxford University
Press. Inc.; Fig. 7.4 from Map 5 in Mourant, A. E., A. C. Kopéc and
Domaniewsha-Sobczak, K. (1976) The Distribution of the Human Blood
Groups and Other Polymorphisms, Oxford University Press, London; The
MIT Press for Fig. 10.2 from ﬁgure 2 in Foose, T. J. (1986) Riders of the last
ark, in The Last Extinction, ed. Kaufman, L. and K. Mallory; The Social
Contract Press for Fig. 1.3 from the maps in Tanton, J. H. (1994) End of the
migration epoch? The Social Contract, 4(3): 162–176 (for critiques of this
essay see The Social Contract 5(1): 28–47. Note: These texts are available
online); The Center for Applied Studies in Forestry for the map in Box
13.1 and the Chapter 16 frontispiece from ﬁgure 2 in James, F (1995) The
status of the red-cockaded woodpecker and the prospect for recovery, in
Kulhavy, D. L., R. G. Hooper and R. Costa, Red-cockaded Woodpecker:
Recovery, Ecology and Management. Center for Applied Studies, Stephen F.
Austin State University, Nacogdoches, TX; CSIRO Publishing for Fig. 15.3
from ﬁgure 2 in Johnston, P. G., R. J. Davey and J. H. Seebeck (1984)
Chromosome homologies in Potoroos tridactylus and P. longipes based on
G-banding patterns. Australian Journal of Zoology 32: 319–324; John Wiley
and Sons, Inc. for Fig. 8.6 from ﬁgure 1 in Hedrick, P., P. S. Miller, E.
Geffen and R. Wayne (1997) Genetic evaluation of the three captive
Mexican wolf lineages. Zoo Biology 16: 47–69; The Carnegie Institute of
Washington for Fig. 5.2 from ﬁgures 19, 23 and 25 in Clausen, J., D. D.
Keck and W. M. Hiesey (1940) Experimental studies on the nature of

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

species. I. Effect of varied environments on Western North American
Plants. Carnegie Institution of Washington Publications No. 520. Carnegie
Institute, Washington, DC; Blackwell Publishers Ltd, for Fig. 6.4 from
ﬁgure 1 in Kettlewell, H. B. D. (1958) A survey of the frequencies of Biston
betularia (L.) (Lep.) and its melanic forms in Great Britain. Heredity 12:
551–572; The Evolution Society for the map in Box 12.1 from Vrijenhoek,
R. C., Pfeiler, E. and J. Wetherington (1992) Balancing selection in a
desert stream-dwelling ﬁsh, Peociliopsis monacha. Evolution 46: 1642–1657;
and the National Academy of Sciences for Fig. 19.9 from Bowen, B. W., F.
A. Abreu-Grobois, G. H. Balazs, N. Kamenzaki, C. J. Limpus and R. J. Ferl
(1995) Trans-Paciﬁc migrations of the loggerhead turtle (Caretta caretta)
demonstrated with mitochondrial DNA markers. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA 92: 3731–3734.

xxi

Chapter 1

Introduction
Conservation genetics is the application of genetics to preserve
species as dynamic entities capable of coping with environmental
change. It encompasses genetic management of small populations,
resolution of taxonomic uncertainties, deﬁning management units
within species and the use of molecular genetic analyses in forensics
and understanding species’ biology.

Terms:
Biodiversity,
ecosystem services,
endangered,
evolutionary potential,
forensics,
genetic diversity,
inbreeding depression,
introgression,
meta-analysis,
outbreeding depression,
population viability analysis,
purging,
reproductive ﬁtness,
threatened,
vulnerable

Selection of threatened species:
Clockwise: panda (China), an
Australian orchid, palm cockatoo
(Australia), tuatara (New Zealand),
poison arrow frog (South
America), lungﬁsh (Australia),
Wollemi pine (Australia) and New
Zealand weta.

2

INTRODUCTION

The ‘sixth extinction’
The biological diversity of the
planet is rapidly being depleted as
a direct and indirect consequence
of human actions

Biodiversity is the variety of ecosystems, species, populations within
species, and genetic diversity within species. The biological diversity of
the planet is being rapidly depleted as a direct and indirect consequence
of human actions. An unknown but large number of species are already
extinct, while many others have reduced population sizes that put
them at risk (WCMC 1992). Many species now require benign human
intervention to improve their management and ensure their survival.
The scale of the problem is enormous, as described below. The current
extinction problem has been called the ‘sixth extinction’, as its magnitude compares with that of the other ﬁve mass extinctions revealed in
the geological record (Leakey & Lewin 1995). Extinction is a natural part
of the evolutionary process. For example, the mass extinction at the end
of Cretaceous 65 million years ago eliminated much of the previous
ﬂora and fauna, including the dinosaurs. However, this extinction
made way for proliferation of the mammals and ﬂowering angiosperm
plants. The sixth extinction is different. Species are being lost at a rate
that far outruns the origin of new species.
Conservation genetics, like all components of conservation biology,
is motivated by the need to reduce current rates of extinction and to preserve biodiversity.

Why conserve biodiversity?
Four justiﬁcations for maintaining
biodiversity have been advanced;
the economic value of
bioresources, ecosystem services,
aesthetics, and rights of living
organisms to exist

Humans derive many direct and indirect beneﬁts from the living world.
Thus, we have a stake in conserving biodiversity for the resources we
use, for the ecosystem services it provides for us, for the pleasure we
derive from living organisms and for ethical reasons.
Bioresources include all of our food, many pharmaceutical drugs,
clothing ﬁbres (wool and cotton), rubber and timber for housing and
construction, etc. Their value is many billions of dollars annually. For
example, about 25% of all pharmaceutical prescriptions in the USA
contain active ingredients derived from plants (Primack 1998). Further,
the natural world contains many potentially useful novel resources
(Beattie 1995). For example, ants contain novel antibiotics that are being
investigated for use in human medicine, spider silk may provide the
basis for light high-tensile ﬁbres that are stronger weight-for-weight
than steel, etc.
Ecosystem services are essential biological functions that are provided free of charge by living organisms and which beneﬁt humankind.
They include oxygen production by plants, climate control by forests,
nutrient cycling, natural pest control, pollination of crop plants, etc.
(Daily 1999). These services have been valued at $US33 trillion (1012) per
year, almost double the $US18 trillion yearly global national product
(Costanza et al. 1997).

ENDANGERED AND EXTINCT SPECIES

Humans derive pleasure from living organisms (aesthetics), as
expressed in growing ornamental plants, keeping pets, visits to zoos
and nature reserves, and ecotourism. This translates into direct economic value. For example, koalas are estimated to contribute $US750
million annually to the Australian tourism industry (Australia Institute
1997).
The ethical justiﬁcations for conserving biodiversity are simply that
one species on Earth does not have the right to drive others to extinction, analogous to abhorrence of genocide among human populations.
The peak international conservation body, IUCN (the World
Conservation Union), recognizes the need to conserve the biological
diversity on Earth for the reasons above (McNeely et al. 1990). IUCN recognizes the need for conservation at the levels of genetic diversity,
species diversity and ecosystem diversity. Genetics is involved directly in
the ﬁrst of these and is a crucial factor in species conservation.

IUCN recognizes the need to
conserve biodiversity at three
levels; genetic diversity, species
diversity, and ecosystem diversity

Endangered and extinct species

Extent of endangerment
Threatened species of animals fall into the categories of critically
endangered, endangered, and vulnerable, as deﬁned below. IUCN (1996)
classiﬁed more than 50% of species in every one of the vertebrate classes
into one of the threatened categories, as shown in Fig. 1.1.

Fig. 1.1 Which vertebrates are the most threatened? Percentages of mammals, birds,
reptiles, amphibians and ﬁshes categorized as critically endangered, endangered,
vulnerable and at lower risk (after IUCN 1996).

Over 50% of vertebrate animal
species and 12.5% of plant species
are classiﬁed as threatened

3

4

INTRODUCTION

Table 1.1

Recorded extinctions, 1600 to present

Number of extinctions on
Taxa

Island

Mainland

Ocean

Total

Percentage of
extinctions on islands

Percentage of
taxon extinct

Mammalsa
Birdsa
Reptilesa
Amphibiansa
Fisha
Molluscsb
Invertebratesa
Flowering plantsa

51
92
20
0
1
151
48
139

30
21
1
2
22
40
49
245

4
0
0
0
0
0
1
0

85
113
21
2
23
191
98
384

60
81
95
0
4
79
49
36

2.1
1.3
0.3
0.05
0.1
0.01
0.2

Notes:
a
From Primack (1998).
b
From WCMC (1992).

The situation in plants is similarly alarming. IUCN (1997) classiﬁed
12.5% of vascular plants as threatened, with a much higher proportion
of gymnosperms (32%) than angiosperms (9%) being threatened.
Estimates for invertebrates and microbes are not available as the
number of extant species in these groups is not known.

Recorded extinctions
Over 800 extinctions have been
documented since records began
in 1600, the majority being of
island species

Fig. 1.2 Changes in extinction
rates over time in mammals and
birds (after Primack 1998, based on
Smith et al. 1995). Extinction rates
have generally increased for
successive 50-year periods.

Recorded extinctions since 1600 for different groups of animal and
plants on islands and mainlands are given in Table 1.1. The proportions
of species in different groups that have gone extinct are small, being
only 1%–2% in mammals and birds. However, the pattern of extinctions
is a matter for concern as the rate of extinction has generally increased
with time (Fig. 1.2) and many species are threatened. Further, many
extinctions must have occurred without being recorded; habitat loss
must have resulted in many extinctions of undescribed species of invertebrates and plants (Gentry 1986).

ENDANGERED AND EXTINCT SPECIES

Table 1.2

Projected extinction rates for different groups based on a variety of arguments

Percent global
loss per decade

Method of estimation

1 million species between 1975
and 2000

4

Extrapolation of past exponential trend

15%–20% of species between
1980 and 2000
12% of plant species in neotropics
15% bird species in Amazon basin
2000 plant species per year in
tropics and subtropics
25% of species between 1985
and 2015
At least 7% of plant species

8–11

Species–area curves and projected forest loss

8

Species–area curves
As above
Loss of half the species in areas likely to be
deforested by 2015
As above

7

Half of species lost in next decade in 10 ‘hotspots’
covering 3.5% of forest area

0.2%–0.3% per year

2–3

Half of rainforest species lost in tropical rainforests
are local endemics and becoming extinct with
forest loss

5%–15% of forest species by
2020
2%–8% loss between 1980 and
2015

2–5

Species–area curve; forest loss assumed twice rate
projected by FAO for 1980–85
Species–area curve; range includes current rate of
forest loss and 50% increase

Estimated extinction rate

9

1–5

Source: WCMC (1992).

The majority of recorded extinctions, and a substantial proportion
of currently threatened species, are on islands. For example, 81% of all
recorded bird extinctions are insular, yet only about 20% of bird species
have existed on islands (Myers 1979). We will return to vulnerability
and signiﬁcance of insular populations many times throughout this
book.

Projected extinction rates
Several projections of extinction levels into the future are given in
Table 1.2. While these estimates are crude and vary widely, there is a
consensus that extinction rates are destined to accelerate markedly,
typically by 1000-fold or more above ‘normal’ background extinction
rates.
Average lifespans of species provide an alternative way of viewing
rates of extinction. The average lifespan of an animal species in the fossil
record, from origin to extinction, is around 1–10 million years, with the
higher number being more typical. For birds and mammals, rates of
documented extinction over the past century correspond to species’

Projections point to greatly
elevated extinction rates in the
near future

5

6

INTRODUCTION

Table 1.3

Deﬁning endangerment (IUCN 1996 criteria)

Category

Probability of
extinction

Time

Critically endangered
Endangered
Vulnerable

50%
20%
10%

10 yrs or 3 generations
20 yrs or 5 generations
100 yrs

lifespans of around 10000 years. Three different methods suggest an
average lifespan for bird and mammal species of around 200–400 years
if current trends continue (Lawton & May 1995) i.e. current extinction
rates are 5000–25 000 times those in the fossil record.

What is an endangered species?
Endangered species are those with
a high risk of immediate extinction

The IUCN (1996) has deﬁned criteria to classify species into critically
endangered, endangered, vulnerable and lower risk. These are based
on population biology principles developed largely by Mace & Lande
(1991). They deﬁned a threatened species as one with a high risk of
extinction within a short time frame. For example, a critically endangered species has a risk of extinction of 50% within 10 years or three generations, whichever is longer (Table 1.3).
IUCN (1996) set out simple rules to deﬁne these categories in terms
of the rate of decline in population size, restriction in habitat area, the
current population size and/or the probability of extinction. A critically endangered species exhibits any one of the characteristics
described under A–E in Table 1.4, i.e. it has either an 80% or greater
decline in population size over the last 10 years (or three generations),
or an extent of occupancy of less than 100 square kilometres, or a population size of less than 250 mature adults, or a probability of extinction of 50% or more over 10 years (or three generations), or some
combination of these. For example, there are only about 65 Javan rhinoceroses surviving in Southeast Asia and the numbers are continuing
to decline, so this species falls into the category of critically endangered. Other examples are given in the Problems at the end of the
chapter.
There are similar, but less threatening characteristics required to
categorize species as endangered, or vulnerable. Species falling outside
these categories are designated as lower risk. IUCN has also deﬁned categories of extinct, extinct in the wild, conservation dependent, near
threatened and data deﬁcient (IUCN 1996).
While there are many other systems used throughout the world to
categorize endangerment, the IUCN categorization system is used as
the basis of listing species in the IUCN Red Books of endangered animals
(IUCN 1996). In general, we have used the IUCN system throughout this
book.

WHAT CAUSES EXTINCTIONS?

Table 1.4

Information used to decide whether species fall into the critically endangered, endangered or vulnerable
IUCN categories (IUCN 1996).

A species falling within any of the categories A–E in the critically endangered column is deﬁned as critically endangered. Similar rules apply to endangered and vulnerable

Criteria (any one of A–E)

Critically endangered

Endangered

Vulnerable

A. Actual or projected reduction in
population’s size

80% decline over the last 10 years
or 3 generations

50%

20%

B. Extent of occurrence
or area of occupancy of

100 km2
10 km2 and any two of
ii(i) severely fragmented or known
to exist at a single location,
i(ii) continuing declines, and
(iii) extreme ﬂuctuations
250 mature individuals and
an estimated continuing decline
50 mature individuals
at least 50% within 10 years or 3
generations, whichever is the
longer

5000 km2
500 km2
5 locations

20000 km2
2000 km2
10 locations

2500

10000

C. Population numbering
D. Population estimated to number
E. Quantitative analysis showing the
probability of extinction in the
wild

250
1000
20% in 20
10% in
years or 5
100 yrs
generations

Importance of listing
It is of great importance to deﬁne endangerment, as it is the basis for
legal protection for species. For example, most countries have
Endangered Species Acts that provide legal protection for threatened
species and usually require the formulation of recovery plans. In addition, trade in threatened species is banned by countries that have signed
the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES;
Hutton & Dickson 2000). This provides important protection for threatened parrots, reptiles, cats, ﬁsh, whales, etc.

Listing a species or sub-species as
endangered provides a scientiﬁc
foundation for national and
international legal protection from
exploitation and trade, and may
lead to remedial actions to
recover it

What causes extinctions?

Human-associated factors
The primary factors contributing to extinction are directly or indirectly
related to human impacts. Since the human population is growing
rapidly (Fig. 1.3), the impacts of these factors are continually increasing.
The human population reached 6 billion on 12 October 1999, the last
billion increase (20%) having occurred in only 12–14 years. The human
population will continue to increase. By 2050, the population is projected to rise to 8.9 billion, with a range of projections between 7.3 and
10.7 billion. However, the rate of increase has declined from a peak of
just over 2% per year to below 1.5% in the early 1990s (Smil 1999).

The primary factors contributing
to extinction are habitat loss,
introduced species, overexploitation and pollution. These
factors are caused by humans, and
related to human population
growth

7

8

INTRODUCTION

Fig. 1.3 Visual representation of
human population growth in
different parts of the world (from
Tanton 1994).

The total human population is projected to climax at 10–11 billion
around 2070 and then begin to decline (Pearce 1999). Even the lower projection of a peak population size of 7.7 billion in 2040 represents a 28%
increase above the current population. Consequently, human impacts
on wild animals and plants will continue to worsen in the foreseeable
future.

Stochastic factors
Additional accidental (stochastic)
demographic, environmental,
catastrophic and genetic factors
increase the risk of extinction in
small populations

Human-related factors can reduce species to population sizes where
they are susceptible to stochastic effects. These are naturally occurring
ﬂuctuations experienced by small populations. These may have environmental, catastrophic, demographic, or genetic (inbreeding depression, and loss of genetic diversity) origins. Stochastic factors are
discussed throughout the book. Even if the original cause of population
decline is removed, problems associated with small population size will
still persist.

Pu
bl
ic

s
tic
ne
Ge

Po
lic
y

WHAT IS CONSERVATION GENETICS?

s
pie
era
Th

Recognition of genetic factors in conservation
biology
Sir Otto Frankel, an Austrian-born Australian, was largely responsible
for recognizing the importance of genetic factors in conservation
biology, beginning with papers in the early 1970s (Frankel 1970, 1974;
see Soulé & Frankham 2000 for biographical information).
Subsequently, Frankel collaborated with Michael Soulé of the USA on
the ﬁrst conservation book that clearly discussed the contribution of
genetic factors (Frankel & Soulé 1981). Frankel strongly inﬂuenced
Soulé’s entry into conservation biology. Soulé is the ‘father’ of modern
conservation biology, having been instrumental in founding the
Society for Conservation Biology, serving as its ﬁrst President, and participating in the establishment of Conservation Biology, the premier
journal in the ﬁeld. Throughout the 1980s, Michael Soulé had a profound inﬂuence on the development of conservation biology as a multidisciplinary crisis ﬁeld drawing on ecology, genetics, wildlife biology
and resource biology (Fig. 1.4).

Fig. 1.4 Structure of
conservation biology and the
position of genetics in it (after
Soulé 1985). Conservation biology is
a crisis discipline akin to cancer
biology, to which it is compared.

What is conservation genetics?
Conservation genetics deals with the genetic factors that affect extinction risk and genetic management regimes required to minimise these
risks. There are 11 major genetic issues in conservation biology:
• The deleterious effects of inbreeding on reproduction and survival
(inbreeding depression)
• Loss of genetic diversity and ability to evolve in response to environmental change

Conservation genetics aims to
minimize the risk of extinction
from genetic factors

9

10

INTRODUCTION

Fig. 1.5 Structure and content of conservation genetics.

• Fragmentation of populations and reduction in gene ﬂow
• Random processes (genetic drift) overriding natural selection as the
main evolutionary process
• Accumulation and loss (purging) of deleterious mutations
• Genetic adaptation to captivity and its adverse effects on reintroduction success
• Resolving taxonomic uncertainties
• Deﬁning management units within species
• Use of molecular genetic analyses in forensics
• Use of molecular genetic analyses to understand aspects of species
biology important to conservation
• Deleterious effects on ﬁtness that sometimes occur as a result of outcrossing (outbreeding depression).
The effects of small population size are of major concern in conservation biology, since endangered species have small and/or declining populations. Small populations suffer from inbreeding and loss of genetic
diversity resulting in elevated extinction risks. Consequently, a major
objective of genetic management is to minimize inbreeding and loss of
genetic diversity.
This textbook is concerned with the 11 issues listed above.
The structure and content of conservation genetics is illustrated in
Fig. 1.5. Conservation genetics is an applied discipline that draws
heavily upon evolutionary, population and quantitative genetics and
taxonomy.

HOW IS GENETICS USED TO MINIMIZE EXTINCTION?

How is genetics used to minimize extinctions?
Knowledge of genetics aids conservation in the following ways.
Reducing extinction risk by minimizing inbreeding and loss of
genetic diversity
Many small, threatened populations are inbred and have reduced levels
of genetic diversity. Inbreeding reduces fecundity and survival and so
directly increases extinction risk (Chapters 2, 11 and 12). Reduced
genetic diversity compromises the ability of populations to evolve to
cope with environmental change and reduces their chances of longterm persistence (Chapters 3, 10 and 13). For example, the endangered
Florida panther suffers from genetic problems as evidenced by low
genetic diversity, and inbreeding-related defects (poor sperm quality
and quantity and morphological abnormalities). To alleviate these
effects, individuals from its most closely related sub-species in Texas
have been introduced into this population. Captive populations of
many endangered species (e.g. golden lion tamarin) are managed to
minimize loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding (Chapter 17).
Identifying populations of concern
Genetic markers can identify populations where genetic issues are
likely to affect their prospects of long-term survival. Asiatic lions that
exist in the wild only in a small population in the Gir Forest in India
have very low levels of genetic diversity. Consequently, they have a
severely compromised ability to evolve (Chapter 10), as well as being susceptible to demographic and environmental risks (Chapter 20). The
recently discovered Wollemi pine, an Australian relict species previously known only from fossils, contains no genetic diversity among
individuals at several hundred loci, so its extinction risk is extreme; it is
susceptible to a common die-back fungus and all individuals that were
tested were similarly susceptible (Woodford 2000).
Resolving population structure
Information regarding the extent of gene ﬂow among populations is
critical to determine whether a species requires translocation of individuals to prevent inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity (Chapter 13).
Wild populations of the red-cockaded woodpecker are fragmented and
genetically differentiated. Further, levels of genetic diversity are correlated with population sizes. Consequently, part of the management of
this species involves translocating individuals into small populations to
minimize the risks of inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity.
Resolving taxonomic uncertainties
The taxonomic status of many species, especially invertebrates and
lower plants, is frequently unknown (Chapter 15). Thus, an apparently
widespread and low-risk species may, in reality, comprise a complex of
distinct taxa, some rare or endangered. Such is the case for the unique

11

12

INTRODUCTION

New Zealand reptile, the tuatara. Genetic marker studies revealed two
distinct species, one of which was being neglected in terms of conservation. Similar studies have shown that Australia is home to well over 100
locally distributed species of velvet worms (Peripatus) rather than the
seven widespread morphological species previously recognized.
Equally, genetic markers may reveal that populations of common
species are attracting undeserved protection and resources. Molecular
genetic analyses have shown that the endangered colonial pocket
gopher from Georgia is indistinguishable from the common pocket
gopher in that region, so that there was no necessity to preserve the colonial pocket gopher. In a related vein, the threatened northern spotted
owl, the subject of great controversy in the Paciﬁc Northwest of the USA,
is genetically very similar to the non-endangered California spotted owl
(see Box 1.1). This latter case remains controversial and unresolved.
Deﬁning management units within species
Populations within species may be sufﬁciently differentiated that they
deserve management as separate units i.e. they are adapted to somewhat different environments (Chapter 15). Their hybrids may be at a disadvantage, sometimes even displaying partial reproductive isolation.
For example, coho salmon (and many other ﬁsh species) display genetic
differentiation among geographic populations and evidence of adaptation to different conditions (morphology, swimming ability and age at
maturation). Thus, they should be managed as separate populations
(Small et al. 1998).
Detecting hybridization
Many rare species of plants, salmonid ﬁsh and canids are threatened
with being ‘hybridized out of existence’ by crossing with common
species (Chapter 15). Molecular genetic analyses have shown that the
critically endangered Ethiopian wolf (simian jackal) is subject to hybridization with local domestic dogs.
Non-intrusive sampling for genetic analyses
Many species are difﬁcult to capture, or become stressed by the process.
DNA can be obtained from hair, feathers, sloughed skin, faeces, etc. in
non-intrusive sampling, the DNA ampliﬁed and genetic studies completed without disturbing the animals (Chapter 3). For example, the critically endangered northern hairy-nosed wombat is a nocturnal
burrowing marsupial that can only be captured with difﬁculty. They are
stressed by trapping and become trap-shy. Sampling has been achieved
by placing adhesive tape across their burrows to capture hair when the
animals exit their burrows. DNA from non-invasive sampling can be
used to identify individuals, determine mating patterns and population
structure, and measure levels of genetic diversity (Chapters 10 and 19).
Deﬁning sites for reintroduction
The northern hairy-nosed wombat exists in a single population of
approximately 75 animals at Clermont in Queensland, Australia. DNA

HOW IS GENETICS USED TO MINIMIZE EXTINCTION?

samples obtained from museum skins identiﬁed an extinct wombat
population at Deniliquin in NSW as belonging to this species. Thus,
Deniliquin is a potential site for reintroduction (Chapter 19). Similarly,
information from genotyping DNA from sub-fossil bones has revealed
that the endangered Laysan duck previously existed on islands other
than its present distribution in the Hawaiian Islands (Chapter 19).
Choosing the best populations for reintroduction
Island populations are considered as an invaluable genetic resource for
re-establishing mainland populations, particularly in Australia and
New Zealand. However, the black-footed rock wallaby population on
Barrow Island, Australia, a potential source of individuals for reintroductions onto the mainland, has extremely low genetic variation and
reduced reproductive rate (presumably due to inbreeding). More endangered mainland populations are genetically healthier and may be a
more suitable source of animals for reintroductions to other mainland
localities (Chapter 18). Alternatively, the pooling of several different
island populations of this wallaby should provide a genetically healthy
population suitable for reintroduction purposes.
Forensics
Consumption of meat from threatened whales has been detected by
analysing whale meat in Japan and South Korea. Mitochondrial DNA
sequences showed that about 9% of the whale meat on sale came from
protected species of whales, rather than from the minke whales that
can be taken legally (Chapter 19). Work is in progress to develop related
methods to identify tiger bones in Asian medicines. Many other related
forensic applications are deriving from molecular genetics.
Understanding species biology
Many aspects of species biology can be determined using molecular
genetic analyses (see Chapter 19). For example, mating patterns and
reproduction systems are often difﬁcult to determine in threatened
species. Studies using genetic markers established that loggerhead
turtle females mate with several males. Mating systems in many plants
have been established using genetic makers. Birds are often difﬁcult to
sex, resulting in several cases where two birds of the same sex were
placed together to breed. Probes for loci on the sex chromosomes are
now available so that birds can be sexed without having to resort to
surgery. Paternity has been determined in many species, including
chimpanzees. Methods to census endangered kit foxes, that are nocturnal and secretive, are being developed, based upon counts of scats
(faeces). This is only possible because mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) can
be used to distinguish kit fox scats from those of gray foxes, coyotes, red
foxes and domestic dogs in the area.
Dispersal and migration patterns are often critical to species’ survival prospects. These are difﬁcult to determine directly, but can be
inferred using genetic analyses.
Each of these issues is treated in detail in later chapters.

13

14

INTRODUCTION

Box 1.1 Use of molecular genetic analyses in an attempt
to resolve the controversial taxonomic status of
the threatened northern spotted owl
(Barrowclough et al. 1999; Haig et al. 2001)

Efforts to conserve the threatened northern sub-species of spotted owl in the Paciﬁc
Northwest of the USA have created enormous controversy. Logging has been
suspended in large areas of old growth forest, local communities have complained
bitterly about job losses and economic dislocation, and it was an issue in the 1996
presidential election. However, there have been uncertainties about the distinctiveness of the northern spotted owl from related California and Mexican spotted owls.
The distributions of the three sub-species of spotted owl are shown below. The
northern and California spotted owls have no gap between their distributions and
ﬁeld biologists cannot distinguish them in areas where they meet. Morphological
measurements failed to distinguish the northern and Californian sub-species, as did
two genetic studies of nuclear loci. However, evidence from sequencing of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA; maternally inherited) indicated a greater degree of differentiation, as described below.
Studies using electrophoretic separation of proteins (described in Chapter 3)
failed to differentiate the northern and California spotted owls, but they differed at
one gene locus from the Mexican spotted owl. A further analysis was done using
the random ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA (RAPD) method (Chapter 3). Blood
samples were collected from 276 birds from 21 breeding populations, 16 populations being northern spotted owl, 2 California spotted owl and 3 Mexican spotted
owl. DNA from each of the samples was screened for genetic differences following ampliﬁcation. Data on 11 variable bands (each band probably represented a
separate locus) was analysed. No bands differentiated northern from California
spotted owls. One band differentiated Mexican spotted owls from northern and
Californian.
In contrast, mtDNA sequences from 73 spotted owls detected a considerable
difference between the three sub-species (Barrowclough et al. 1999). Only one
mtDNA sequence from the northern spotted owl was identical to sequences from
the California spotted owls and all Mexican spotted owl sequences were distinct

HOW IS GENETICS USED TO MINIMIZE EXTINCTION?

from the other sub-species. More extensive analyses from the region where northern and California spotted owl populations meet have revealed considerable gene
ﬂow between the sub-species, probably due to secondary contact as a result of
habitat destruction (Haig et al. 2001). About 13% of northern spotted owls in the
region nearest to the California spotted owl have mtDNA that is normally associated
with California spotted owls. Consequently, the taxonomic status of the northern
spotted owl as a distinct sub-species remains controversial. Listing under the US
Endangered Species Act requires that a population be a distinct species, or subspecies, or a distinct population segment. This is interpreted to mean that they should
have mtDNA sequences that are not shared and that there should be evidence of
some frequency differences in nuclear loci, or evidence of genetically determined
morphological, behavioural or life history differences. The ability of the northern
spotted owl to satisfy these criteria, as a distinctly different population from the
California spotted owl, is open to question.
Additional concerns have arisen recently. First, the California spotted owl is in
decline as a result of human encroachment in the south, so the combined northern
–California spotted owl may justify listing in the future (Lahaye et al. 1994). Second,
hybridization of spotted owls to barred owls is becoming common since the habitat
was fragmented (Hamer et al. 1994). Thus, northern spotted owls may warrant conservation effort, but not necessarily for the reasons originally envisaged.

15

16

INTRODUCTION

Genetic versus demographic and environmental
factors in conservation biology
There is controversy over the
importance of genetic factors in
conservation

A number of ecologists and wildlife biologists have questioned the signiﬁcance of genetic factors in conservation (see Chapter 2). Several have
suggested that demographic factors, environmental ﬂuctuations (stochasticity) and catastrophes will drive wild populations to extinction
before genetic factors take effect. However, there is a clear theoretical
basis and a growing body of experimental evidence that genetic factors
are involved in extinctions (Chapter 2). Genetic factors may frequently
interact with demographic and environmental ﬂuctuations in precipitating species to decline towards extinction.

What do we need to know to genetically manage
threatened species?
Four primary questions are asked
when seeking to manage
endangered species: Is the
taxonomy known? Is the
population small and/or
fragmented? Is it subject to
harvesting? Are all essential
aspects of species biology known?

A ﬂowchart of the information required for the genetic management of
threatened populations is given in Fig. 1.6. The ﬁrst crucial group of
questions relate to whether the taxonomy is clearly known. If not, this
can often be resolved using genetic marker studies. A related question is
whether populations within species differ sufﬁciently to justify separate management, as would typically be accorded to sub-species. The
ﬁnal question in this area is concerned with whether the species is
hybridizing with another species (introgression). These issues are
addressed in Chapter 15.
The second group of critical questions relates to population size. We
have already alluded to the fact that the total species population size
and the extent of fragmentation are central to an assessment of extinction risk through genetic factors. These questions are addressed in
Section II of the textbook.
The third question relates to whether all the critical aspects of the
species’ biology are known and whether unknown parameters can be
resolved using molecular genetic analyses. The fourth question relates
to the existence of illegal hunting or trade, and whether molecular
genetic analyses can aid in their detection. These issues are all treated
in Section III of the book, ‘From theory to practice’.
Conservation genetics relies heavily upon knowledge of population
and quantitative genetics to understand the genetic consequences of
small population size. Consequently, Section I of the book deals with
the required principles of evolutionary genetics. Section II builds upon
this background by exploring the genetic consequences of small populations. These sections provide the background for us to deal with practical management issues in conservation genetics in Section III.

Fig. 1.6 Flowchart of questions that are asked in relation to genetic issues in conservation.

18

INTRODUCTION

Methodology in conservation genetics
Conceptual issues in conservation
genetics are typically resolved
using experiments with laboratory
species, computer simulations and
combined analyses of data from
many wildlife species (metaanalyses)

An important feature of conservation genetics is the methodology used
for resolving issues and advancing the ﬁeld. Information on endangered species is often limited and these species are often unsuitable for
experimental studies. Advances in the ﬁeld come from the interplay of
theory, computer simulations and experimentation, in a manner analogous to that used in economics or climate modelling. Theory and evaluation must be involved in a feedback loop. The traditional means for
testing theory and resolving issues are to use replicated experiments
with controls. However, endangered species are unsuitable for doing
this, as they are typically slow breeders, expensive to keep and present
in low numbers, and experimentation is ruled out by both practical and
ethical considerations.
As the genetics of all outbreeding species are similar, laboratory
species such as fruit ﬂies, ﬂour beetles, and mice have long been used to
investigate parallel problems in the related ﬁelds of evolutionary genetics and animal breeding. For example, inbreeding has been found to
result in deleterious effects on reproduction and survival (reproductive
ﬁtness) in essentially all naturally outbreeding populations of laboratory animals, domestic animals, domestic plants and wild species that
have been adequately investigated (see Chapter 12). We are aware of no
case where studies with laboratory species have yielded qualitative
results at variance with those found for other species with similar
breeding systems.
Computer simulations provide means for dealing with complex
models with many interacting factors. Mathematical models and computer simulation have provided much of the theory that we apply to the
biology of small populations. Computer simulation has an extremely
important role in population viability analysis (PVA) which determines
extinction risk due to the combined effects of demographic and environmental factors, catastrophes and genetic factors (Chapters 2 and 20).
Data sets for endangered species are typically small, so conclusions
from any one species are usually not convincing. Consequently, statistical analyses frequently combine data from a variety of species or populations (meta-analyses). For example, the impact of inbreeding on
captive mammals was evaluated by combining data on juvenile survival
of inbred versus outbred offspring from 44 populations of mammals
(Chapter 11). Relationships between genetic diversity and population
size were also resolved in this way (Chapter 10).
Much of the supporting evidence in the book comes from laboratory
studies, computer simulations and meta-analyses. However, we have
sought to use examples from endangered populations wherever adequate evidence could be found.

SUMMARY

Island theme
Parallels between populations of conservation concern and island populations are a recurring theme throughout the book. Endangered
species in captivity are akin to island populations. Fragmented populations often have the characteristics of island populations, including
small sizes and restricted migration, but have typically been isolated for
much shorter periods than oceanic island populations.
Island populations usually experience environments different from
those of their mainland counterparts, especially the absence of many
predators, parasites and diseases. The evolution of endangered species
in captivity has features akin to this. Island populations were frequently
founded from a small number of individuals so they have often experienced population size bottlenecks. Further, they are typically smaller
than their mainland counterparts. As a consequence of bottlenecks at
foundation and small size, island populations usually have less genetic
diversity than mainland populations, are often inbred and may have
lowered reproductive ﬁtness (Chapters 10–12). A disturbing implication
of the island analogy is that island populations have proved to be much
more prone to extinction than mainland populations (Table 1.1).

Sources of information
An annotated list of widely used references is given at the end of this
chapter. References within the text are primarily given to reviews and
recent papers that provide an entry into each topic area. The primary
research information appears in the specialist journal Conservation
Genetics, in general conservation biology journals (Conservation Biology,
Animal Conservation and Biological Conservation) and in more broadly
based evolutionary biology journals including Molecular Ecology,
Evolution, Journal of Heredity, Heredity, Genetics and Genetical Research.

Summary
1. The biodiversity of the planet is rapidly being depleted due to
direct and indirect human actions.
2. An endangered species is one with a high risk of extinction
within a short time.
3. The primary factors contributing to extinction are habitat loss,
introduced species, over-exploitation and pollution. Additional accidental (stochastic) demographic, environmental, catastrophic and
genetic factors increase the risk of extinction in small populations.
4. Conservation genetics is the use of genetics to preserve species as
dynamic entities that can evolve to cope with environmental change
and thus minimize their risk of extinction.

Island populations share many
features with endangered species,
including small population size and
elevated risks of extinction and so
provide a useful analogy to draw
upon

19

20

INTRODUCTION

5. Genetics is used to minimize extinction probabilities by minimizing inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity, identifying populations of concern, determining population structure, resolving
taxonomic uncertainties, deﬁning management units within species,
identifying populations and sites for reintroductions, using molecular
genetic analyses in forensics and by providing tools to improve our
understanding of species biology.
GENER AL BIBLIOGR APHY

(For full bibliographical details see References.)
Avise (1994) Molecular Markers, Natural History and Evolution. Readable textbook
concerned with molecular population genetics, determination of life history
parameters and taxonomy.
Avise & Hamrick (1996) Conservation Genetics. Advanced scientiﬁc reviews on the
conservation genetics of major groups of animals and plants.
Burgman & Lindenmayer (1998) Conservation Biology in the Australian
Environment. Excellent textbook in conservation biology with a focus on
Australian examples and a solid treatment of genetic issues.
Falconer & Mackay (1996) Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. Outstanding textbook on population and quantitative genetics, with applications given for
animal and plant breeding. Similar level to this textbook.
Falk & Holsinger (1991) Genetics and Conservation of Rare Plants. Monograph on
conservation of rare plants. Advanced level, but readable.
Frankel & Soulé (1981) Conservation and Evolution. Excellent book on conservation biology, the ﬁrst with a reasonable genetic component. Quite old, but
still worth consulting. Level similar to this textbook.
Futuyma (1998) Evolutionary Biology. Excellent textbook covering all aspects of
evolutionary biology; chapters 9–16 cover topics of direct relevance to conservation genetics.
Hartl & Clarke (1997) Principles of Population Genetics. Basic textbook in population genetics with a strong molecular ﬂavour for advanced undergraduates
and graduate students.
Landweber & Dobson (1999) Genetics and the Extinction of Species. Edited volume
with contributions from different authors on reasons for extinctions, measurement of biodiversity, captive breeding, etc.
Loeschcke et al. (1994) Conservation Genetics. A collection of scientiﬁc review
papers on conservation genetics by different authors. Advanced, but fairly
readable.
Meffe & Carroll (1997) Principles of Conservation Biology. Basic textbook in conservation biology, with a reasonable coverage of genetic issues.
Primack (1998) Essentials of Conservation Biology. Basic textbook in conservation
biology with a good, but limited coverage of genetic issues.
Quammen (1996) The Song of the Dodo. An interesting and stimulating book
written for a popular audience; it has a ﬁne coverage of island populations
and their relevance to extinctions.
Roff (1997) Evolutionary Quantitative Genetics. Textbook on quantitative genetics
of non-domestic populations for advanced undergraduates and above.
Schonewald-Cox et al. (1983) Genetics and Conservation. A collection of scientiﬁc
review papers by different authors. Written at a level that should be understood by the audience of this book. Excellent science and still worth
reading.

PROBLEMS

Singh & Krimbas (2000) Evolutionary Genetics. Recent reviews on all aspects of
evolutionary genetics that provide the background to Sections I and II of this
book. Advanced.
Smith & Wayne (1996) Molecular Genetic Approaches in Conservation. A book containing scientiﬁc review chapters on the molecular aspect of conservation.
Advanced.
Soulé & Wilcox (1980) Conservation Biology. Proceedings of the conference that
began the modern era of conservation biology, one that included genetic
issues. A classic reference that is generally intelligible to the audience of this
book. Still worth consulting.
Soulé (1987) Viable Populations for Conservation. An important reference to papers
by different authors on the size of population required to avoid extinction.
Advanced, but reasonably readable.
PROBLEMS

These problems are designed to review material on Mendelian inheritance, probability and statistics that are assumed knowledge (1.1–1.8),
and to evaluate your ability to place species in the IUCN categories of
risk (1.9–1.12).
1.1 Mendelian inheritance: If two parents have genotypes of A1A2
and A1A2 at a locus, what genotypes of progeny do they produce? What
are the expected proportions of the different progeny?
1.2 Mendelian inheritance: What progeny genotypes are expected
from the cross between A1A2 B1B2 and A1A2 B1B2 parents, assuming
independent assortment of the A and B loci? What are the expected
proportions of the different progeny?
1.3 Mendelian inheritance: What does independent assortment of
two gene loci imply about the location of the two loci?
1.4 Transcription and translation: Given the strand of DNA below,
insert the complementary strand, the mRNA, the tRNA anticodon and
the amino acids speciﬁed.
Complementary DNA
Coding DNA strand
TAC TTT GGG ATT
mRNA
tRNA anticodon
Amino acids
1.5 Statistics: A family of mice produces 50 males and 80 females in
their lifetime. Use a 2 test to determine whether this differs from a
1:1 ratio.
1.6 Probability: What are the possible ratios of females to males in
families of size 4? What are their respective probabilities of occurrence?
1.7 Statistics: The four phenotypes in an F2 were found in the
numbers 100: 20: 35: 5. Use a 2 test to determine whether these differ
from the 9:3:3:1 expectation.
1.8 Statistics: Nine golden lion tamarin females have litter sizes of
0, 1, 2, 3, 2, 1, 0, 2, and 3. What is the mean litter size? What is the standard deviation?
1.9 IUCN categories: In what IUCN category would you place
the northern hairy-nosed wombat? It exists as a relatively stable

21

22

INTRODUCTION

population of approximately 75 individuals (say 45 adults) in one location in Queensland, Australia.
1.10 IUCN categories: In what IUCN category would you place the
southern blueﬁn tuna? Its population size has declined by almost 90%
over the last 30 years, from 3.7 million in 1965 to 423000 in 1994.
1.11 IUCN categories: In what IUCN category would you place the
thylacine, a marsupial carnivore from Tasmania, Australia? It has not
been seen in the wild since 1933, and the last animal in captivity died
in 1936.
1.12 IUCN categories: In what IUCN category would you place
Attwater’s prairie chicken? It occurs in Texas, USA and has a total population size of 456 in 1993, distributed over three fragmented populations (populations of 372, 24 and 60) that may have been isolated since
1937. The species once numbered about 1 million, and has recently
been declining at a rate of about 5% per year.
P R A C T I C A L E X E R C I S E S : C A T E G O R I Z I N G E N DA N G E R M E N T O F S P E C I E S

Provide students with groups of three species (one abundant, and two
falling into different threatened categories) and ask them to categorize
them using the IUCN system. Supply students with suitable reference
materials. Students can work in groups of three for this. Example of
species to use include the following:
Gray wolf, Puerto Rican parrot, northern right whale
Deer mouse, whooping crane, golden lion tamarin
Red kangaroo, orange-bellied parrot, koala
Indian mynah bird, giant panda, Javan rhinoceros
African buffalo, Mauritius pink pigeon, chimpanzee
European starling, Iberian lynx, Mediterranean monk seal

Chapter 2

Genetics and extinction
Inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity are inevitable in small
populations of threatened species. They reduce reproduction and
survival in the short term and diminish the capacity of populations
to evolve in response to environmental change in the long term; they
have undoubtedly contributed to previous extinctions and
constitute part of the threat to endangered species.

Terms:
Demographic stochasticity,
endemic,
environmental stochasticity,
extinction vortex,
genetic diversity,
inbreeding,
inbreeding coefﬁcient,
inbreeding depression,
major histocompatibility complex
(MHC),
outbreeding, self-incompatibility

Extinct dodo and its previous
distribution on the Island of
Mauritius.

24

GENETICS AND EXTINCTION

Genetics and the fate of endangered species

Inbreeding reduces reproduction
and survival

Little more than a decade ago, the contribution of genetic factors to the
fate of endangered species was considered to be minor. Lande (1988)
summarized this opinion by suggesting that demographic and environmental ﬂuctuations (stochasticity), and catastrophes, would cause
extinction before genetic deterioration became a serious threat to wild
populations. A healthy controversy has persisted (see Caro & Laurenson
1994; Frankham 1995a; Hedrick et al. 1995; Caughley & Gunn 1996;
Frankham & Ralls 1998; Dobson 1999; Frankham 2000). However, there
is now a compelling body of both theoretical and empirical evidence
supporting the contention that genetic changes in small populations
are intimately involved with their fate. Speciﬁcally:
• Many surviving populations have now been shown to be genetically
compromised (reduced genetic diversity and inbred)
• Inbreeding causes extinctions in deliberately inbred captive populations
• Inbreeding has contributed to extinctions in some natural populations and there is circumstantial evidence to implicate it in many
other cases
• Computer projections based on real life histories, including demographic, environmental and catastrophic factors, indicate that
inbreeding will cause elevated extinction risks in realistic situations
faced by natural populations
• Loss of genetic diversity increases the susceptibility of populations
to extinction.
Inbreeding is the production of offspring by individuals related by
descent, e.g. self-fertilization, brother–sister, parent–offspring, cousin
matings, etc. (Box 2.1 and Chapter 11). Inbreeding reduces reproduction
and survival (reproductive ﬁtness) – this is referred to as inbreeding
depression. For example, inbred individuals showed higher juvenile
mortality than outbred individuals in 41 of 44 captive mammal populations studied by Ralls & Ballou (1983). On average, brother–sister mating
resulted in a 33% reduction in juvenile survival. By extrapolation, it was
anticipated that inbreeding would increase the risk of extinction in
wild populations. Further, the impact of inbreeding depression was
expected to be greater in the wild than in captivity, as natural environments are generally harsher.
There is now clear evidence that inbreeding adversely affects most
wild populations. Crnokrak & Roff (1999) reviewed 157 valid data sets,
including 34 species, for inbreeding depression in natural situations. In
141 cases (90%) inbred individuals had poorer attributes than comparable outbreds (i.e. they showed inbreeding depression), two were equal
and only 14 were in the opposite direction. Results were very similar
across birds, mammals, poikilotherms and plants. Signiﬁcant inbreeding depression has been reported in at least another 15 taxa (Chapter
12). Species exhibiting inbreeding depression in the wild include the
following: mammals (golden lion tamarins, lions, native mice, shrews

GENETICS AND THE FATE OF ENDANGERED SPECIES

and Soay sheep), birds (greater prairie chicken, Mexican jay, song
sparrow, American kestrel and reed warbler), ﬁsh (Atlantic salmon,
desert topminnow and rainbow trout), a reptile, a snail, an insect
(butterﬂy) and many species of plants (see Bensch et al. 1994; Frankham
1995a; Madsen et al. 1996; Brown & Brown 1998; Saccheri et al. 1998;
Westemeier et al. 1998; Coltman et al. 1999).
In the desert topminnow ﬁsh, Vrijenhoek (1994) used a co-occurring
and related asexual species, lacking genetic variation, as a natural
control. Prior to a drought that eliminated their habitat, the genetically
diverse and sexually reproducing topminnows numerically dominated
the asexual species. Following the drought, populations of both species
were re-established. However, the asexual species now numerically
dominated the sexual species. The sexual species had lost much of its
genetic variation (and was inbred) as a consequence of small numbers
of individuals taking part in the re-establishment (founding) event.
After deliberate replacement of 30 of the sexual ﬁsh with 30 outbred
individuals from elsewhere, to restore genetic diversity, the sexual
species regained numerical dominance (details in Box 12.1). In a similar
example, the Illinois population of greater prairie chickens declined
from millions to only 200 in 1962, and failed to recover following
habitat restoration. It showed clear evidence of inbreeding depression
by reduced fertility and hatchability. However, when inbreeding effects
were removed by crossing to unrelated birds from other states, the population recovered its fertility and hatchability and grew in numbers.

Box 2.1 Measures of inbreeding
Inbreeding is the production of offspring from related individuals. There are
repeated matings of relatives in the pedigree below of the Nigerian giraffe X born
in Paris Zoo in 1992 (Bingaman-Lackey 1999). This highly inbred calf died three
weeks after birth.
There are several ways to measure the extent of inbreeding in a population.
While these measures are detailed in Chapter 11, it is useful to brieﬂy explore the
concept in the present context.
THE INBREEDING COEFFICIENT (F)

The inbreeding coefﬁcient of an individual refers to how closely related its parents are. When parents are unrelated, offspring F 0, while when inbreeding is
complete F 1. Level of inbreeding for different kinds of relationships among parents
are:
Parents

Offspring F

Unrelated
Brother–sister, mother–son, or father–daughter
Half-brother–half-sister (half-sibs)
First cousins
Self-fertilization (or selﬁng)

0
0.25
0.125
0.0625
0.5

25

26

GENETICS AND EXTINCTION

Inbreeding accumulates in closed populations (those without immigration) and complete inbreeding can eventually be reached with repeated inbred matings; an F of
0.999 is reached after 10 generations of self-fertilization, while an F of 0.986 is
reached after 20 generations of brother–sister mating. The Nigerian giraffe X above
had an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 0.52 (see Problem 11.11).
AVERAGE INBREEDING

A second measure of inbreeding is the average inbreeding coefﬁcient of all individuals in a population. In small closed populations, average F will inevitably rise as mates
become increasingly related. Average F increases at a rate of 1/(2N) per generation
in a randomly breeding population of size N (Chapter 10).
The ﬁgure opposite illustrates the increase in average inbreeding coefﬁcient in
populations of 10 and 20 randomly breeding individuals. In the population of size 10,
average F reaches the level of brother–sister matings (F0.25) by generation 6, while
the population of size 20 reaches this inbreeding level by generation 12.

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INBREEDING AND EXTINCTION

INBREEDING RELATIVE TO RANDOM BREEDING

The third way to measure inbreeding is to compare the average relatedness of mates
(parents) to what one would expect if the population was breeding randomly. If the
population is mating at random, then F0. If mates are more closely related than
expected under random matings, then the population is said to be inbreeding and
F0. If individuals in the populations are actively choosing less related mates, then
the population is said to be avoiding inbreeding and F0. This F value refers to the
average F of the population, while the inbreeding coefﬁcient is calculated for a particular individual.
Levels of inbreeding can be determined from pedigrees, or inferred from heterozygosities for genetic markers (Chapters 4 and 11).

Genetic diversity is the extent of heritable variation in a population, or
species, or across a group of species, e.g. heterozygosity, or number of
alleles, or heritability (Chapters 3, 4 and 5). Genetic diversity is required
for populations to evolve in response to environmental change
(Chapters 6, 8 and 10). Such environmental change is a ubiquitous
feature of life on Earth. Consequently, if there is no genetic diversity in
a population or species, it is likely to go extinct in response to major
environmental change. Genetic diversity is lost in small random mating
populations at the same time they become inbred, so the two processes
are closely related (Chapters 8, 10 and 11).

Genetic diversity is required for
populations and species to evolve
in response to environmental
change

Relationship between inbreeding and extinction
The ﬁrst line of evidence on the relationship between inbreeding and
extinction came from deliberately inbred populations of laboratory and
domestic animals and plants. Between 80% and 95% of deliberately
inbred populations die out after eight generations of brother–sister
mating or three generations of self-fertilization (Frankel & Soulé 1981).
For example, 338 populations of Japanese quail, inbred by continued
brother–sister mating, were all extinct after four generations. Such
extinctions could be due to either inbreeding, or to demographic stochasticity (ﬂuctuations in birth and death rates and sex-ratios), or a
combination of these effects. However, under circumstances where

Deliberately inbred populations of
laboratory and domestic animals
and plants show greatly elevated
extinction rates

27

28

GENETICS AND EXTINCTION

Fig. 2.1 Relationship between inbreeding and extinction. Populations of mice and two
species of fruit ﬂies (one with two populations) were inbred using brother sister–matings
(Bowman & Falconer 1960; Kosuda 1972; Rumball et al. 1994). Demographic stochasticity
made very little or no contribution to these extinctions (Frankham 1995b). The
proportions of populations going extinct rises with inbreeding, but extinctions do not begin until
intermediate, threshold, levels of inbreeding have been reached.

demographic stochasticity is excluded, inbreeding clearly increased the
risk of extinction in captive populations (Frankham 1995b, 1998).
Examples from mice and fruit ﬂies are shown in Fig. 2.1.

Rate of inbreeding and extinction risk
Even slow inbreeding increases
the risk of extinction

Rapid inbreeding (brother–sister mating or self-fertilization) was used
to inbreed the populations referred to above. Natural populations of
outbreeding wild animals and plants (those whose mating systems do
not include substantial selﬁng or close inbreeding) are usually subject
to slower rates of inbreeding, dependent on their population sizes (Box
2.1). Slower inbreeding allows natural selection more opportunity to
remove genetically compromised individuals (and thereby remove deleterious alleles). For ﬁtness components such as survival and fecundity,
slower rates of inbreeding generally do lead to less inbreeding depression than fast inbreeding for the same total amount for inbreeding,
although the effects are typically small (Chapter 12).
However, even slow rates of inbreeding increase the risk of extinction; it just takes longer for inbreeding to accumulate and extinction to
occur. For example, 15 of 60 fruit ﬂy populations, inbred due to sizes of
67 individuals per generation, went extinct within 210 generations
(Latter et al. 1995). In a similar manner, 5 of 6 replicate houseﬂy populations of size 50 went extinct over 64 generations (Reed & Bryant 2000).
Further, a comparison of extinction risks for the same amount of
inbreeding, but due to slower double ﬁrst-cousin versus faster
brother–sister inbreeding, revealed no signiﬁcant difference in extinction risk due to rate of inbreeding (Frankham 1995b). Accordingly, differences in the effects of rate of inbreeding on extinction risk for the
same amount of inbreeding are unlikely to be large.

INBREEDING AND EXTINCTION IN THE WILD

Do taxonomic groups differ in susceptibility to
inbreeding depression?
Much information on inbreeding and extinctions comes from species
used in laboratory experiments. It is therefore essential to know
whether these ﬁndings can be extrapolated to other species and taxonomic groups. Most studies ﬁnd little evidence of difference among
major diploid taxa in inbreeding depression for naturally outbreeding
species. Inbreeding depression for wild populations of homeotherms,
poikilotherms and plants do not differ signiﬁcantly (Crnokrak & Roff
1999). Nor were there any signiﬁcant differences in inbreeding depression under captive conditions among mammalian orders (Ralls et al.
1988). Further, a comparison of extinction proneness due to inbreeding
in 25 captive populations failed to ﬁnd signiﬁcant differences among
mammals, birds, invertebrates and plants (Frankham unpublished
data); extinction rates at F 0.85 (equivalent to nine generations of
brother–sister mating) were 68% for mammals, 81% for birds, 60% for
invertebrates and 99% for a single plant species.
Inbreeding depression in plants is typically higher for gymnosperms than angiosperms (Husband & Schemske 1996). This could be
related to a higher level of polyploidy (more than two doses of each
chromosome, e.g., 4n vs. 2n) in the latter than the former. Since the
rate of increase in homozygosity is slower in polyploids than in diploids, polyploids are expected to suffer less inbreeding depression (see
Chapter 12).

Differences in susceptibility to
inbreeding depression among
mammals, birds, invertebrates and
plants seem to be small

Inbreeding and extinction in the wild
Since inbreeding leads to elevated extinction risks in captive populations, it is logical to extrapolate this to wild populations. Three lines of
evidence point to the susceptibility of wild populations to inbreeding
and consequent elevated extinction risk:
• Computer projections have predicted that inbreeding will increase
extinction risks for wild populations
• Many small surviving wild populations have now been shown to be
genetically compromised
• Direct evidence of inbreeding and loss of genetic variation contributing to the extinction of populations in nature has been presented.

There is a growing body of
evidence showing that inbreeding
elevates extinction risks in wild
populations

Computer projections
Computer projections incorporating factual life history information
are often used to assess the combined impact of all deterministic and
stochastic factors on the probability of extinction of populations (see
Chapter 20). Information on population size, births and survival rates
and their variation over age and years together with measures of

Computer projections predict that
inbreeding elevates extinction risk
for most outbreeding wild
populations

29

30

GENETICS AND EXTINCTION

Bay checkerspot butterfly

Fig. 2.2 Impact of inbreeding on population size. Computer projections of population
sizes for threatened populations of two mammals, a bird and an invertebrate in the wild,
when the deleterious effects of inbreeding are included (•), or excluded (•).

inbreeding depression, changes in habitat quality, etc. form the input.
Stochastic models are then run through repeated cycles to project the
fate of populations into the future.
Mills & Smouse (1994) used computer simulations to show that
inbreeding generally increases the risk of extinction, especially in
species with low reproductive rates. These simulations encompassed
only a 20-year time frame, representing less than ﬁve generations for
the types of life cycles they simulated. Since the effects of inbreeding
continue to accumulate over generations in closed populations, their
simulations underestimate the impacts of inbreeding over periods of
conservation concern (typically 100–200 years). Computer projections
over 100 years, using a range of outbreeding bird, mammal, and invertebrate life cycles, were conducted by Brook and co-workers (unpublished data). Almost all yielded substantial increases in extinction risk
when the effects of inbreeding were included, compared to runs with
inbreeding effects excluded. Runs for four different species show lower
population size for models that include inbreeding depression than for
those excluding it (Fig. 2.2). These differences translate into differences
in extinction risk over time. A similar computer projection for the rare
European plant Gentiana pneumonanthe yielded similar conclusions
(Oostermeijer 2000).

INBREEDING AND EXTINCTION IN THE WILD

Direct evidence of extinctions due to inbreeding and
loss of genetic diversity
The most compelling single body of evidence for the involvement of
inbreeding in extinction of natural populations is for butterﬂy populations in Finland (Box 2.2). Inbreeding was a signiﬁcant predictor of
extinction risk after the effects of all other ecological and demographic
variables had been removed. Further, experimental populations of the
evening primrose plant founded with a low level of genetic diversity
(and high inbreeding) exhibited 75% extinction rates over three generations in the wild, while populations with lower inbreeding showed only
a 21% extinction rate (Newman & Pilson 1997). Differences in inbreeding, as well as differences in genetic diversity, were presumed to be
involved.

Box 2.2 Inbreeding and extinction risk in butterﬂy
populations in Finland (Saccheri et al. 1998)
Forty-two butterﬂy populations in Finland were typed for genetic markers in 1995,
and their extinction or survival recorded in the following year. Of these, 35 survived
to autumn 1996 and seven went extinct. Extinction rates were higher for populations
with lower heterozygosity, an indication of inbreeding, even after accounting for the
effects of demographic and environmental variables (population size, time trend in
population size and area) known to affect extinction risk, as shown in the ﬁgure
below. The different curves represent the relationships between extinction probability and proportion of loci heterozygous for populations with different numbers (1–5)
of larval groups.

There is direct evidence that
inbreeding and loss of genetic
diversity increase the risk of
extinction for populations in
nature

31

32

GENETICS AND EXTINCTION

Fig. 2.3 The extinction vortex. This describes the possible interactions between human
impacts, inbreeding, loss of genetic diversity and demographic instability in a downward
spiral towards extinction.

Circumstantial evidence for extinctions due to
inbreeding
The effects of inbreeding
depression and loss of genetic
diversity can interact with
demographic, environmental and
catastrophic factors in an
‘extinction vortex’

The responses of populations to environmental stochasticity (random
unpredictable variation in environmental factors), demographic stochasticity and the impact of catastrophes are not independent of
inbreeding and genetic diversity. Inbreeding, on average, reduces birth
rates and increases death rates and may distort sex-ratios. It therefore
interacts with the basic parameters determining population viability,
such as population growth rate and variation in population size.
Adverse effects of inbreeding on population growth rates probably
occur in most naturally outbreeding species.
Experimental populations of mosquito ﬁsh founded from brother–
sister pairs showed 56% lower growth in numbers than populations
founded from unrelated pairs (Leberg 1990a). Strong reductions in population growth were also observed in ﬂour beetle populations inbred
due to small numbers (McCauley & Wade 1981). They even detected
adverse effects at F 0.1 (equivalent to a level between cousin and halfsib matings).
If populations become small for any reason, they become more
inbred and less demographically stable, further reducing population
size and increasing inbreeding. This feedback between reduced population size, loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding is referred to as the
extinction vortex (Fig. 2.3). One very clear message derives from Fig.
2.3. The complicated interactions between genetic, demographic and
environmental factors can make it extremely difﬁcult to identify the

INBREEDING AND EXTINCTION IN THE WILD

Fig. 2.4 Extinction rates are
higher in smaller than larger
populations. Relationship between
persistence and population size in
North American bighorn sheep
(after Berger 1990).

immediate cause(s) for any particular extinction event (see Chapters 12
and 20).
Smaller populations are expected to be more extinction prone than
larger ones for demographic, ecological and genetic reasons. Berger
(1990) found a strong relationship between population size and persistence in North American bighorn sheep (Fig. 2.4). All populations of50
became extinct within 50 years. A wide variety of demographic, ecological and genetic factors may have contributed to these extinctions.
Inbreeding depression and loss of genetic diversity were among those
considered likely to be involved. In a related vein, mammalian extinctions in national parks in western North America were related to park
area, and presumably population sizes (Newmark 1995). Extinctions
were more frequent for populations with smaller initial population
sizes, larger ﬂuctuations in population size and shorter generation
times. As we will see later, all of these effects are predicted by genetic
considerations (Chapters 10–12), but most are also expected from demographic and environmental considerations.
Declines in population size or extinction in the wild have been
attributed, at least in part, to inbreeding in many populations including bighorn sheep, Florida panthers, Isle Royale gray wolves, greater
prairie chickens, heath hens, middle spotted woodpeckers, adders, and
many island species (Frankham 1995a; Westemeier et al. 1998; Madsen et
al. 1999). Further, inbreeding colonial spiders have a higher rate of
colony extinction than non-inbreeding species.

Extinction proneness of island populations
Recorded extinctions since 1600 reveal that a majority of extinctions
have been of island forms, even though island species represent a minority of total species in all groups (Table 1.1). For example, only 20% of all
bird species live on islands, but 80% of bird species driven to extinction
have been island dwellers (Myers 1979). Further, substantial proportions

Small populations are more likely
to suffer from extinctions than
large populations for both genetic
and ecological reasons

There is circumstantial evidence
that inbreeding has contributed to
many other wildlife extinctions

The majority of extinctions of
plants and animals have been of
island species, although these
represent a minority of all species.
Endemic island species are more
prone to extinction than nonendemic species

33

34

GENETICS AND EXTINCTION

Circumstantial evidence points to
inbreeding and loss of genetic
diversity contributing to the
extinction proneness of island
populations of many species

The greater extinction proneness
of endemic than non-endemic
island species is predicted by
genetic, but not by demographic
and ecological considerations

of species listed as endangered and vulnerable species are insular
(Chapter 1). In vertebrates, endemic island species (species not found
elsewhere) are more prone to extinction than non-endemic species. This
holds true for birds in general, for New Zealand land birds, and for reptiles (Frankham 1998).
Human factors have been the major recorded causes of extinction on
islands over the past 50 000 years. The human impacts have typically
driven down population sizes to the point where stochastic factors
come into play and the coup de grâce is usually delivered by stochastic
factors, whether demographic, environmental, catastrophic or genetic.
The mechanisms underlying susceptibility of island populations to
extinction are controversial. Ecologists stress the susceptibility of small
island populations to demographic and environmental stochasticity.
However, this susceptibility is also predicted on genetic grounds
(Frankham 1998). Island populations are expected to be inbred due to
both low numbers of founders on remote islands (often a single inseminated female animal or a single plant propagule), and subsequent small
population sizes. There is essentially little critical evidence to separate
the effects of ‘non-genetic’ factors from the effects of inbreeding and
loss of genetic diversity. Inbreeding can certainly diminish the resistance of a population by reducing its reproductive rate and survival
such that it is more susceptible to ‘non-genetic’ factors.
Island populations typically have less genetic diversity and are more
inbred than mainland populations (Frankham 1997, 1998). A metaanalysis of data involving 202 island populations revealed that 82% had
lower levels of genetic diversity than their mainland counterparts.
Island populations are signiﬁcantly inbred with endemic island populations more so than non-endemics (Fig. 2.5). Signiﬁcantly, inbreeding
in many island populations is at levels where captive populations show
an elevated risk of extinction. The levels of inbreeding in these island
populations are not in accord with predictions that demographic and
environmental stochasticity and catastrophes will drive populations to
extinction before genetic factors become a problem. A particularly
telling case is that of black-footed rock wallabies on Barrow Island and
other islands off the west coast of Australia (Box 2.3). These populations
have very low levels of genetic diversity and the Barrow Island population exhibits evidence of inbreeding depression. In addition, euros (a
kangaroo species) on Barrow Island also have reduced genetic diversity
and suffer from chronic anaemia and higher parasite loads than their
mainland counterparts (Eldridge et al. personal communication).
Endemic island populations have generally existed on islands at
restrictedpopulationsizesforlongerthannon-endemics.Theyaretherefore expected to be more inbred. This is evident in Fig. 2.5. Consequently,
endemic island populations are expected to be more prone to extinction
than non-endemics for genetic reasons. Conversely, there are no obvious
demographic or environmental reasons why endemic and non-endemic
island populations should differ in extinction proneness. Consequently,
this indicates that genetic factors are, at least partly, responsible for the
extinction proneness of island populations.

INBREEDING AND EXTINCTION IN THE WILD

Fig. 2.5 Distributions of
inbreeding coefﬁcients in endemic
and non-endemic island
populations of wildlife (after
Frankham 1998). Arrows indicate
means. Island populations are
signiﬁcantly inbred and endemic
populations more so than nonendemics. Many populations are
inbred to levels where captive
populations show elevated extinction
risks.

Box 2.3 Island populations of black-footed rock wallabies
have persisted for 1600 or more generations at
small sizes, are highly inbred, have low levels of
genetic diversity and exhibit inbreeding
depression (Eldridge et al. 1999)
Rock wallabies are small macropod marsupials (about 1 m tall) that live on rocky outcrops on the Australian mainland and on offshore islands (see map below). The
shaded regions on the map show the distribution of black-footed rock wallabies on
the mainland and on offshore islands. The Barrow Island population of black-footed
rock wallabies (1) has been isolated from the mainland for 8000 years (about 1600
generations) and has a relatively small population size. Genetic diversity in the

35

36

GENETICS AND EXTINCTION

Barrow Island population, and in other island populations, is markedly lower than in
mainland sites at Exmouth (2) and Wheatbelt (3).
The Barrow Island population has the lowest recorded genetic diversity in any vertebrate, as assessed by microsatellites (described in Chapter 3). Genetic diversity for
two mainland and the Barrow Island populations are shown below. Other island populations (shown as •) also have low genetic diversity, as described in Chapter 13.
Population
(location)

Proportion of
loci polymorphic

Mean number of
alleles/locus

Average
heterozygosity

Barrow Island (1)
Mainland
Exmouth (2)
Wheatbelt (3)

0.1

1.2

0.05

1.0
1.0

3.4
4.4

0.62
0.56

The Barrow Island population has an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 0.91. Further, it displays
inbreeding depression compared to the mainland population. The frequency of lactating females is 92% in mainland rock wallabies, but only 52% on Barrow Island.
These rock wallaby populations demonstrate that genetics can have an impact before
demographic and environmental stochasticity or catastrophes cause extinctions.
They have clearly survived stochastic ﬂuctuations and catastrophes, but they are suffering genetic problems that increase their risk of extinction.
Island populations have been viewed as ideal sources for restocking depleted or
extinct mainland populations, especially in Australasian species. However, as they
often have low genetic diversity and are inbred, they may not be good candidates for
translocations, if alternative mainland populations still exist.

Humans are fragmenting mainland
populations and creating ‘island’
populations

Humans are fragmenting habitat throughout the world. This results in
‘islands’ (remnants, reserves, national parks, etc.) in a ‘sea’ of nowinhospitable landscape (Chapter 13). Consequently, these population
fragments share many characteristics, including susceptibility to
extinction, with their island counterparts. This is the case for isolated
populations of greater prairie chickens in Illinois and adders in Sweden.
Both populations declined due to inbreeding depression and only recovered following introduction of additional genetic diversity (Chapter 12).

Relationship between loss of genetic diversity
and extinction
To cope with ever-changing
environments, species must
evolve, or face extinction

In the section above we have brieﬂy surveyed the relationship between
inbreeding, inbreeding depression and extinction risk. We now focus
on the intimately related issue of loss of genetic diversity, particularly
with respect to loss of potential for future adaptive evolution.
Natural populations face continuous assaults from environmental
changes including new diseases, pests, parasites, competitors and predators, pollution, climatic cycles such as the El Niño–La Niña cycles, and
human-induced global climate change. Species must evolve to cope
with these new conditions or face extinction. To evolve, species require

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY AND EXTINCTION

genetic diversity (Chapter 6). Naturally outbreeding species with large
populations normally possess large stores of genetic diversity that
confer differences among individuals in their responses to such environmental changes (Chapters 3 and 6). Evolutionary responses to environmental change have been observed in many species (Chapter 6). For
example, over 200 species of moths have evolved black body colours
(melanics) to aid in camouﬂage in response to industrial pollution
(Kettlewell 1973).
Small populations typically have lower levels of genetic diversity
than large populations. This is due to sampling of alleles in the parental
generation in production of offspring. During this random sampling
process, some alleles increase in frequency, others decrease and some
alleles may be lost entirely. The smaller the population, the more
change there will be between the parental and offspring gene pools.
Over time genetic diversity will decline, with loss being more rapid in
smaller than in larger populations (Chapters 8 and 10).
Genetic variation allows populations to tolerate a wide range of environmental extremes (Hoffmann & Parsons 1997). These include ability
to tolerate climatic extremes, heavy metal pollutants, herbicides, pesticides, etc. Humans are generating increasing rates of environmental
change. For example, increasing levels of greenhouse gas are causing
global climate change. If populations are to cope with these factors they
require genetic diversity.
There are compelling theoretical predictions that loss of genetic
diversity will reduce the ability of populations to evolve in response to
environmental change. Experimental evidence validates these predictions. Consequently, we expect a similar relationship between loss of
genetic diversity and extinction rate due to environmental change.
However, there are only a few examples where extinctions of natural
populations can be directly attributed to lack of genetic variation.

Genetic diversity is lost in small
populations

Populations with lower genetic
diversity are poorer at coping with
environmental extremes and
diseases than populations with
higher genetic diversity

Relationship between loss of genetic diversity at selfincompatibility loci and extinction in plants
The most direct evidence of a relationship between loss of genetic diversity and increased risk of extinction comes from studies of selfincompatibility loci in plants. About half of all ﬂowering plant species
have genetic systems that reduce or prevent self-fertilization (Richards
1997). Such self-incompatibility prevents fertilization when the pollen
and the egg come from the same plant. Self-incompatibility is regulated
by one or more loci that may have 50 or more alleles in large populations. If the same allele is present in a pollen grain and the stigma, fertilization by that pollen grain will not be successful. Self-incompatability
is presumed to have evolved to avoid the deleterious effects of inbreeding.
Self-incompatibility alleles are lost by random sampling in small
populations. This leads to a reduction in the number of plants that can
potentially fertilize the eggs of any individual and eventually to

Loss of self-incompatibility alleles
in small populations of many plant
species leads to reduced
reproductive ﬁtness

37

38

GENETICS AND EXTINCTION

reduced seed set and extinction. For example, the Lakeside daisy population from Illinois declined to three plants. This population did not
reproduce for 15 years despite bee pollination, as it contained only one
allele (Demauro 1993), i.e. this population was functionally extinct.
Plants did however produce viable seed when fertilized with pollen
from large populations in Ohio or Canada. While reduced ﬁtness due
to loss of self-incompatibility alleles has only been documented in a
few species of plants (Les et al. 1991; Demauro 1993; Young et al. 2000),
it is likely to be a problem, or become so, in most threatened, selfincompatible plants.

Relationship between loss of genetic diversity and
susceptibility to disease, pests and parasites
Populations with low genetic
diversity are expected to suffer
more seriously from diseases,
pests and parasites than those
with high genetic diversity

Novel pathogens constitute one of the most signiﬁcant challenges to all
species. Indeed it has been argued that the evolutionary origin of sexual
reproduction, to generate diverse genetic combinations (genotypes),
was in response to pathogen pressure (Hurst & Peck 1996). Loss of
genetic diversity severely diminishes the capacity of populations to
respond to this pressure (Chapters 6, 8 and 10). For example, the
American chestnut was driven to near extinction in the 1950s by the
introduced chestnut blight disease, as it had no genetic variation for
resistance. Previously, the chestnut had dominated the northeastern
forests of the USA, so this event represents one of the largest ecological
disasters to strike the USA.
There is circumstantial evidence that loss of genetic diversity in the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) is associated with reduced
ability to evolve to cope with new and changed diseases. In most vertebrates, there are very high levels of genetic diversity at the major histocompatibility complex, a cluster of loci involved in immune responses.
Genetic diversity is maintained by selection that either favours heterozygotes or rare genotypes (Chapter 9). Even though MHC diversity is maintained by selection, it is lost by chance during sampling of gametes in
small populations (Seddon & Baverstock 1998; Zegers 2000). With
reduced diversity at the MHC in small populations, a pathogen capable of
killing one individual becomes capable of killing all. Conversely, individuals within genetically variable populations will differ widely in their
abilities to respond to new disease threats. Following sequential assaults
by different pathogens, populations with high genetic diversity are more
likely to persist than populations with low genetic diversity. Populations
with low genetic diversity may survive some assaults, but are likely to
succumb to others (Fig. 2.6). For example, Lively et al. (1990) found that ﬁsh
populations with low genetic diversity had higher parasite loads than
populations with greater diversity. Mortality due to gastrointestinal nematode parasites, following periods of high population density, is elevated
in Soay sheep with low genetic diversity and high inbreeding when compared with sheep with more diversity (Coltman et al. 1999). Parasite levels

FURTHER READING

Fig. 2.6 Hypothetical example of the relationship between genetic diversity and disease
resistance. Two small inbred populations, each homozygous for different alleles, are
resistant to one disease but not to the other. Conversely, a larger population containing
both alleles has resistance to both diseases.

are negatively correlated with levels of genetic diversity among populations of deer mice and bumblebees (Meagher 1999).

Summary
1. Inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity are of conservation
concern as they increase the risk of extinction.
2. Inbreeding reduces reproductive ﬁtness in essentially all wellstudied populations of naturally outbreeding species.
3. Inbreeding increases the risk of extinction in captive populations, and there is growing evidence that it is one of the factors
causing extinctions of wild populations.
4. Loss of genetic diversity reduces the ability of species to evolve to
cope with environmental change.
FURTHER READING

Demauro (1993) Describes functional extinction in a population of Lakeside
daisies due to loss of genetic diversity for self-incompatibility alleles.
Frankham (1995b) Review and analysis of the evidence on the relationship
between inbreeding and extinction in laboratory and domestic species.
Frankham & Ralls (1998) A brief news and views describing the Saccheri et al.
(1998) article and reviewing evidence that refutes claims that demographic
and environmental factors are likely to drive populations to extinction
before genetic factors become important.
Hedrick et al. (1995) Response addressing the controversy on the role of genetics in extinction.
Lande (1988) Summarizes the view that demographic and environmental
factors are likely to drive populations to extinction before genetic factors
become important.

39

40

GENETICS AND EXTINCTION

Mills & Smouse (1994) Detailed computer modelling work showing that
genetic factors often make important contributions to extinction risk in
wild populations.
Saccheri et al. (1998) Describes the ﬁrst direct evidence that inbreeding contributes to the extinction of wild populations in nature.
Westemeier et al. (1998) Describes decline of a small, isolated greater prairie
chicken population in Illinois due to loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding, and its recovery following introduction of unrelated birds from other
states.
PROBLEMS

2.1 Inbreeding: What is inbreeding?
2.2 Inbreeding: Why is inbreeding of conservation concern?
2.3 Relationship between population size and extinction: What
factors could account for the association of extinction rates and population size in bighorn sheep (Fig. 2.4)?
PR ACTIC AL EXERCISES: COMPUTER PROJECTIONS

Use the VORTEX simulation package to determine the extinction risk of
the following populations when the effects of inbreeding on reproductive ﬁtness are included and when they are ignored. Use the following
input ﬁles for Mauritius pink pigeon and the Capricorn silvereye, plus
that for the golden lion tamarin (Fig. 20.4). Number of individuals in
each species are adjusted for this exercise. Look for other data ﬁles on
the book’s web site (Preface).

PRACTICAL EXERCISES

PIGEON.OUT ***Output Filename***
N ***Graphing Files?***
1000 ***Simulations***
100 ***Years***
1 ***Reporting Interval***
0 ***Deﬁnition of Extinction***
1 ***Populations***
Y ***Inbreeding Depression?***
3.14 ***Lethal equivalents***
0.5 ***Prop genetic load as lethals***
N ***EV concordance repro and surv?***
3 ***Types Of Catastrophes***
M ***Monogamous, Polygynous, or
Hermaphroditic***
1 ***Female Breeding Age***
1 ***Male Breeding Age***
15 ***Maximum Age***
55 ***Sex Ratio***
2 ***Maximum Litter Size (0 normal
distribution) *****
N ***Density Dependent Breeding?***
40.0 **breeding
4.0 ***EV—Reproduction***
87.5 ***Population 1: Percent Litter Size 1***
25.0 *FMort age 0
5.0 ***EV—FemaleMortality***

15.0 *Adult FMort
2.0 ***EV—AdultFemaleMortality***
25.0 *MMort age 0
5.0 ***EV—MaleMortality***
15.0 *Adult MMort
2.0 ***EV—AdultMaleMortality***
6.0 ***Prob Of Catastrophe 1***
1.0 ***Severity—Reproduction***
0.5 ***Severity—Survival***
3.0 ***Prob Of Catastrophe 2***
1.0 ***Severity—Reproduction***
0.9 ***Severity—Survival***
1.0 ***Prob Of Catastrophe 3***
0.9 ***Severity—Reproduction***
0.5 ***Severity—Survival***
N ***All Males Breeders?***
80.0 ***Percent Males In Breeding Pool***
Y ***Start At Stable Age Distribution?***
16 ***Initial Population Size***
35 ***K***
0.0 ***EV—K***
N ***Trend In K?***
N ***Harvest?***
N ***Supplement?***
N ***AnotherSimulation?***

SILV_EYE.OUT ***Output Filename***
N ***Graphing Files?***
1000 ***Simulations***
100 ***Years***
1 ***Reporting Interval***
0 ***Deﬁnition of Extinction***
1 ***Populations***
Y ***Inbreeding Depression?***
3.14 ***Lethal equivalents***
0.5 ***Prop of genetic load as lethals***
Y ***EV concordance repro and surv?***
1 ***Types Of Catastrophes***
M ***Monogamous, Polygynous, or
Hermaphroditic***
1 ***Female Breeding Age***
1 ***Male Breeding Age***
11 ***Maximum Age***
50 ***Sex Ratio***
0 ***Maximum Litter Size (0 normal distribution) *****
N ***Density Dependent Breeding?***
77.5 **breeding
8.2 ***EV—Reproduction***

1.927 ***Population 1: Mean Litter Size***
1.245 ***Population 1: SD in Litter Size***
42.3 *FMort age 0
8.93 ***EV—FemaleMortality***
37.6 *Adult FMort
9.31 ***EV—AdultFemaleMortality***
42.3 *MMort age 0
8.93 ***EV—MaleMortality***
37.6 *Adult MMort
9.31 ***EV—AdultMaleMortality***
10.0 ***Probability Of Catastrophe 1***
1.0 ***Severity—Reproduction***
0.645 ***Severity—Survival***
Y ***All Males Breeders?***
Y ***Start At Stable Age Distribution?***
342 ***Initial Population Size***
500 ***K***
50.0 ***EV—K***
N ***Trend In K?***
N ***Harvest?***
N ***Supplement?***
N ***AnotherSimulation?***

41

Section I
Evolutionary genetics of
natural populations

Since our objective in conservation genetics is to preserve species as
dynamic entities, capable of evolving to adapt with environmental
change, it is essential to understand the natural forces determining evolutionary change. Such information is indispensable if we are to understand how to genetically manage threatened and endangered
populations. Since evolution at its most basic level is a change in the
genetic composition of a population, it only occurs when there is
genetic diversity. Consequently, we need to appreciate how genetic
diversity arises, how it is lost, and what forms of genetic diversity exist.

Extent of genetic diversity
Chapter 3 introduces methods for measuring genetic diversity for DNA,
proteins, deleterious alleles and quantitative characters, and documents levels of genetic diversity for them. Most large populations of
animals and plants contain extensive genetic diversity. However, levels
of genetic diversity are often reduced in small populations, island populations and endangered species.

Genetic constitution of populations
To evaluate changes in genetic diversity, we must have means for quantifying it. Chapter 4 covers the estimation of allele (gene) frequencies
and heterozygosity that are used to describe diversity at single loci.
Chapter 5 describes the measures used to characterize genetic diversity
for quantitative characters, especially the concept of heritability.
Quantitative characters are centrally involved in the major areas of conservation concern, evolutionary potential, the deleterious effects of

44

EVOLUTIONARY GENETICS OF NATURAL POPULATIONS

inbreeding and the deleterious effects that sometimes occur when different populations are mixed.

Changes in genetic diversity
Genetic diversity is generated by mutation, and the frequency of different alleles change due to migration, selection and chance. The roles of
these forces in natural evolutionary changes for large populations are
discussed in Chapters 6–9. Since environment change is ubiquitous,
species must adapt to better cope with these changes. Selection is the
only agent leading to adaptive evolutionary changes (Chapter 6).
Deleterious mutations exist in populations due to a balance between
input of deleterious alleles through mutation and their removal by
natural selection (Chapter 7). Deleterious mutations have major conservation implications, as they cause the reductions in reproductive ﬁtness
associated with inbreeding.
Chapter 8 is concerned with evolution in small populations, the situation for most species of conservation concern. Evolutionary processes in small populations differ in two critical ways from those in
large populations:
• Chance has a much greater role
• Selection has a lesser impact.
Chapter 9 considers how genetic diversity is maintained in natural
populations, as we are concerned with the mechanisms normally
involved in retaining evolutionary potential. This information provides
the background for devising genetic management procedures to retain
genetic diversity in threatened species. The relative importance of
chance, mutation and selection in maintaining genetic diversity varies
among different traits (DNA, proteins, visible polymorphisms, gene
clusters, and quantitative characters). A proportion of the diversity in
populations is selectively neutral. It arises by mutation and its fate is
inﬂuenced by chance sampling events in ﬁnite populations. Other
alleles are actively maintained by the action of balancing selection. A
substantial proportion of the genetic diversity for ﬁtness characters
results from mutation–selection balance. In small populations, the
inﬂuence of the various forces changes, with chance assuming a greater
role. Even alleles subject to selection are lost by chance.

Chapter 3

Genetic diversity
Genetic diversity is required for populations to adapt to
environmental change. It is measured using an array of molecular
and quantitative methods. Large populations of naturally
outbreeding species usually have extensive genetic diversity, but it is
usually reduced in populations and species of conservation concern

Fruit

Fruit and seeds

Insects

Insects and
some nectar

Nectar and
some insects

Terms:
Allelic diversity, allozyme, chloroplast
DNA (cpDNA), DNA ﬁngerprint,
electrophoresis, exon, genetic
distance, genetic load, genome,
heterozygosity, intron, inversion,
locus, microsatellite, mitochondrial
DNA (mtDNA), monomorphic,
polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
polymorphism, quantitative
character, quantitative genetic
variation, randomly ampliﬁed
polymorphic DNA (RAPD),
restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP), silent
substitution, single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP)

Diversiﬁcation in endangered
Hawaiian honeycreepers. All were
derived from one ﬁnch-like
ancestral species about 5 million
years ago. Diets of different forms
are indicated (after Whitﬁeld et al.
1987).

46

GENETIC DIVERSITY

Importance of genetic diversity
Genetic diversity is required for
populations to evolve to cope
with environmental change, and
loss of genetic diversity is often
associated with reduced
reproductive ﬁtness

Maintenance of genetic diversity is a major focus in conservation
biology. First, environmental change is a continuous process and
genetic diversity is required for populations to evolve to adapt to such
change. Second, loss of genetic diversity is often associated with
inbreeding and reduction in reproductive ﬁtness. Consequently, IUCN
recognizes the need to conserve genetic diversity as one of three global
conservation priorities (McNeely et al. 1990).
This chapter addresses the basis of these two concerns about genetic
diversity, deﬁnes what it is, describes methods for measuring it, and
reviews the evidence on its extent in non-endangered and endangered
species.

Genetic diversity is required for evolutionary change
Genetic diversity is the raw
material for adaptive evolutionary
change

Loss of genetic diversity is related
to reduction in reproductive
ﬁtness in naturally outbreeding
species

Species face ever-changing environments, be they climatic changes due
to global warming, pollution, introduction of novel competitors, or
changes in diseases, pests or parasites (Chapter 6). To cope with these
changes species must evolve or become extinct. Genetic diversity in a
population reﬂects its evolutionary potential. There is no short-term
evolution in populations lacking genetic diversity, while populations
with genetic diversity can respond to environmental change.
Numerous species have been observed to evolve in response to environmental change as a result of genetic diversity (Chapter 6). For
example, industrial melanism has evolved in about 200 species of moths
in areas subject to industrial pollution (Kettlewell 1973; Majerus 1998).
Similarly, numerous ‘pest’ species have evolved resistance to insecticides, herbicides, antibiotics and other biocontrol agents (Georghiou
1986; McKenzie 1996).
The necessity of genetic diversity for evolution to occur is illustrated
by two plant examples. Plants with genetic diversity for ability to tolerate heavy metal pollution (Agrostis tennuis and bunch grass) were able to
colonize the polluted soils (containing Cu, Zn and Cd) on slagheaps
from mines in Wales, UK. They achieved this by evolving heavy-metaltolerant forms. Conversely, those plant species without the appropriate
genetic diversity failed (Bradshaw 1991). Similarly, the American chestnut was almost driven to extinction by an introduced disease to which
it had no genetic diversity for resistance.

Relationship between genetic diversity and
reproductive ﬁtness
A second concern is that low genetic diversity in many species is related
to reduced reproduction and survival (reproductive ﬁtness). Such a correlation is expected as loss of genetic diversity is related directly to the

WHAT IS GENETIC DIVERSITY?

level of inbreeding and inbreeding leads to reductions in reproductive
ﬁtness (Chapters 2, and 10–12). Data from a meta-analysis indicate that
there is a signiﬁcant overall relationship between population mean
heterozygosity and population ﬁtness (Reed & Frankham 2001). These
relationships are discussed in detail in Chapters 9–12.
The importance of genetic diversity over the long term (maintenance of adaptive evolutionary potential) as well as the short term
(maintenance of reproductive ﬁtness) makes it a primary focus for conservation genetics. Captive breeding and wildlife management programs typically recognize the importance of avoiding inbreeding and
loss of genetic diversity. Pedigrees are maintained for captive populations and management action includes consulting pedigrees when
establishing matings or choosing individuals to reintroduce into the
wild (Chapters 17 and 18). Levels of genetic diversity are analysed and
monitored in wild populations of endangered species, and gene ﬂow
between isolated wild populations may be instigated (Chapter 16).
The remainder of this chapter deals with means for measuring
genetic diversity, and the extent and distribution of genetic diversity.
Many of the issues introduced here are considered in more detail later.

Maintenance of genetic diversity is
a primary objective in the
management of wild and captive
populations of threatened species.

What is genetic diversity?
Genetic diversity is reﬂected in the differences among individuals for
many characters, including eye, skin and hair colour in humans, colour
and banding patterns of snail shells, ﬂower colours in plants, and protein and DNA sequences. For example, diversity among Hawaiian honeycreepers (chapter frontispiece) reﬂects genetic diversity in their
ﬁnch-like ancestor. Similarly, the vast variety of dog breeds have all been
derived from the gray wolf (Vila et al. 1997). Starting with the wolf, selection based on phenotypes has produced breeds of different size (St.
Bernard versus chihuahua), behaviour (German shepherd guard dogs,
fox terriers, hunting dogs such as pointers, water hunting dogs such as
labradors, sheep dogs, cattle dogs, etc.), shape (bulldogs, dachshunds),
etc. These differences reﬂect both genetic diversity within the ancestral
wolf and new mutations that arose during selection.
Genes are sequences of nucleotides in a particular segment (locus)
of a DNA molecule. Genetic diversity represents slightly different
sequences. In turn, DNA sequence variants may result in amino acid
sequence differences in the protein coded for by the locus. Such protein
variation may result in functional biochemical or morphological dissimilarities that cause differences in reproductive rate, survival or behaviour of individuals.
The terminology used to describe genetic diversity is deﬁned in
Table 3.1. Genetic diversity is typically described using polymorphism,
average heterozygosity, and allelic diversity. Example 3.1 illustrates
different measures of genetic diversity in African lions, as assessed by
allozyme electrophoresis; 23% of loci were variable (polymorphic), 7.1%
of loci were heterozygous in an average individual, and there was an

Genetic diversity is the variety of
alleles and genotypes present in
the group under study
(population, species or group of
species)

47

48

GENETIC DIVERSITY

Table 3.1

Terminology used to describe genetic diversity

Locus: A segment of DNA, or an individual gene, e.g. the segment of DNA coding for the alcohol
dehydrogenase enzyme is a separate locus from that coding for haemoglobin (they are located in
different positions on chromosomes). Molecular loci, such as microsatellites (see below), are simply
segments of DNA that may have no functional products.
Genotypes: The combination of alleles present at a locus in an individual, e.g. A1A1, A1A2, or A2A2.
Genotypes are heterozygous (A1A2) or homozygous (A1A1, A2A2). Sometimes compound genotypes,
including two or more loci, are speciﬁed (A1A1B1B2).
Genome: The complete genetic material of a species, or individual. All of the DNA, all of the loci, or all
of the chromosomes.
Homozygote: An individual with two copies of the same allele at a locus e.g. A1A1.
Heterozygote: An individual with two different alleles at a locus, e.g. A1A2.
Alleles: Different forms of the same locus that differ in DNA base sequence, e.g. A1, A2, A3, A4, etc.
Allele frequency: The frequency of an allele in a population (often referred to as gene frequency). For
example, if a population has 8 A1A1 individuals and 2 A1A2 individuals, then there are 18 copies of the
A1 allele and 2 of the A2 allele. Thus, the A1 allele has a frequency of 0.9 and the A2 allele a frequency
of 0.1.
Polymorphic: Having genetic diversity; a locus in a population is polymorphic if it has more than one
allele, e.g. A1 and A2. Polymorphic loci are usually deﬁned as having the most frequent allele at a
frequency of less than 0.99, or less than 0.95 (to minimize problems with different sample sizes).
Monomorphic: Lacking genetic diversity; a locus in a population is monomorphic if it has only one allele
present in the population, e.g. A1. All individuals are homozygous for the same allele.
Proportion of loci polymorphic (P): Number of polymorphic loci / total number of loci sampled.
For example, if three loci are polymorphic, and seven are monomorphic,
P 3 / 10 0.3

Average heterozygosity (H): Sum of the proportions of heterozygotes at all loci / total number of
loci sampled. For example, if the proportions of individuals heterozygous at ﬁve loci in a population
are 0, 0.10, 0.20, 0.05 and 0, then
H(0 0.10 0.20 0.05 0) / 5 0.07

Typically, expected heterozygosities (Chapter 4) are reported, as they are less sensitive to sample size
than observed heterozygosities. In random mating populations, observed and expected
heterozygosities are similar (Chapter 4).
Allelic diversity (A): average number of alleles per locus. For example, if the number of alleles at 6 loci
are 1, 2, 3, 2, 1, 1
A (1 23211) / 6 1.67

Co-dominance: Situation where all genotypes can be distinguished from phenotypes, i.e. A1A1, A1A2
and A2A2 can be distinguished. This contrasts with dominance where the phenotypes of some
genotypes are indistinguishable.
Genetic distance: A measure of the genetic difference between allele frequencies in two populations
or species, e.g. Nei’s genetic distance (Chapter 15). These are usually based on many loci.

WHAT IS GENETIC DIVERSITY?

average of 1.27 alleles per locus. These levels of genetic diversity are
typical of electrophoretic variation for non-threatened mammals. By
contrast, endangered Asiatic lions have low genetic diversity (Box 3.1).
Further details on measures of genetic diversity are given in Chapter 4.

Example 3.1

Genetic diversity in African lions (Newman et al. 1985)

Genetic diversity (as measured by allozyme electrophoresis) was surveyed at 26 loci in African lions. Of the 26 loci, 20 showed no variation
(monomorphic), while six loci showed variation (polymorphic). Five
of the six loci had two alleles, while one had three. Frequencies of
alleles at the polymorphic loci are shown, along with the proportions
of individuals in the population that were heterozygous (H) for each
of the six loci. The computations of proportion of loci polymorphic
and average heterozygosity are given below.

Enzyme
locus
ADA
DIAB
ES1
GPI
GPT
MPI
20 other loci
monomorphic

Allele
1

2

3

Heterozygosity

0.56
0.61
0.88
0.85
0.89
0.92

0.33
0.39
0.12
0.15
0.11
0.08

0.11

0.564
0.476
0.211
0.255
0.196
0.147

1.00

0

Since six of 26 loci were variable, the proportion of loci polymorphic
(P) is
P 6 / 260.23
Thus, 23% of loci are estimated to be polymorphic in African lions.
The proportion of loci heterozygous in an average individual (H) is
computed as follows:
H[0.5640.476 0.211 0.255 0.196 0.147(200)] / 26
0.071
Thus, 7.1% of loci are heterozygous in an average lion. The levels of
polymorphism and heterozygosity in the lions are fairly typical of
large populations of non-endangered mammals. By contrast, endangered Asiatic lions show no allozyme genetic diversity, as shown in
Box 3.1.
The allelic diversity (A) is computed as follows:
A [3 5 2 (201)] / 26 1.27
Thus, there is an average of 1.27 alleles per locus.

49

50

GENETIC DIVERSITY

Box 3.1 Very low genetic diversity in endangered Asiatic
lions from Gir Forest, India (O’Brien 1994)
Asiatic lions occur in the wild only in the Gir Forest of northwest India in a relict group
of fewer than 250 individuals. They experienced a severe reduction in population size
(to less than 20 individuals) in the early 1900s. O’Brien and coworkers measured
genetic diversity for 50 allozyme loci (more than used in the study described in
Example 3.1), and for DNA ﬁngerprints. Levels of genetic diversity for Gir lions and
for several populations of non-endangered African lions with much larger population
sizes are given below.

Allozymes

Gir lions
African lions

P

H

DNA ﬁngerprints
H

0
0.04–0.11

0
0.015–0.038

0.038
0.45

For both measures, Gir lions had far less genetic diversity than African lions. For DNA
ﬁngerprints, Gir lions are almost as similar as identical twins in humans.
Why is there so little genetic diversity in Asiatic lions? The most probable explanation is that the population has been small (bottlenecked) for an extensive period
(Chapter 10).
Surprisingly, captive populations of ‘Asiatic’lions were found to have genetic diversity for allozymes. However, this proved to be due to inadvertent crossing with
African lions.

Low genetic diversity in DNA
ﬁngerprints from Gir lions
compared to African lions (from
the Serengeti, Tanzania). (From
Gilbert et al. 1991.)

Measuring genetic diversity
Genetic diversity has been measured for many different traits, including continuously varying (quantitative) characters, deleterious alleles,
proteins, nuclear DNA loci, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), chloroplast
DNA (cpDNA) and for chromosomes. The most extensive data exist for
proteins, but an increasing body of data is being generated for variation
at the DNA level, as methods improve and costs decease.

MEASURING GENETIC DIVERSITY

Quantitative characters
The most important form of genetic variation is that for reproductive
ﬁtness as this determines the ability to evolve. Individuals vary in reproduction and survival (e.g. age at ﬁrst reproduction, litter size, seed set,
lifetime reproductive output, longevity). These traits and other measurable characters, such as height, weight, etc., are referred to as quantitative characters.
The existence of variation in quantitative characters is obvious in
humans; we differ in height, weight and shape. However, this variation
is due to both genetic and environmental causes. Consequently,
methods are required to determine how much of this variation is due to
heritable genetic differences among individuals and how much to environment. Artiﬁcial selection or statistical analyses of resemblances
among relatives have been used to demonstrate genetic contributions to
differences among individuals for these kinds of characters (Chapter 5).
While genetic variation for quantitative characters (quantitative
genetic variation) is the genetic diversity of most importance in conservation biology, it is difﬁcult and time-consuming to measure (Chapter 5).

Variation for quantitative
characters is due to both genetic
and environmental causes. A
genetic component is
demonstrated by response to
artiﬁcial selection, or by signiﬁcant
resemblance between relatives
that is not due to a common
environment

Deleterious alleles
As the majority of mutations are from a functional allele to a less functional state, part of the genetic diversity present in populations is due
to deleterious alleles, such as those causing genetic diseases in humans
and other species. Detection of this type of genetic diversity requires
identiﬁcation of genetically based deformities and malfunctions.
However, deleterious alleles are usually rare and mostly recessive and so
are often hidden in heterozygotes. Consequently, deliberate inbreeding
has been used to measure the level of deleterious alleles in some species,
especially fruit ﬂies. Inbreeding increases the frequency of homozygotes and so increases the probability of exposing deleterious recessive alleles (Chapter 11). Special techniques are also available in fruit
ﬂies to make chromosomal homozygotes (instant complete inbreeding)
(Lewontin 1974). Using these techniques, the number of lethal, sublethal and deleterious alleles can be estimated. Consequently, much of
the most precise data on deleterious alleles come from fruit ﬂy species.
In endangered species, inbreeding is deleterious, so deliberate inbreeding cannot be justiﬁed as a management practice. Thus, the limited
available data come from inadvertent inbreeding.

Recessive deleterious alleles are
exposed by matings among
relatives (inbreeding)

Proteins
Theﬁrstmeasuresofgeneticdiversityusingmolecularmethodswereprovided in 1966 using electrophoresis. This technique separates proteins
according to their net charge and molecular weights (Box 3.2). Electrophoresis allows us to distinguish among different forms of proteins and

Extensive information on genetic
diversity has been obtained using
electrophoretic separation of
proteins

51

52

GENETIC DIVERSITY

measure the level of genetic variation for a particular protein locus.
About 30% of DNA base changes result in charge changes, so electrophoresis appreciably underestimates the full extent of genetic diversity.
Protein electrophoresis is typically done using blood, liver or kidney
in animals, or leaves and root tips in plants as these contain ample
amounts and varieties of soluble proteins. Consequently, animals must
be captured to obtain blood samples, or killed to obtain liver or kidney
samples. These are unsuitable practices for endangered species.

Box 3.2 Measuring genetic diversity in proteins using
allozyme electrophoresis (see Lewontin 1974;
Leberg 1996)
Genes consist of segments of DNA. If there is a base change in the DNA, this results
in a change in the base composition of the messenger RNA (mRNA). Some of these
base changes result in amino acid changes in the resulting protein. Five of the 20 naturally occurring amino acids are charged (lysine, arginine and histidine [], glutamic acid
and aspartic acid []), so about 30% of the base substitutions result in charge changes
in the protein. These charge changes, as well as differences in molecular weights caused
by base changes, can be detected by electrophoresis, as illustrated below.

DNA

DNA with base substitution

. . . . A T G C T T GAC G T T . . . .
. . . . T AC GAA C T G CAA . . . .

. . . . A T G C T T GGC G T T ....
. . . . T AC GAA CCG CAA ....

mRNA
.... AUG CUU GAC GUU ....
.... AUG CUU GGC GUU ....
amino acid composition of the two proteins
.... met – leu – asp – val ....
.... met – leu – gly – val ....
The DNA base substitution results in the substitution of uncharged glycine (gly) for
negatively charged aspartic acid (asp) and is detectable by electrophoresis, as
described below. The protein on the right will migrate more slowly through the gel.

MEASURING GENETIC DIVERSITY

A gel electrophoresis apparatus is shown above (after Hedrick 1983). Tissue
samples that have been homogenized to release soluble proteins are placed in
spaced positions across the top of the gel. An electrical potential gradient applied to
the gel causes the proteins to migrate through the gel. Proteins coded for by the same
genetic locus but with different charges migrate to different positions (F–fast vs.
S–slow). Proteins from speciﬁc loci are usually detected by their unique enzymatic
activity, using a histochemical stain.

DNA
There are several means for directly, or indirectly, measuring DNA base
sequence variation, and new methods are regularly being devised (Box
3.3). DNA sequencing for nuclear and especially mitochondrial genes is
now done routinely, especially for taxonomic purposes. Microsatellites
(variable number short tandem repeats; Box 3.3) are rapidly becoming
the marker of choice for population studies. DNA ﬁngerprints and
restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLP), once commonly
used, are losing popularity as more sensitive and convenient methods
are developed.
The characteristics of different molecular techniques for measuring genetic diversity are compared in Table 3.2. The mode of inheritance is an important determinant of the utility of a technique.
Co-dominant inheritance is most desirable as this allows all genotypes to be distinguished. Methods that reveal higher levels of genetic
diversity provide greater precision for most uses in conservation
biology. For example, they provide more powerful comparisons of
threatened and non-threatened species, better discrimination in parentage, etc. Microsatellites reveal much higher levels of genetic diversity per locus than allozymes, while RAPDs, AFLPs and DNA
ﬁngerprints allow many more loci to be surveyed than is usually possible for allozymes.

Box 3.3 Techniques for measuring genetic diversity in
DNA (Avise 1994; Smith & Wayne 1996; Hoelzel
1998)
MICROSATELLITES (SIMPLE SEQUENCE REPEATS [SSR], OR SHORT TANDEM
REPEATS [STR])

Microsatellite loci are tandem repeats of short DNA segments, typically 1–5 bases in
length. For example, CA sequences with 7 and 9 repeats are shown. CA repeats are
found in many species. The number of microsatellite repeats is highly variable due to
‘slippage’ during DNA replication. Three genotypes, two different homozygotes and
a heterozygote, are illustrated below, along with their banding patterns on a sequencing gel. X and Y are invariant (conserved) DNA sequences (primer sites) ﬂanking the
microsatellite repeat.

A wide array of methods are
available for measuring genetic
diversity in the DNA, with
microsatellites being the method
currently favoured

53

54

GENETIC DIVERSITY

A1A1

A1A2

A2A2

XCACACACACACACAY

XCACACACACACACACACAY

XCACACACACACACACACAY

XGTGTGTGTGTGTGTY

XGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTY

XGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTY

XACACACACACACACY

XACACACACACACACY

XACACACACACACACACACY

XTGTGTGTGTGTGTGY

XTGTGTGTGTGTGTGY

XTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGY

Fragment sizes on a gel (the samples loaded at top, migration is down the page,
with smaller fragments coded for by the A1 allele migrating furthest)

______

_____
_____

_____

Microsatellite diversity is detected by amplifying DNA using PCR. Unique conserved
sequences (primers) ﬂanking microsatellites are used to deﬁne the DNA segment
that is to be ampliﬁed. The resulting DNA fragments are separated according to size
using eletrophoresis on acrylamide or agarose gels. After separation the fragments
are detected by either (1) staining gels with ethidium bromide (a DNA stain), (2) use
of radioactively labelled primers and autoradiography of gels, or (3) use of ﬂuorescently labelled primers and running the PCR products on a DNA sequencing
machine. If an individual is heterozygous for two microsatellite alleles with different
numbers of repeats, then two different sized bands will be detected, as shown above.
Microsatellites have advantages over other DNA markers as they combine high
variability with nuclear co-dominant inheritance and they can be typed following noninvasive sampling. They have the disadvantage that they must be developed anew for
each species, though primers from closely related species, such as humans and chimpanzees, will often work in both species. Methods for detecting microsatellites are
detailed in Avise (1994) and Smith & Wayne (1996).
DNA FINGERPRINTS (MINISATELLITES, OR VARIABLE NUMBER TANDEM REPEATS
[VNTR])

Alex Jeffreys in England made the serendipitous discovery that there are variable
number tandem repeat sequences throughout the genome of humans and other
eukaryotes. These minisatellite sequences have core repeat sequences with lengths
in the range of 10 to 100 bases (i.e. they are larger than microsatellites). Variability in
repeat number is generated by unequal crossing-over. To identify minisatellites DNA
is puriﬁed, cut with a restriction enzyme that cleaves outside the repeat, releasing the
minisatellite DNA fragment, and the fragmented DNA separated according to size
on an agarose gel. The two strands of the DNA fragments are separated (denatured) and transferred to a membrane (Southern blotting). The membrane with
attached DNA is placed in a solution containing many copies of single stranded
radioactively labelled DNA of the core repeat sequence (probed). Radioactively
labelled core sequences attach (hybridize) to minisatellite fragments on the membrane by complementary base pairing. Single stranded unhybridized probe DNA is
washed away, the membrane is dried and a photographic ﬁlm is placed over it (autoradiography). The resulting autoradiograph reveals a pattern of bands akin to a
barcode (see Box 3.1).
The number of repeats is highly variable, such that each individual in outbreeding
species normally has a unique DNA ﬁngerprint (apart from identical twins). Three

MEASURING GENETIC DIVERSITY

genotypes for a single minisatellite locus are shown below, along with their banding
patterns on a gel. ‘o’ represents a single repeat of the core sequence. Many such loci
are typed simultaneously.

-----ooooo---------ooooo-----

-----oooooo---------ooooo-----

-----oooooo---------oooooo-----

_____
_____

_____

DNA fragments on a gel

_____

The advantages of DNA ﬁngerprints are that they are highly variable, assess nuclear
DNA variation over a wide range of loci, and do not require a prior knowledge of
DNA sequence in the species being typed. The disadvantages are that individual loci
are not normally identiﬁable, as the fragments derive from many different places in
the genome. The inheritance of bands is not deﬁned and they cannot be typed following non-invasive sampling as they require considerable amounts of DNA. DNA
ﬁngerprints are now being replaced by methods that allow non-invasive sampling following PCR. For example, PCR-based ﬁngerprints are produced using AFLP or
RAPDs, as described below.
RAPD: RANDOM AMPLIFIED POLYMORPHIC DNA

For this technique, random primer sequences (rather than speciﬁc ones, as used in
microsatellites), usually 10–20 base pairs in length, are used for PCR reactions on
nuclear DNA samples. These yield a series of DNA fragments, which are separated
on agarose or sequencing gels. Typically, several fragments in the 100–200 base size
range amplify, so that several bands are detected for each primer. If there is variation
in the priming sites in the DNA, then some bands will reveal a presence–absence
pattern. Inheritance is dominant (presence) / recessive (absence). RAPDs assay many
loci without the need to sequence the genome and design speciﬁc primers and
they can be typed following non-invasive sampling. Their disadvantages are the dominant mode of inheritance and the considerable care required to obtain repeatable
results. Longer primer sequences generally provide higher repeatability. RAPDs have
been widely used in plants, but less so in animals. A single RAPD locus is illustrated
below, along with the pattern observed for the three genotypes on a gel. ‘o’ represents a site in the DNA that has a sequence homologous to the random primer and
the solid line the fragment of DNA ampliﬁed by PCR. A is dominant and a recessive
(absence of primer sites). Several such loci are usually typed simultaneously.

AA

Aa

-------o————o--------- -------o———
——o---------------o————o--------- -------o-----------------------

aa
-------o-----------------------------o-----------------------

DNA fragments on a gel

_____

_____

(no band)

AFLP: AMPLIFIED FRAGMENT LENGTH POLYMORPHISM

This method is closely related to RAPDs. Genomic DNA is cut with a restriction
enzyme and short synthetic DNA fragments (adapters) of known sequence are

55

56

GENETIC DIVERSITY

attached to the cut ends. PCR is carried out using primers that match the known
adapter sequence plus additional ‘selective’ nucleotides. The method produces a
multilocus DNA ﬁngerprint apparent as either band presence (dominant) or
absence (recessive) as for RAPDs. This method is more repeatable than RAPDs.
RFLP: RESTRICTION FRAGMENT LENGTH POLYMORPHISM

For this method, DNA is puriﬁed, cut with a restriction enzyme and run on a gel to
separate fragments of different size. The DNA strands are separated and transferred to a membrane, and the membrane dried. The membrane is placed in a solution containing many copies of single stranded, radioactively labelled (often 32P)
segments of DNA (probe) for the locus in question. After complementary base
pairing, unhybridized single stranded probe molecules are washed off, the membrane is dried and autoradiographed. If there is variation in the DNA sequence at
the restriction enzyme cutting site, then different sized fragments will be evident on
the autoradiograph. A RFLP locus is shown below. ‘o’ represents sequences cut by
the particular restriction enzyme used (a dash in the corresponding position indicates absence of the cut site) and the region recognized by the probe is shown as a
solid line.

A

B

C

B

C

-----o--——-—---o----- -----o--——o—---o----- -----o--——o—---o----A
A
B
C
-----o--——-—---o----- -----o--——-—---o----- -----o--——o—---o-----

DNA fragments on a gel
A
_____

A
_____
B
_____
_____

B
_____
_____

C

C

The advantages of RFLP are that they show co-dominant inheritance, they track variation in known genes and are moderately variable. They have several disadvantages:
they require large amounts of DNA so they cannot be typed following non-invasive
sampling, known locus probes must be available and they are not as variable as microsatellites. RFLP are being replaced by more convenient PCR-based methods.
SNP: SINGLE NUCLEOTIDE POLYMORPHISM

A position in the DNA of a species at which two or more alternative bases occur at
appreciable frequency (1%) is referred to as a single nucleotide polymorphism.
These are detected by sequencing, or using DNA chips (Wang et al. 1998). Their
utility in conservation genetics has yet to be established.
SSCP: SINGLE STRAND CONFORMATIONAL POLYMORPHISMS

Genetic diversity among PCR products from different individuals can be detected
without sequencing by using SSCP. In this procedure, the two complementary stands

MEASURING GENETIC DIVERSITY

of the DNA from the PCR product are separated at high temperatures (denatured),
immediately cooled, and the single stranded products subjected to electrophoresis
in a polyacrylamide gel, at low temperature. Under these conditions, the single DNA
strands fold upon themselves in a sequence-speciﬁc manner. These molecules
migrate in the gel according to both their size and their conformation. This method
has been applied to detection of genetic diversity in mtDNA, and a few nuclear loci
(especially MHC loci). Examples of two mtDNA sequences and their mobilities following SSCP are shown (after Smith & Wayne 1996). Note that there is a band for
each of the single DNA strands.
GATTAGGATCCGATCCGATCGTAGCTGAT

GATTAGGATCCGATTCGATCGCAGCTGAT

CTAATCCTAGGCTAGGCTAGCATCGACTA

CTAATCCTAGGCTAAGCTAGCGTCGACTA

Single stranded DNA fragments on a gel

_____
_____
_____
_____

DNA SEQUENCING

The most direct means for measuring genetic diversity is to determine the sequences
of bases in the DNA. This is usually done using DNA sequencing machines (Avise
1994). This is still relatively time-consuming and expensive, and has primarily been
used for taxonomic purposes, where mtDNA (or sometimes nuclear loci) are
sequenced for a restricted number of individuals. However, technical improvements
have markedly reduced the cost and time taken to sequence DNA, as is evident from
the Human Genome Project and similar endeavours to sequence the complete
genomes of other species.

Table 3.2

Characteristics of different molecular methods for assessing genetic diversity

Method

Source

Electrophoresis

Blood, kidney,
liver, leaves
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA
DNA

Microsatellites
DNA ﬁngerprints
RAPDb
AFLP
RFLP
SSCP
DNA sequencing
SNP

Non-invasive
sampling

Cost

Development
timea

Inheritance

No

Low

None

Co-dominant

Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Moderate
Moderate
Low–moderate
Moderate–high
Moderate
Moderate
High
Moderate–high

Considerable
Limited
Limited
Limited
Limited
Moderate
None
Considerable

Co-dominant
Dominant
Dominant
Dominant
Co-dominant
Co-dominant
Co-dominant
Co-dominant

Notes:
a
Indication of time taken to develop the technique so that genotyping can be done for threatened species.
b
There are sometimes problems of repeatability with RAPDs. All other methods are highly repeatable.

57

58

GENETIC DIVERSITY

Fig. 3.1 Non-invasive sampling of DNA and use of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
to amplify DNA (after Avise 1994). PCR is used to amplify (generate multiple copies of)
DNA from tiny samples (as little as a single molecule). PCR is essentially an in vitro version
of natural DNA replication, except that it only replicates the region of DNA of interest.
DNA is extracted and puriﬁed from the biological sample and added to a reaction mix
containing all the necessary reagents. These include DNA oligonucleotide primers, a
heat-resistant DNA replicating enzyme (Taq polymerase), magnesium, the four DNA
nucleotides and buffer. The primers are homologous to DNA sequences on either side of
(ﬂanking) the DNA sequence to be ampliﬁed (i.e. the locus of interest). The Taq
polymerase enzyme replicates DNA, the nucleotides are the building blocks of the new
DNA and magnesium and buffer are required for the enzyme to work.
Repeated temperature cycles are used to denature the DNA (separate the strands),
allow the DNA primers to attach to the ﬂanking sequences (anneal), and to replicate the
DNA sequence between the two primers (extend). Each cycle doubles the quantity of
DNA of interest. All other DNA in the sample becomes so relatively rare that is it
irrelevant in subsequent analyses.

Genotyping of individuals can be
done following non-invasive or
‘remote’ sampling and PCR
ampliﬁcation of DNA

A major advantage of measuring DNA variation is that sampling can
often be done non-invasively, and genotyping done following DNA
ampliﬁcation using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Fig. 3.1).
Since extremely small samples of DNA can be ampliﬁed by millions of
times by PCR, only small biological samples are now needed to conduct
molecular genetic analyses. This contrasts with electrophoresis where
animals must be caught or killed to take the samples required to genotype them. Consequently, the development of ‘remote’ sampling
methods involving extraction of DNA from shed hair, skin, feathers,
faeces, urine, egg shell, ﬁsh scales, museum specimens and even fossils
has been a major advance for species of conservation concern (see Smith
& Wayne 1996; Hoelzel 1998).

MEASURING GENETIC DIVERSITY

To amplify a DNA segment of interest, speciﬁc invariant (conserved)
sequences on either side of the segment of interest must be identiﬁed to
design primers for the PCR reaction. The two primers will deﬁne the
segment to be ampliﬁed. Copies of these sequences are synthesized
(oligonucleotides) and used in the PCR reaction. Primer sequences can
often be obtained from published sequence information for mtDNA,
but must usually be developed anew for nuclear loci, especially for
microsatellites (see Smith & Wayne 1996 for technical details). Primers
developed for one species may also work in a closely related species. For
example, human primers usually work in chimpanzees, and some of the
primers from domestic ruminants work in the endangered Arabian
oryx (Marshall et al. 1999).

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
Mitochondria contain circular DNA molecules that are maternally
inherited (mother to offspring) in most species. Genetic diversity in
their DNA can be detected by a range of methods, including cutting
with restriction enzymes (RFLP), SSCP and sequencing (Box 3.3). DNA
primers that work for most species are now available for the control
region (also known as the D-loop), for the cytochrome b locus and the
12S rRNA locus. These regions can be ampliﬁed by PCR and the products
sequenced. Sequencing of mtDNA has the advantages over other techniques that it can be done following non-invasive sampling, that
mtDNA has a high mutation rate and is highly variable, and that it can
be used to speciﬁcally trace female lines of descent, or migration patterns. Its disadvantages are that it is relatively expensive, it traces only
a single maternally inherited unit, and mtDNA can only be considered
a single ‘locus’. We will defer further consideration of mtDNA variation
to Chapters 15 and 19, as its main conservation uses are in resolving
taxonomic uncertainties and deﬁning management units, and in
helping understand important aspects of species biology.

Mitochondrial DNA is maternally
inherited in most species. It is used
widely to assess taxonomic
relationships and differences
among populations within species

Chromosomes
The primary use of chromosomal diversity is to differentiate species
(Benirschke & Kumamoto 1991). Species usually differ in the number,
shape and/or banding patterns of their chromosomes. For example, the
Chinese and Indian muntjac (barking deer) appear so similar that some
authorities considered them to belong to the same species. However,
they are dramatically dissimilar in chromosome number, the Chinese
muntjac having 46 chromosomes and the Indian muntjac 6 in males
and 7 in females (Ryder & Fleischer 1996).
Chromosomes are characterized from rapidly dividing tissues.
Animal somatic cells may be cultured from blood or skin biopsies, and
germ line cells from testis biopsies. In plants, root tips provide somatic

The number, size and shape of
chromosomes within species are
usually constant, but
chromosomes often differ
between species

59

60

GENETIC DIVERSITY

cells while ﬂower buds provide germ line material. In many species,
more precise characterization of chromosomes can be achieved by differential staining methods that reveal chromosomal bands. This may
reveal variation among individuals within species. For example, variants with different gene orders (inversions) are common in fruit ﬂies,
but are not common in other species. However, individuals heterozygous for some types of chromosome rearrangements have reduced
fertility. Animals with reproductive difﬁculties in captive breeding programs may be examined cytologically. Populations of plants may differ
in ploidy level (the number of sets of chromosomes – 2n diploid, 4n
tetraploid, etc). Further information on chromosomes is provided in
Chapter 15.

Extent of genetic diversity

Quantitative variation
Large populations of naturally
outbreeding species usually have
sizeable amounts of genetic
diversity as detected for
quantitative character, deleterious
alleles, proteins or DNA

Virtually all quantitative characters in outbreeding species show
genetic diversity. Quantitative genetic variation has been found for
reproductive characters (egg production in chickens, number of offspring in sheep, mice, pigs and fruit ﬂies, and seed yield in plants, etc.),
for growth rate (in cattle, pigs, mice, chickens, fruit ﬂies and plants), for
chemical composition (fat in animals, protein and oil in maize), for
behaviour (in insects and mammals), and for disease resistance in
plants and animals (Lewontin 1974). A familiar example is the diversity
of breeds in domestic dogs that all belong to the same species. Extensive
genetic diversity is also found within plant species. For example, the
cabbage species has diversiﬁed to give cabbages (edible leaves), kohlrabi
(edible roots), Brussels sprouts (edible buds), broccoli (edible ﬂowers),
etc. (Diamond 1997). These examples serve to illustrate the vast potential that could be produced in species with high levels of genetic diversity for quantitative characters (Chapters 5 and 6).

Deleterious alleles
All outbred populations contain a
load of rare deleterious alleles that
can be exposed by inbreeding

The extent of diversity in populations attributable to deleterious alleles
is important in conservation because these alleles reduce reproductive
ﬁtness when they are made homozygous by inbreeding (Chapter 12).
Deleterious alleles are constantly generated by mutation and removed
by selection. Consequently, all outbred populations contain deleterious
rare alleles (‘mutation load’) (Chapter 7). Typically, these occur at frequencies of less than 1%. Rare human genetic syndromes, such as
phenylketonuria, albinism and Huntington’s chorea are examples.
Equivalent syndromes are found in wild populations of plants and
animals. For example, mutations leading to a lack of chlorophyll are
found in many species of plants. Further, a range of genetically based

EXTENT OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

defects has been described in endangered animals (dwarﬁsm in
California condors, vitamin E malabsorption in Przewalski’s horse,
undescended testes and fatal heart defects in Florida panthers and hairlessness in red-ruffed lemurs; Ryder 1988; Roelke et al. 1993; Ralls et al.
2000).
Most deleterious alleles probably make no useful contribution to
evolutionary potential. However, some are advantageous in different
environments and a few show heterozygote advantage. For example, in
humans heterozygotes for sickle cell anaemia possess higher resistance
to malaria than the normal homozygote, while most sickle cell homozygotes die (semi-lethal) due to defective haemoglobin (Chapter 9).

Protein variation
Until recently, it was impractical to survey DNA sequence diversity
directly, so most of the available data on genetic diversity are for
protein variation. It was the primary molecular tool for measuring
genetic diversity from the late 1960s until the 1980s. Electrophoresis
has been used to estimate level of genetic diversity in well over 1000
species (see Ward et al. 1992), but is rapidly being replaced by microsatellite analyses.
The ﬁrst analyses of electrophoretic variation, in humans and fruit
ﬂies, revealed surprisingly high levels of genetic diversity. Similar
results are found for most non-threatened species with large population sizes. For example, in African lions 23% of 26 loci were variable
(polymorphic) and the average individual was heterozygous for 7.1% of
the loci (Example 3.1 above). The corresponding ﬁgures from humans
(based on 104 loci) are 32% of loci polymorphic and an average heterozygosity of 6% (Harris et al. 1977). Table 3.3 summarizes allozyme heterozygosities for several major taxa. Average heterozygosity within species
(H) is lower in vertebrates (6.4%) than in invertebrates (11.2%) or plants
(23%), possibly due to lower population sizes in the former (Chapters 9
and 10).
The abundant genetic diversity found in large populations contrasts with that found in many small or bottlenecked populations. The
northern elephant seal was the ﬁrst species of conservation interest
studied using electrophoresis. It had been hunted almost to extinction,
but has subsequently recovered from its population size bottleneck.
Allozymes revealed no variation (Bonnell & Selander 1974). Similarly,
no allozyme diversity has been found in a range of threatened or
endangered species (or sub-species) including the cheetah, Asiatic lion,
eastern barred bandicoot, northern spotted owl, Torrey pine, Furbish’s
lousewort, Howellia aquatilis and King’s lomatia (Ledig & Conkle 1983;
Waller et al. 1987; Lesica et al. 1988; Barrowclough & Gutierrez 1990;
Sherwin et al. 1991; O’Brien 1994; Lynch et al. 1998). Most endangered
species have lower genetic diversity than related, non-endangered
species (see below).

There is extensive genetic
diversity at protein-coding loci in
most large populations of outbred
species. On average 28% of loci
are polymorphic and 7% of loci
are heterozygous in an average
individual, as assessed by
electrophoresis

Smaller or bottlenecked
populations often have reduced
genetic diversity

61

62

GENETIC DIVERSITY

Table 3.3 Allozyme genetic diversity in different taxa. H is the average
heterozygosity within populations and GST is the proportion of the variation in
allele frequencies that is attributable to variation among populations
H

GST

Vertebrates
Total
Mammals
Birds
Reptiles
Amphibians
Fish

0.064
0.054
0.054
0.090
0.094
0.054

0.202
0.242
0.076
0.258
0.315
0.135

Invertebrates
Total
Insects
Crustaceans
Molluscs

0.113
0.122
0.063
0.121

0.171
0.097
0.169
0.263

Plants
Total
Gymnosperms
Monocotyledons
Dicotyledons

0.113
0.160
0.144
0.096

0.224
0.068
0.231
0.273

Source: Hamrick & Godt (1989); Ward et al. (1992).

Nuclear DNA
There is extensive genetic
diversity in DNA sequences
among individuals within
outbreeding species, the most
extensive diversity usually being
found in sites with little functional
signiﬁcance

Most of the polymorphisms at the
DNA level have little functional
signiﬁcance, as they occur in noncoding regions of the genome, or
do not alter the amino acid
sequence of a protein

The ﬁrst extensive study of DNA sequence variation at a locus within a
population was by Kreitman for the alcohol dehydrogenase (Adh) locus
in fruit ﬂies (Fig. 3.2). Among 11 samples, there were 43 variable (polymorphic) sites across 2379 base pairs. The majority of base changes
(42/43) do not result in amino acid substitutions (i.e. they are silent substitutions) as they were in non-coding regions of the locus (introns), or
involved the third position in triplets coding for amino acids. Such variation is not detectable by protein electrophoresis. Most exons (regions
coding for amino acids) showed low variation. However, polymorphism
was highest around the one polymorphic site causing an amino acid
polymorphism in the Adh protein, a site where selection favours genetic
diversity (Chapter 9). Sequence variation at the Adh locus in two outbreeding plant species from the Brassica family was, if anything, even
higher than that found in the fruit ﬂy (Liu et al. 1998).
The highest levels of genetic diversity in DNA are typically found for
bases with little functional signiﬁcance; ones that either do not code for
functional products, or where substitutions do not change the function
of the molecule. Conversely, the lowest genetic diversity is found for
functionally important regions of molecules, such as the active sites of

EXTENT OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

Fig. 3.2 DNA sequence variation found among 11 samples of the alcohol
dehydrogenase locus from wild populations of fruit ﬂies (after Li & Graur 1991 from data
of Kreitman). Only polymorphic sites are illustrated and only differences from the most
common (consensus) sequence in the top row are shown. Dots indicate identity with the
consensus sequence. The asterisk in exon 4 indicates the site of the lysine for threonine
replacement that is responsible for the polymorphism in electrophoretic mobility, a site
whose variation is subject to balancing natural selection.

enzymes (Hartl & Clarke 1997). Much of the DNA in an organism does
not code for functional products. Changes in the base composition in
these regions are unlikely to have selective signiﬁcance. They include
regions between loci as well as regions within loci (introns) that are
transcribed, but not translated. Further, about 70% of base substitutions within loci are silent so they are likely to be subjected, at most, to
only very weak natural selection. Some regions of polypeptide chains
are cleaved off before a functional protein is produced. These regions,
and many regions outside the active sites of enzymes and proteins, are
constrained by limited functional demands.
There are two major exceptions to the generalization that polymorphism is lowest in regions with important functions, the major histocompatibility complex (a large family of genes that play an important
role in the vertebrate immune system and in ﬁghting disease) and selfincompatibility loci in plants. Both regions have very high levels of
genetic diversity due to natural selection that favours genetic diversity
(Chapters 2 and 9).
Microsatellites have recently been used to measure genetic diversity
in a wide variety of species, many of them endangered. They typically
show very high levels of polymorphism and many alleles per locus. For
example, CA repeats are common and often vary in repeat number
within populations; alleles with 10 repeats vs. 12 vs. 15 may segregate in
the same population. Such diversity has been found in all species so far
examined. For example, data from a survey of microsatellite variation at
eight loci in 35 wild chimpanzees detected an average of 5.75 alleles per
locus and an average heterozygosity of 0.65 (Table 3.4). Genetic diversity
in large populations of a variety of non-endangered species is given in
Table 3.5. All show remarkably high levels of genetic diversity.
Genetic diversity detected by microsatellites is typically much
greater than that detected by electrophoresis (compare Example 3.1 and

Microsatellites show high levels of
genetic diversity. They provide
one of the most powerful and
practical means currently available
for surveying genetic diversity in
threatened species

63

64

GENETIC DIVERSITY

Table 3.4

Microsatellite variation at eight loci in 35 wild chimpanzees from Gombe National Park, Tanzania. Allele
frequencies at each of the eight loci are given, along with the proportions of individuals heterozygous (H) for each
locus and the average number of alleles (A )

Locus
Allele

Mfd3

Mfd18

Mfd23

Mfd32

FABP

Pla2a

Rena4

LL

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

0.026
0.316
0.026
0.079
0.553

0.066
0.211
0.013
0.132
0.026
0.303
0.250
0.167

0.042
0.194
0.264
0.056
0.083
0.014
0.181

0.014
0.527
0.122
0.270
0.054
0.014

0.237
0.066
0.053
0.513
0.132

0.176
0.014
0.662
0.122
0.027

0.618
0.382

0.041
0.027
0.027
0.014
0.216
0.014
0.324
0.338

H

0.587

0.779

0.820

0.631

0.656

0.515

0.472

0.731

Av. H 0.649
A5.75

Source: Morin et al. (1994). Illustration from Austin & Short (1984).

Table 3.5). The number of microsatellite alleles per locus is typically
5–10 for large outbreeding populations, while most polymorphic loci
detected by electrophoresis have only two alleles. Heterozygosities for
polymorphic microsatellite loci are often 0.6–0.8, while polymorphic
allozyme loci typically have average heterozygosities of 0.2–0.4.
Similarly, the proportion of microsatellite loci polymorphic in large
outbred populations is around 0.8, while that for allozyme loci average
around 0.3. Fewer species have been surveyed for microsatellites than
for allozymes, and there are no wide-ranging comparative surveys for
microsatellites.
Comparisons of genetic diversity for microsatellites are not as
straightforward as for allozymes. Microsatellite mutation rates differ
among species and microsatellites with more repeats have more variation than smaller ones. Further, the use of primers developed in other
species can lead to lower levels of variation being detected when the
species are not closely related (Primmer et al. 1996).

DNA ﬁngerprints (minisatellites), RAPD and AFLP
Extensive genetic diversity for
DNA ﬁngerprints, RAPDs and
AFLP is typically found in large
populations of non-threatened
species

Large, non-threatened populations of outbreeding species contain
extensive levels of genetic diversity for DNA ﬁngerprints (Avise 1994).
For example, the African lion shows extensive DNA ﬁngerprint variation (Box 3.1). In most species, individuals can be distinguished from
each other with an extremely high probability. This has led to widespread use of DNA ﬁngerprints in human forensics to detect criminals,
as well as to its use to identify paternity.
RAPDs and AFLP have been used more extensively in plants than
animals. However, they are less convenient for population genetic analyses as they show dominance, rather than co-dominance, as is found for

EXTENT OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

Table 3.5

Levels of microsatellite genetic diversity in a range of non-endangered and related, threatened taxa.
Average number of alleles per locus (A) and heterozygosity (H) are given for polymorphic loci. Globally threatened, or
previously threatened, species (or sub-species) are placed adjacent to the nearest one or more related, but nonendangered species (or sub-species) for which data are available (nsample size)

Non-endangered
species

Human
Polar bear
Grey seal
African buffalo
Gray wolf
Coyote
Domestic dog
African lion
Puma
American crow
Northern raven
European kestrel
Greater kestrel
Lesser kestrel
Loggerhead shrike
(mainland)
Swallow

A

H

n

8.9
5.4
8.0
8.6
4.5
5.9
6.4
4.3
4.9
6.0
4.3
5.5
4.5
5.4
5.6

0.81
0.62
0.74
0.73
0.62
0.68
0.73
0.66
0.61
0.68
0.68
0.68
0.59
0.70
0.58

28
30
805
34
18
17
26
8
10
14
21
10
10
8
20

19.3 0.78

46

Koala
8.0 0.81
Southern hairy5.9 0.71
nosed wombat
Allied rock wallaby 12.0 0.86
American alligator
Northern water
snake
Sleepy lizard
Atlantic salmon
Fruit ﬂy
Wild soybeans
Royal mahogany

8.3 0.67
9.1 0.72
11.5
9.3
7.3
13.8
9.3

0.71
0.82
0.61
0.87
0.67

25
3–90
153
28
50
38
25
72
32
32

Threatened
species
A

H

n

Chimpanzee

7.8

0.65 35

Black rhinoceros
Mexican wolf
Ethiopian wolf
African wild dog
Cheetah

4.2
2.7
2.4
3.5
3.4

0.69
0.42
0.21
0.56
0.39

Mariana crow

1.8

0.16 16

Mauritius kestrel
Seychelles kestrel
Peregrine falcon
San Clemente Island
loggerhead shrike

1.4
1.3
4.1
2.1

0.10 75
0.12 4
0.48 28
0.34 26

Laysan ﬁnch

3.1

0.52 44

Northern hairy-nosed
wombat
Long-footed potoroo
Bridled nail-tail wallaby
Komodo dragon

2.1

0.32

Mahogany tree

3.7
11.6
4.0

9.7

7
38
20
78
10

7–65

0.56 9
0.83 73
0.31 78

0.55 79

Reference
1
2
3
4,5
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1,6
7
1
1
8
1
1
1
1
9
10
11
12
13
1

References: 1. Frankham (2001a); 2. Paetkau et al. (1995); 3. Allen et al. (1995); 4. O’Ryan et al. (1998); 5. Brown & Houlden (1999); 6. Nesje
et al. (2000); 7. Mundy et al. (1997); 8. Houlden et al. (1996); 9. Prosser et al. (1999); 10. Cooper et al. (1997); 11. Nielsen et al. (1999);
12. England et al. (1996); 13. Maughan et al. (1995).

microsatellites. It is more difﬁcult to compare results across species,
especially if they are not closely related. The typical measure of genetic
diversity is percentage of band sharing between individuals.
Populations with high levels of band sharing have low genetic diversity,
since band sharing increases with relatedness. For example, band

65

66

GENETIC DIVERSITY

sharing was 91% for the endangered burying beetle species in the USA
and only 77% in a related non-endangered species (Kozol et al. 1994),
indicating that the endangered species had lower genetic diversity than
the non-endangered one.

Low genetic diversity in endangered species
Endangered species usually have
lower levels of genetic diversity
than non-endangered species

Most endangered species and populations have lower genetic diversity
than related, non-endangered species with large population sizes. Of 38
endangered mammals, birds, ﬁsh, insects and plants, 32 had lower
genetic diversity (mainly for allozymes) than related non-endangered
species, ﬁve had similar genetic diversity and one greater (Frankham
1995a). In endangered birds, 11 of 13 species had lower allozyme genetic
diversity than the average of 70 non-endangered species (Haig & Avise
1996). Further, all 17 endangered taxa listed in Table 3.5 have lower
genetic diversity than related, non-endangered species for microsatellites. For example, endangered species such as the northern hairy-nosed
wombat and the Ethiopian wolf have greatly reduced microsatellite
variation compared to related non-endangered species. Endangered
species have about half the genetic diversity of non-endangered species
(Table 3.5).
A similar conclusion applies to almost all comparisons involving
DNA ﬁngerprints, RAPD and AFLP. Low DNA ﬁngerprint genetic diversity, compared to non-endangered species (or sub-species) has been
reported in Arabian oryx, Asiatic lion, Florida panther, Isle Royale gray
wolf, St. Lawrence beluga whales, Mariana crow, nene, Chatham Island
black robin, palila, Puerto Rican plain pigeon, Puerto Rican parrot,
Seychelles warbler and whooping crane (Wayne et al. 1991; Brock &
White 1992; Longmire et al. 1992; Roelke et al. 1993; Fleischer et al. 1994;
Miyamoto et al. 1994; O’Brien 1994; Patenaude et al. 1994; Rave et al. 1994;
Wayne et al. 1994; Ardern & Lambert 1997; Komdeur et al. 1998; Tarr &
Fleischer 1999). For example, Komdeur et al. (1998) reported an average
band sharing of 0.57 in four endangered bird species compared to only
0.21 in natural outbred non-endangered birds. Conversely, the humpback whale has levels of ﬁngerprint diversity that are equal to, or greater
than, those found in non-endangered mammals (Baker et al. 1993).
Low genetic diversity compared to non-endangered species has been
reported for RAPD or AFLP in endangered light-footed clapper rail from
California, and in endangered plants Cerastium ﬁscherianum var. molle,
Lysimachia minoricensis from Minorca and Wollemi pine from Australia,
in addition to the burying beetle described above (Kozol et al. 1994;
Nusser et al. 1996; Calero et al. 1998; Maki & Horie 1999; Hogbin et al.
2000).
There can be no doubt that most endangered species have lower
genetic diversity than related non-endangered species. The reasons for
low genetic diversity in endangered species will be considered in
Chapter 10.

VARIATION OVER SPACE AND TIME

What genetic diversity determines evolutionary
potential?
It is important to deﬁne what genetic diversity we are seeking to conserve to maintain evolutionary potential, as we can assess genetic diversity by the wide array of methods just described. Evolutionary potential
is most directly measured by quantitative genetic variation (Franklin
1980). Most important is quantitative genetic variation for reproductive
ﬁtness. Unfortunately, this is the most difﬁcult to measure and the
aspect of genetic diversity for which we have least information in threatened species (Chapter 5). Other measures such as DNA and allozymes
are only of conservation value if they reﬂect evolutionary potential
(Chapter 5).

Quantitative genetic variation for
life history traits is the major
determinant of evolutionary
potential. Unfortunately, we have
least information on this form of
genetic diversity and it is the most
difﬁcult to measure

Variation over space and time
As an approximation, the magnitude of genetic differentiation among
animal populations is inversely correlated with dispersal ability
(Chapter 13). The relationship between genetic differentiation and dispersal ability can be gauged from the GST values in Table 3.3. GST measures the proportion of the total variation that occurs among
populations; zero represents populations that show no genetic differentiation, while values above zero indicate species where populations are
partially genetically subdivided. Birds with high dispersal ability show
the lowest GST values of all vertebrate groups. Similarly, insects, which
disperse easily, show the lowest GST amongst invertebrates. For example,
highly mobile fruit ﬂies in the Hunter Valley region of southeastern
Australia showed no signiﬁcant differences among populations from 10
different wineries. Conversely, the critically endangered sentry milkvetch plant species that lives on the rim of the Grand Canyon in Arizona
has very limited dispersal; 63% of its variation is among populations,
11% among sub-populations and only 27% within populations (Travis et
al. 1996).
Plants typically have locally adapted races for quantitative genetic
variation, and often show allozyme differences among populations,
especially for self-fertilizing species.
Most allele frequencies in large populations are relatively stable for
molecular genetic markers over tens of years. For example, there were
no consistent changes in allozyme frequencies in wild fruit ﬂy populations over ﬁve years and frequencies were still indistinguishable over 20
years (over 200 generations) later (Frankham & Loebel 1992). In the same
populations, microsatellite allele frequencies were similar over four
years (England 1997).
In contrast, small populations of threatened species typically lose
genetic diversity over time. For example, analyses based upon museum
specimens have documented loss of genetic diversity in the whooping
crane, Arabian oryx, Mauritius kestrel and nene (Glenn et al. 1999;

Spatial variation in genetic
composition depends critically on
rates of gene ﬂow, population
sizes and selection

Large populations typically show
negligible change in genetic
diversity over tens of years.
Conversely, small populations
typically lose genetic diversity
rapidly over time

67

68

GENETIC DIVERSITY

Marshall et al. 1999; Groombridge et al. 2000; Paxinos et al. in press); all
four species have suffered severe population bottlenecks (Chapters 8
and 10).

What explains differences in levels of genetic
diversity?
In brief, the following factors affect levels of genetic diversity:
• Historical and current population sizes (Chapters 6 and 10)
• Population bottlenecks (Chapter 8)
• Breeding system (Chapters 4 and 11)
• Natural selection (Chapters 6 and 9)
• Different mutation rates (Chapter 7)
• Immigration and emigration among populations (Chapters 7, 9
and 13)
• Interactions among the above factors (Chapter 9).

Genetic differences among species
The genetic differences among
species roughly reﬂect their
taxonomic divergence

Genetic divergence among species roughly reﬂects their phylogeny. Trees
of relationship among higher taxonomic ranks derived from DNA or proteins are often similar to those based upon morphology. However, the
genetic divergence among species within different genera varies widely
(Fig. 3.3), reﬂecting the somewhat arbitrary nature of taxonomic classiﬁcations. Genetic differentiation among bird species is on average less
than that among species of other vertebrate groups (Johns & Avise 1998).
Species of fruit ﬂies in the genus Drosophila typically show much greater
genetic differentiation than primates currently placed in different taxonomic families (Avise & Johns 1999). Use of genetic diversity among taxa
to resolve taxonomic uncertainties is considered in Chapter 15.

Summary
1. Genetic diversity represents the essential evolutionary potential
for species to respond to changing environments.
2. Genetic diversity can be measured for quantitative characters,
for deleterious alleles, for proteins and for DNA.
3. Microsatellites are currently the most practical and informative
of the molecular techniques for measuring DNA variation within populations.
4. Large populations of non-endangered species typically have
extensive genetic diversity.
5. Most endangered species have reduced genetic diversity when
compared to related non-endangered species.
6. Genetic diversity among taxa roughly reﬂects their taxonomic
divergence.

FURTHER READING

Fig. 3.3 Genetic differences
among species in selected
vertebrate genera (from Avise
1994). Means and ranges of genetic
distances among species, based
upon multilocus protein
electrophoresis. This is an indirect
measure of the amount of DNA
sequence divergence among
species. Genetic distances among
species within genera vary
considerably among vertebrate
classes.

FURTHER READING

Avise (1994) Molecular Markers, Natural History and Evolution. Clear descriptions of
the molecular methods for measuring genetic diversity and results achieved
with them.
Avise & Hamrick (1996) Conservation Genetics. Advanced scientiﬁc reviews on the
conservation of major groups of animals and plants. Contains considerable
information on genetic diversity.
Goldstein & Schlotterer (1999) Microsatellites. An edited volume covering a range
of topics on microsatellites.
Hamrick & Godt (1989) Compilation of data on electrophoretic variation in
plants and factors affecting it.
Hartl & Clarke (1997) Principles of Populations Genetics. Provides an easy-to-follow
coverage of genetic diversity and its importance.
Hoelzel (1998) Molecular Genetic Analysis. Advanced information on molecular
methods used to measure genetic diversity.
Smith & Wayne (1996) Molecular Genetic Approaches in Conservation.
Contains information on genetic diversity in threatened species and the
diverse molecular methods for measuring it. Advanced.

69

70

GENETIC DIVERSITY

Ward et al. (1992) Compilation of data on electrophoretic variation for more
than 1000 species, with analyses testing for differences relating to taxa and
protein size and structure. See also the earlier paper by Nevo et al. (1984) on
the same topic.
Wright (1978) Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, vol. 4. Review of much of
the earlier literature on genetic diversity.
PROBLEMS

3.1 Genetic diversity: Why is genetic diversity of importance in conservation biology?
3.2 Measurement of genetic diversity: What is the basis for using
electrophoretic separation of proteins to measure the extent of
genetic diversity?
3.3 Measuring genetic diversity: What are microsatellites?
3.4 Measuring genetic diversity: What is a RFLP?
3.5 Measuring genetic diversity: What is a RAPD?
3.6 Measuring genetic diversity: What is an AFLP?
3.7 Measuring genetic diversity: What is a DNA ﬁngerprint?
3.8 Measuring genetic diversity: What genetic markers can be
typed following non-invasive sampling?
3.9 Genetic diversity: What form of genetic diversity is most important for retaining evolutionary potential?
3.10 Levels of genetic diversity: How do major taxonomic groups
compare in genetic diversity?
3.11 Levels of genetic diversity: How do endangered and non-endangered species compare in genetic diversity?
PR ACTIC AL EXERCISE: MEASURING GENETIC DIVERSIT Y USING
MICROSATELLITES

A practical that is suitable for illustrating genetic diversity involves noninvasive sampling, PCR ampliﬁcation and microsatellite typing. Choose
a species where microsatellites have been developed. Beware of crosscontamination during all stages of the procedure. This practical can
conveniently be spread over two weeks, the ﬁrst involving preparing
hair, DNA extraction and DNA ampliﬁcation. Microsatellite typing can
be done on a sequencing machine during the intervening period and
genotypes illustrated on a computer screen in the second week, when
allele frequencies and heterozygosities can be estimated from the data.
Use of hair as a source of DNA Hair from an interesting species (we used
tammar wallabies) can be collected from live animals, or frozen
samples. Hairs with good roots are chosen. These are cut at a point about
3 mm above the bulb with a razor blade.
DNA extraction DNA can be extracted by a simple boiling method, such
as that of Sloane et al. (2000).
DNA ampliﬁcation It is necessary to get microsatellite primers made
with ﬂuorochromes added (thus avoiding use of radioactive isotopes)

PRACTICAL EXERCISE

that are suitable for running in a DNA sequencing machine. Two loci,
labelled with different ﬂuorochromes provide suitable material,
though a single locus will sufﬁce. Add microsatellite DNA primers, Taq
polymerase, nucleotides and buffer, and amplify the DNA.
Separate the ampliﬁed microsatellite fragments on a DNA sequencing machine
The use of a sequencing machine allows the microsatellite typing to be
done and the results stored in electronic form. These can be viewed and
the data analysed to obtain allele frequencies and heterozygosities.

71

Chapter 4

Characterizing genetic
diversity: single loci
Terms:
Allotetraploid,
autotetraploid,
effective number of alleles,
equilibrium,
expected heterozygosity,
gene diversity,
haplotype,
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium,
hermaphrodite,
linkage disequilibrium,
observed heterozygosity,
polyploid,
selﬁng,
sex-linked,
tetraploid

An Australian velvet worm and an
autoradiograph illustrating genetic
diversity at microsatellite loci in
this species.

Frequencies of alleles at individual loci and heterozygosities are
used to characterize genetic diversity in populations. Allele and
genotype frequencies are in equilibrium under random mating
when there are no other perturbing forces operating

FREQUENCIES OF ALLELES AND GENOTYPES

Describing genetic diversity
In the previous chapter, we examined techniques for ascertaining the
genotype of each individual from a sample of organisms from a population or species. We now describe the parameters that allow us to extrapolate from samples to the entire population. These values are essential
for comparisons among populations and species, and for predicting
changes in the genetic composition of populations. Parameters are
required for both single loci, and for more complex, multilocus, quantitative characters. This chapter is concerned with simple one or two loci
situations. Chapter 5 addresses quantitative traits.

Measures of genetic diversity are
required if we are to document
loss of genetic diversity or
adaptive evolutionary changes

Frequencies of alleles and genotypes
The information we collect provides the numbers of each genotype at a
locus. This is illustrated for an egg-white protein locus in Scottish eider
ducks (Table 4.1). This species was severely reduced due to harvest for
feathers for pillows and eiderdowns. Genotype frequencies are simply
calculated from the proportion of the total sample of that type (e.g.
genotype frequency of FF37/670.552).
For comparative and predictive use, the information is usually
reported in the form of allele frequencies (often referred to as gene frequencies), rather than genotype frequencies. We will use the letters p
and q to represent the allele frequencies for two alleles at a locus. The
frequency of the F allele (p) in the eider duck population is simply the
proportion of all alleles examined which are F. Note that we double
the number of each homozygote, and the total, as the ducks are
diploid (each bird has inherited one copy of the locus from each of its
parents).
p

(2  FF) FS
2  Total

(4.1)

The calculation in Example 4.1 shows that the F allele has a frequency of
0.73.

Table 4.1 Numbers and frequencies for each of the genotypes at an eggwhite protein locus in eider ducks from Scotland. Individuals were genotyped
by protein electrophoresis. F refers to the faster migrating allele and S to the
slower
Genotypes

Numbers
Genotype frequencies
Source: Milne & Robertson (1965).

FF

FS

SS

Total

37
0.552

24
0.358

6
0.090

67
1.00

The genetic composition of a
population is usually described in
terms of allele frequencies,
number of alleles and
heterozygosity

73

74

GENETIC DIVERSITY: SINGLE LOCI

Example 4.1 Calculation of F and S allele frequencies at an egg-white
protein locus in eider ducks
The frequency for the F allele p is obtained as follows:
p[(2 37)(1 24)] / [2 67] 0.73
and that for S q as
q[(2 6)(124)] / [ 2 67] 0.27
q can also be obtained as 1p when there are only two alleles, as the
sum of relative frequencies is 1.00, i.e.
pq0.73 0.271.00.
Allele frequencies may also be reported as percentages.

Similar procedures are applied to obtain allele frequencies when there
are more than two alleles at a locus, as found for many microsatellite
loci. Numbers of each genotype at a microsatellite locus with three
alleles in the endangered Hawaiian Laysan ﬁnch are given in Table 4.2.
The method for estimating the frequency of one of the alleles is shown
in Example 4.2.

Table 4.2

Numbers of each genotype at a microsatellite locus with three
alleles in the endangered Hawaiian Laysan ﬁnch. The allelic designations 91, 95
and 97 are the sizes, in base pairs, of the ampliﬁed PCR fragments

Genotypes

Numbers

91/91

91/95

91/97

95/95

95/97

97/97

Total

7

10

8

5

11

3

44

Source: Tarr et al. (1998).

Example 4.2 Estimating allele frequencies at a locus with three alleles
in the endangered Laysan ﬁnch
The frequency of the 91 allele p is obtained by counting the number
of 91 alleles (twice the number of the 91/91 genotype, plus the
numbers of the 91/95 and 91/97 genotypes) and dividing by twice the
total number of individuals, as follows:
p[(2 7)10 8] / [2 44] 0.364
The frequencies of the 95 and 97 alleles, calculated in a similar
manner, are 0.352 and 0.284, respectively. The frequencies of the
three alleles sum to 1.000.

HARDY–WEINBERG EQUILIBRIUM

The extent of genetic diversity at a locus is expressed as heterozygosity.
Observed heterozygosity (H0) is simply the number of heterozygotes at
a locus divided by the total number of individuals sampled. For
example, the observed frequency of heterozygotes at the egg-white
protein locus in eider ducks (Table 4.1) is 24 / 67 0.36. A similar procedure is followed when there are more than two alleles at a locus. For the
Laysan ﬁnch microsatellites (Table 4.2), the observed heterozygosity
is [10 8 11] /44 0.659. Generally, expected heterozygosity (He),
described later, is reported for outbreeding species, as it is less sensitive
to sample size than observed heterozygosity.
Having described the parameters used to characterize the genetic
composition of populations, we will now deal with factors that inﬂuence the frequencies of alleles and genotypes. The remainder of this
chapter covers the consequences of different mating systems. Chapters
6 and 7 deal with mutation, migration and selection and Chapter 8 with
the consequences of small population size.
We now address the questions, what determines the frequencies of
genotypes in a population? What is the relationship between allele and
genotype frequencies under random mating?

Heterozygosity is the measure
most commonly used to
characterize genetic diversity for
single loci

Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
In dealing with the factors inﬂuencing the frequencies of alleles and genotypes in populations, we begin with the simplest case – that of a large
population where mating is random and there is no mutation, migration
or selection. Allele and genotype frequencies under random mating
attain an equilibrium referred to as the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium,
after its discoverers Godfrey Hardy, an English mathematician, and
Wilhelm Weinberg, a German physician. While the Hardy–Weinberg
equilibrium is very simple, it is crucial in conservation and evolutionary
genetics. It provides a basis for detecting deviations from random mating,
testing for selection, modelling the effects of inbreeding and selection,
and estimating the allele frequencies at loci showing dominance.
Assume that we are dealing with an autosomal locus with two alleles
A1 and A2 at relative frequencies of p and q in a large random mating population (pq 1). Imagine hermaphroditic (both sperm and eggs
released by each individual) marine organisms shedding their gametes
into the water, where sperm and eggs unite by chance (Table 4.3). Since
the allele frequency of A1 in the population is p, the frequency of sperm
or eggs carrying that allele is also p. The probability of a sperm carrying
A1 uniting with an egg bearing the same allele, to produce an A1A1
zygote, is therefore ppp2 and the probability of an A2 sperm fertilizing an A2 egg, to produce an A2A2 zygote is, likewise, q q q2.
Heterozygous zygotes can be produced in two ways, it does not matter
which gamete contributes which allele, and their expected frequency is
therefore 2pq2pq. Consequently, the expected frequencies of
A1A1, A1A2 and A2A2 zygotes are p2, 2pq and q2, respectively. These are the
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium genotype frequencies.

Allele and genotype frequencies at
an autosomal locus attain
equilibrium after one generation in
large, random mating populations
when there are no perturbing
forces (no mutation, migration or
selection)

75

76

GENETIC DIVERSITY: SINGLE LOCI

Table 4.3

Genotype frequencies resulting from random union of gametes at
an autosomal locus

Ova
frequencies

A1
p

A2
q

A1

p

p2
A1A1

pq
A1A2

A2

q

pq
A2A1

q2
A2A2

Sperm

The resulting genotype frequencies in progeny are:
A1A1
A1A2
p2
2pq

A2A2
q2

These are the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium genotype frequencies.
Note that the genotype frequencies sum to 1, i.e. p2 2pq q2 
(p q)2 1. If the frequencies of the alleles A1 and A2 are 0.9 and 0.1,
then the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium genotype frequencies are:
A1A1
A1A2
A2A2
Total
0.92
20.90.1
0.12
1.0
0.81
0.18
0.01
1.0
In example 4.1, we calculated allele frequencies by taking the values
of (2 number of homozygotes)number of heterozygotes / 2total
number of individuals. Now that we are using simple algebraic terms,
this equates to [(2p2) 2pq] / [2(p2 2pq q2)]. As the denominator
equals 2, the frequency of the A1 allele in the progeny (p1) is
p1 p2 pqp (pq),
and, as pq1, p1 p
Likewise the frequency of A2 is q1 q
Thus, the frequencies of the two alleles have not changed, indicating
that allele frequencies are in equilibrium. As further generations of
random mating yield the same genotype frequencies, genotype frequencies do not change over generations. Consequently, allele and genotype frequencies are at equilibrium after one generation of random mating and
remain so in perpetuity in the absence of other inﬂuences.
The relationships between allele and genotype frequencies according to the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium are shown in Fig. 4.1. This illustrates two points. First, the frequency of heterozygotes cannot be
greater than 50% for a locus with two alleles; this occurs when the
alleles both have frequencies of 0.5. Second, when an allele is rare,
most of its alleles are in heterozygotes, while most are in homozygotes
when it is at a high frequency. This is important in the context of the
effectiveness of selection (Chapter 6). For example, when the A2 allele is

HARDY–WEINBERG EQUILIBRIUM

Fig. 4.1 Relationship between
genotype frequencies and allele
frequencies in a population in
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium.

at a frequency of 0.1, the frequency of A2A2 homozygotes is 0.01, that of
heterozygotes 0.18, while A1A1 homozygotes have a frequency of 0.81
(Table 4.3). In this case, 90% of the A2 alleles are in heterozygotes.
Conversely, at a frequency of 0.5, the three genotypes have frequencies
of 0.25, 0.50 and 0.25. Here half the alleles are in heterozygotes and half
in homozygotes.
Do genotypes in real populations obey the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium frequencies? It may seem that we have considered an unrealistically simple situation. To obtain the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium we
assumed:
• Random mating
• Normal Mendelian segregation of alleles
• Equal fertility of parent genotypes
• Equal fertilizing capacity of gametes
• Equal survival of all genotypes
• A closed population (no migration)
• No mutation
• A large population size.
The genotype frequencies for the eider duck egg-white protein locus are
tested for agreement with the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium in Table
4.4. Values of p and q, calculated previously, are used to calculate p2, 2pq
and q2. These frequencies are then multiplied by the total number (67)
to obtain expected numbers for the three genotypes.
The observed genotype frequencies are very close to the values
expected from the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium at this locus. In
general, agreement with expectations is found for most loci in large naturally outbreeding populations. This does not mean that the loci are not
subject to mutation, migration, selection and sampling effects, only
that these effects are often small.

Chi-square (2) test to assess agreement between
observed and expected numbers
Differences between observed and expected numbers will occur by
chance. To determine if the differences are of statistical signiﬁcance (i.e.

Genotype frequencies for most
loci usually agree with
Hardy–Weinberg genotype
frequency expectations in large
naturally outbreeding populations

77

78

GENETIC DIVERSITY: SINGLE LOCI

Table 4.4

Test for agreement of genotype frequencies with Hardy–Weinberg
equilibrium genotype frequencies for the eider duck egg-white protein locus

Genotypes

Observed numbers (O)
Expected frequencies

Expected numbers (E)
(expected frequency 67)

FF

FS

SS

Total

37
p2
0.732
0.5329
35.7

24
2pq
20.73 0.27
0.3942
26.4

6
q2
0.272
0.0729
4.9

67
1.0
1.0
1.0
67

unlikely to be due to chance alone), the deviation between observed
numbers (O) and expected numbers (E) is tested using a 2 test, computed
as follows:

2 兺 (O E)2 / E
The larger the difference between observed and expected, the larger the
2 value. The 2 value is computed as follows:
兺 (O E)2 / E 

(37  35.7) 2 (24  26.4) 2 (6  4.9) 2


35.7
26.4
4.9

2 

0.047



0.218

 0.247 0.512

To assess the probability of obtaining a 2 value as great as this by
chance, we need to determine the number of degrees of freedom (df).
This is the number of genotypes (3) minus 1 (for using the total number)
minus the number of alleles (1 in this case). Thus
df 31 11
The probability is obtained by looking up the 2 value in statistical
tables under the appropriate degrees of freedom, or by using statistical
software, yielding
Probability0.47
Thus, we conclude that the observed genotype frequencies do not differ
signiﬁcantly from the expectations. If the probability had been0.05,
we would have concluded that there was a signiﬁcant deviation from
expectations.

Expected heterozygosity
The Hardy–Weinberg expected
heterozygosity is usually reported
when describing genetic diversity
as it is less sensitive to sample size
than observed heterozygosity

Genetic diversity at single loci is characterized by expected heterozygosity, observed heterozygosity and allelic diversity. For a single locus with
two alleles with frequencies of p and q, the expected heterozygosity
He 2pq (also called gene diversity). When there are more than two

EXPECTED HETEROZYGOSITY

alleles, there are related expressions as shown below. However, in these
cases it is simpler to calculate expected heterozygosity as 1 minus the
sum of the squared allele frequencies:
He 1 

No. of
alleles

兺p
i1

2

i

(4.2)

where pi is the frequency of the ith allele. The reasoning behind this can
be appreciated for the case of two alleles at a locus where the expected
genotype frequencies are p2, 2pq and q2. Since p2 2pq q2 1, 2pq 1
p2 q2, an expression that corresponds to equation 4.2. He is usually
reported in preference to observed heterozygosity as it is less affected by
sampling.
Example 4.3 illustrates the calculation of expected heterozygosity
for the microsatellite locus in Laysan ﬁnches. The Hardy–Weinberg
expected heterozygosity is 0.663, based upon the allele frequencies at
this locus.

Example 4.3 Calculating expected heterozygosity for a microsatellite
locus in the Laysan ﬁnch
The allele frequencies for the 91, 95 and 97 alleles are 0.364, 0.352 and
0.284, respectively, based on the data in Table 4.2. Consequently, the
Hardy–Weinberg expected heterozygosity is
He 1 (0.3642 0.3522 0.2842) 1(0.1325 0.12390.0807)
0.663
The observed and expected heterozygosities of 0.659 and 0.663 at this
locus are very similar.
To assess the evolutionary potential of a species, information is required
about genome-wide genetic diversity. Information on a single locus is
unlikely to accurately depict genetic diversity for all loci in a species. For
example, mammals have around 35 000 loci. Consequently, genetic
diversity measures (H0, He) are averaged over several loci (hopefully a
random sample) to characterize genetic diversity for a population or
species. These measures are demonstrated in Box 4.1, where comparisons are made between levels of genetic diversity in endangered
Ethiopian wolves, domestic dogs, gray wolves and coyotes, based on nine
microsatellite loci.
Conservation biologists are often concerned with changes in levels
of genetic diversity over time, as loss of genetic diversity is one indication that the population is undergoing inbreeding and losing its evolutionary potential. Heterozygosity is often expressed as the proportion of
heterozygosity retained over time, i.e. Ht /H0 where Ht is the level of
heterozygosity at generation t and H0 the level at some earlier time,
referred to as time 0. For example, H0 may be the heterozygosity before
a population crash, and Ht after the crash. Then 1Ht /H0 reﬂects the proportion of heterozygosity lost as a result of the crash. The Mauritius
kestrel passed through a single-pair bottleneck in 1974 and recovered to

Average heterozgyosity over
several loci is used to characterize
genetic diversity in a species

79

80

GENETIC DIVERSITY: SINGLE LOCI

Box 4.1 Characterizing genetic diversity in the
endangered Ethiopian wolf and its conservation
implications (after Gottelli et al. 1994))
The Ethiopian wolf is one of the most endangered canids. It exists in only six isolated
areas of Ethiopia and has a total population of no more than 500 individuals.
Numbers are decreasing due to habitat destruction associated with agriculture, overgrazing and increasing human population pressure. Further, in at least one population, the wolves coexist with domestic dogs and may hybridize with them. Several
phenotypically abnormal wolves were suspected of being hybrids. Dogs also
compete for prey with wolves and may act as disease vectors.
Data were obtained for nine microsatellite loci on two populations of Ethiopian
wolves, one on the Sanetti Plateau, where there were very few dogs, and the other
in Web Valley where dogs were abundant. These results were compared with globally non-endangered canids, gray wolves, coyotes and domestic dogs. Allele frequencies at the nine loci in the Sanetti population are shown in the table below
(slightly modiﬁed from the original data), with summary statistics for the Web population, domestic dogs, gray wolf and coyotes.
Allele
Locus

1

2

225
109
204
123
377
250
213
173
344

0.933
0.133
1.000
1.000
0.889
0.933
0.031
0.533
1.000

0.067
0.867

Means
Ethiopian wolf
Sanetti
Web
Domestic dogs
Gray wolf
Coyote

3

4

5

A

2
2
1
1
0.028 0.028 0.028 0.028 5
0.067
2
0.969
2
0.467
2
1

H0

He

ne

Sample
size

0.133
0.267
0.000
0.000
0.222
0.133
0.063
0.533
0.000

0.125
0.231
0.000
0.000
0.207
0.125
0.060
0.498
0.000

1.14
1.30
1
1
1.26
1.14
1.06
1.99
1

15
15
15
16
18
15
16
15
18

2.0 0.150 0.138 1.21 16
2.8 0.313 0.271 1.37 23
6.4 0.516 0.679 3.11 35
4.5
0.620 2.63 18
5.9
0.675 3.08 17

To characterize the genetic diversity, we use observed heterozygosity (Ho),
Hardy–Weinberg expected heterozygosity (He), allelic diversity (A) and effective
number of alleles (ne). These are averaged over the nine loci, as shown at the bottom.
Observed heterozygosity is calculated for each locus as the total number of heterozygotes divided by the sample size. We calculate the Hardy–Weinberg expected
heterozygosity for each locus (using equation 4.2), and average them. The number
of alleles per locus are also averaged, as shown. Finally the effective number of alleles
is calculated for each locus and averaged.
Several pieces of information of conservation relevance can be gleaned from this
information. First, the Ethiopian wolf populations have lower genetic diversity than the

EXPECTED HETEROZYGOSITY

related globally non-endangered gray wolf, coyote and domestic dog, as gauged by
allelic diversity, effective number of alleles and average heterozygosity. Consequently,
the Ethiopian wolf has less evolutionary potential than non-endangered canids.
Second, the relatively ‘pure’ Sanetti population has less genetic diversity than the
Web Valley population that coexists with domestic dogs, suggesting that there may
be hybridization with dogs. This was veriﬁed when seven phenotypically abnormal
Ethiopian wolves were found to contain alleles present in domestic dogs, but absent
from ‘pure’ Ethiopian wolves.
Third, observed and expected heterozygosities are similar (they do not differ signiﬁcantly in either of the Ethiopian wolf populations). Consequently, mating in the
wolves is approximately random within populations.
The study also established that Ethiopian wolves are distinctly different from other
canids, but related to gray wolves and coyotes (data not shown here).
The management recommendations that arose from this study were:
• that feral domestic dogs be controlled to eliminate hybridization and disease
spread
• that a captive breeding program be instituted immediately with genetically ‘pure’
Ethiopian wolf founders
• that the other Ethiopian wolf populations be surveyed
• that the Ethiopian wolf be recognized as a distinct species deserving conservation.

a population size of 400–500 by 1997. Its average heterozygosity for
microsatellites prior to the bottleneck (based on genotyping of museum
skins) was 0.23, but heterozygosity had dropped to 0.10 by 1997
(Groombridge et al. 2000). Hence, Ht /H0 0.1 / 0.230.43. Thus, the
Mauritius kestrel has lost 57% of the genetic diversity it possessed before
the bottleneck.

Allelic diversity
Allelic diversity, the average number of alleles per locus, is also used to
characterize the extent of genetic diversity. For example, there are two
alleles at the locus determining egg-white protein differences in eider
ducks and three alleles at the microsatellite locus in Laysan ﬁnches.
When there is more than one locus, allelic diversity (A) is the number of
alleles averaged across loci:
A total number of alleles over all loci / number of loci

(4.3)

For example, the Sanetti population of the endangered Ethiopian wolf
(Box 4.1) has a total of 18 alleles over the nine microsatellite loci surveyed, so A 18 / 92.0.
A second measure reﬂecting the number of alleles is the effective
number of alleles. This is the number of alleles there would be to
provide the same heterozygosity if all were equally frequent, and is less
inﬂuenced by rare alleles. This measure is used as it is less sensitive to

Allelic diversity is also used to
characterize genetic diversity

81

82

GENETIC DIVERSITY: SINGLE LOCI

sample sizes and it ties in with theory we consider in Chapter 9. The
effective number of alleles (ne) is calculated as follows:
ne 1 / 兺pi2

(4.4)

where pi is the frequency of each allele, and the values are summed for
all alleles. For example, the Mdg3 microsatellite locus in chimpanzees
has ﬁve alleles, but the effective number of alleles is 2.42 (Example 4.4).
By contrast, the microsatellite locus in Laysan ﬁnch above with three
alleles has a ne of 2.96, very close to the actual value, as the allele frequencies are almost equal. The effective number of alleles only equals
the actual number when all alleles are equally frequent, and in most
cases, ne is much less than A.

Example 4.4 Effective number of alleles at the Mfd3 microsatellite
locus in chimpanzees
The frequencies of the ﬁve alleles at the Mfd3 microsatellite locus are
0.026, 0.316, 0.026, 0.079 and 0.553 (Table 3.4). Consequently, the effective number of alleles is
ne 1 / 兺pi2 1 / (0.0262 0.3162 0.0262 0.0792 0.5532) 2.42
Thus, the effective number of alleles at this locus is 2.42.

Estimating the allele frequency for a recessive
allele
The Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
provides a means for estimating
the frequencies of recessive alleles
in random mating populations

It is not possible to determine the frequency of an allele at a locus
showing dominance using the allele counting method outlined above.
This is because dominant homozygotes cannot be distinguished, phenotypically, from heterozygotes. However, the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium provides a means for estimating the frequencies of such alleles.
Homozygous recessives are phenotypically detectable and have an
expected frequency of q2 for loci in Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium. Thus,
the observed frequency of homozygous recessive phenotypes can be
equated to q2, and the recessive allele frequency obtained as the square
root of this frequency. The calculation is illustrated for chondrodystrophic dwarﬁsm in the endangered California condor in Example 4.5.
This allele has an estimated frequency of 0.17, a surprisingly high frequency for a recessive lethal allele.
Since there are several assumptions underlying this method of estimating q (random mating, no selection or migration), it should never be
used for loci where all genotypes can be distinguished.
Relatively high frequencies of particular recessive inherited defects
have also been found in other populations derived from few founders,
including other endangered species and human isolates, such as the
Amish (Chapter 7).

EXPECTED HETEROZYGOSITY

Example 4.5 Estimating the allele frequency for the recessive
chondrodystrophy allele in California condors using the
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium frequencies
Chondrodystrophy in California condors is a condition that results in
severe malformations (dwarﬁng) in the long bones and death around
hatching. It is thought to be due to homozygosity for a recessive allele,
as are similar conditions in domestic turkeys. Of 169 hatched eggs in
the condors, 5 exhibited chondrodystrophy (4 from the one family
and another from a related individual), a frequency of 0.0296 (Ralls et
al. 2000). If we useand dw as the symbol for the normal and chondrodystrophic alleles, and p and q for their frequencies, the phenotypes, corresponding genotypes, and their expected Hardy–Weinberg
equilibrium frequencies are as follows:

Phenotypes

Normal

Chondrodystrophic

Genotypes
Observed frequency
H–W equilibrium
expected frequency

(anddw)
0.9704

dwdw
0.0296

p2 2pq

q2

As the homozygous normal and the heterozygotes cannot be distinguished, it is not possible to obtain the allele frequencies by direct
counting. However, if the assumptions of the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium are upheld, we can estimate the frequency of the dw allele by
equating the observed frequency of affected individuals to q2 and
solving, as follows:
q2 0.0296
Taking the square root of both sides of the equation
q  √0.0296 0.17
The chondrodystrophy allele has a frequency of about 17% at hatching. This is a very high level for a deleterious allele, but is not surprising given that the condors have been reduced to very low numbers
(minimum of 14 individuals).

Frequency of carriers (heterozygotes)
The frequency of carriers of recessive mutations is of interest in conservation genetics, as well as in human and veterinary medicine. However,
carriers of deleterious recessives (Aa) cannot be distinguished from noncarriers. Nevertheless, we can predict the frequency of carriers amongst
those with normal phenotypes from the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium.
It is the ratio of the frequency of heterozygotes (Aa2pq) to that of all
individuals with normal phenotypes (AAAa p2 2pq), as follows:

The Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
allows us to predict the frequency
of carriers for genetic diseases

83

84

GENETIC DIVERSITY: SINGLE LOCI

frequency (carriers)2q / (1q)

(4.5)

In the case of chondrodystrophy, the frequency of carriers among individuals with normal phenotypes is expected to be 20.17 / (10.17)
0.29. Thus, about 30% of the condor population are carriers, almost 10
times the frequency of affected homozygotes (if we can assume random
mating).

Deviations from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
Deviations from Hardy–Weinberg
equilibrium genotype frequencies
are highly informative, allowing us
to detect inbreeding, population
fragmentation, migration and
selection

When any of the assumptions underlying the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium are violated, then deviations from the equilibrium genotype
frequencies will occur. Immigration, selection and non-random mating
will all lead to deviations from the equilibrium. Thus, the Hardy–
Weinberg equilibrium provides a null hypothesis that allows us to detect
if the population has non-random mating, migration or selection.
There are two types of non-random mating, those where mate choice
is based on ancestry (inbreeding and crossbreeding), and those where
choice is based on genotypes at a particular locus (assortive and dissortive mating).

Inbreeding
Inbreeding is the production of
offspring from mating of relatives.
It reduces the frequency of
heterozygotes compared to
random mating

Fig. 4.2 Effect of self-fertilization
on genotype frequencies. The
frequency of heterozygotes halves
with each generation of selﬁng.

The mating of relatives is called inbreeding (Chapter 2). It is of major
importance in conservation genetics as it leads to reduced reproductive
ﬁtness (Chapters 2 and 12). When related individuals mate at a rate
greater than expected by random mating, the frequency of heterozygotes is reduced relative to Hardy–Weinberg expectations, and homozygote frequencies correspondingly increased. We can see how this
arises in the case of self-fertilization (the most extreme form of inbreeding) by following the genotype frequencies expected under Mendelian
inheritance (Fig. 4.2). If an A1A2 individual is self-fertilized, heterozygosity is halved in the progeny. By generation 2, the frequency of heterozygotes is 25%, compared to the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
expectation of 50%, and it continues to halve in each subsequent generation.

DEVIATIONS FROM HARDY–WEINBERG EQUILIBRIUM

Table 4.5 Heterozygote deﬁciency in an inbreeding plant population.
Observed numbers for the three genotypes at the phosphoglucomutase-2 locus
in a phlox population are given, along with expected numbers for a random
mating population in Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium. In this species, 78% of the
seeds are estimated to result from self-fertilization
Genotypes

Observed numbers
Hardy–Weinberg expectations

FF

FS

SS

15
9.3

6
17.5

14
8.3

Source: Data from Hartl & Clark (1997) after Levin.

Consequently, deﬁciencies of heterozygotes in populations, compared to Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium expectations, indicate that they
are not mating randomly. There is a deﬁciency of heterozygotes in phlox
plants (Table 4.5). This species shows a high level of self-fertilization.
Note that there are only six heterozygotes, while 17 are expected with
random mating under the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium. While
inbreeding leads to lower than expected heterozygosity, avoidance of
inbreeding and outcrossing can lead to higher than expected heterozygosity. Inbreeding is treated in detail in Chapter 11.

Assortive and dissortive mating
The preferential mating of like-with-like genotypes is called assortive
(or assortative) mating, while the mating of unlike genotypes is referred
to as dissortive (or disassortative) mating. In general, assortive mating
leads to increased homozygosity, while dissortive mating increases
heterozygosity compared to Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium frequencies.
Assortive mating based on phenotypic resemblance has been documented in humans for stature, intelligence and other quantitative characters. Genotypic dissortive mating is common in the self-sterility
systems found in many plant species. In these systems, pollen must
carry a different allele to the female parent (or ovum) for fertilization to
succeed. For example, if the female parent is S1S2, then pollen that succeeds in fertilization carries alleles S3, S4, etc., i.e. not S1 or S2. This type
of mating serves to avoid inbreeding and its deleterious consequences.

Fragmented populations
Allele frequencies diverge in isolated populations due to chance and
selection (Chapter 13). This results in an overall deﬁciency of heterozygotes, even when individual populations are themselves in Hardy–
Weinberg equilibrium. In the extreme case, where one population only
has allele A1 and the other only has allele A2, there are no heterozygotes.

Fragmented populations with
restricted gene ﬂow show
deﬁciencies of heterozygotes
compared to Hardy–Weinberg
expectations

85

86

GENETIC DIVERSITY: SINGLE LOCI

This is much less than the overall expectation of 50% heterozygosity
with two alleles, both at frequencies of 0.5. For example, two isolated
populations of black-footed rock wallabies on Barrow and Mondrain
Islands off the Western Australian coast are ﬁxed for alleles 136 and 124
respectively at the Pa297 microsatellite locus (Table 13.1). A similar situation also exists at several other loci.
An extreme case of isolation exists when two undescribed species are
mistakenly considered as one population. For example, when velvet
worms (see chapter frontispiece) from a single log in the Blue Mountains
near Sydney were genotyped using electrophoresis, genetic diversity was
detected at several loci, but there were no heterozygotes. Two forms that
differed slightly in body colour were both found to be homozygous at all
loci, but they were homozygous for different alleles at 86% of the sampled
loci. This was a clear indication that the two forms (previously considered
to belong to a single species) were not exchanging alleles, even though
they shared the same habitat. Consequently, this led to them being designated as separate species (Briscoe & Tait 1995). Genetic markers can be
used to determine whether there is gene ﬂow between populations, and
so assist in resolving taxonomic uncertainties (Chapter 15).

Extensions of the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium

Three alleles
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
occurs for autosomal loci with any
number of alleles in random
mating populations

Expressions for the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium can be obtained for
more than two alleles at a locus. If there are three alleles A1, A2 and A3 at
a locus with frequencies p, q and r, then the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium genotype frequencies are given by the terms of the binomial
expansion (pqr)2 (Example 4.6). This expression can be derived in a
similar manner to that for a diallelic locus (Table 4.3). Related expressions can easily be derived for any number of alleles at a locus. Example
4.6 illustrates calculation of expected genotype frequencies for a locus
with three alleles in the endangered Laysan ﬁnch.

Example 4.6 Calculating the expected Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
frequencies at a locus with three alleles
For the Laysan ﬁnches in Table 4.2, the frequencies of the 91, 95 and 97
microsatellite alleles are 0.364 (p), 0.352 (q) and 0.284 (r), respectively.
Consequently, the expected genotype frequencies are:

Genotypes
91/91

91/95

91/97

95/95

95/97

97/97

Total

2pq
2pr
q2
2qr
r2
1
Expected
p2
2
2
frequencies 0.364 2 0.364 0.352 2 0.364 0.284 0.352 20.3520.284 0.2842 1
0.132 0.256
0.207
0.124 0.200
0.081 1

EXTENSIONS OF THE HARDY–WEINBERG EQUILIBRIUM

Sex-linked loci
Sex-linked loci occur in different doses in females and males. In
mammals and fruit ﬂies, sex-linked loci are located on the X chromosome. Females have XX sex chromosomes and males XY. The Y chromosome lacks the loci present on the X, and females have two copies of each
locus and males have only one. Conversely, birds and Lepidoptera have
ZZ males and ZW females. Here the Z chromosome has the sex-linked
loci, while the W chromosome is devoid of these loci. Fish have species
with both these forms of sex chromosomes, while plants are most often
hermaphroditic (both sexes in each individual). When dealing with sexlinked loci we will display alleles as superscripts on the X or Z chromosomes (e.g. XA, or ZA) and the Y or W as devoid of sex-linked alleles, to
avoid confusion with autosomal loci.
It is important to distinguish sex-linked loci as they have Hardy–
Weinberg equilibrium genotype frequencies that differ from those for
autosomal loci. Consequently, these differences could be confused with
the effects of inbreeding, assortive mating or population fragmentation.
The procedure for calculating allele frequencies for a sex-linked
locus is similar to the allele counting method used in Example 4.1,
except that we must take account of the different number of copies of
loci in the two sexes. Table 4.6 illustrates genotype frequencies for the
sex-linked 6-pgd locus in a Heliconius butterﬂy from Trinidad, and
Example 4.7 illustrates the estimation of allele frequencies. In
mammals 2/3 of the sex-linked alleles are found in females and 1/3 in
males when there is an equal sex ratio, while these proportions in the
two sexes are reversed in birds and Lepidoptera.

Table 4.6

Numbers of each genotype in females and males at the sex-linked
6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase enzyme (6-pgd) locus in a Heliconius butterﬂy from Trinidad, and the numbers expected with Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium. Note that males have ZZ and females ZW chromosomes

Males

Numbers
Expected

Females

ZFZF

ZFZS

ZSZS

Total

ZFW

ZSW

Total

39
32.1

46
55.7

27
24.2

112
112

29
33.2

33
28.8

62
62

Source: Simpliﬁed from Johnson & Turner (1979).

Example 4.7 Estimation of allele frequencies at the sex-linked 6-pgd
locus in Heliconius butterﬂies from Trinidad
The frequency of the ZF allele is obtained by counting the number of
copies of the F allele in all the females and males, as done previously.
However, for a sex-linked locus we must take account of the different
number of copies of the locus in females (1) and males (2). Thus, the

As sex-linked loci exist in different
numbers of copies in females and
males, they have different
genotype frequencies in the two
sexes

87

88

GENETIC DIVERSITY: SINGLE LOCI

number of F alleles is 2 39 78 from the ZFZF males, 46 from the ZFZS
males and 29 from the ZFW females, totalling 153 F alleles.
We divide this by the total number of allele copies in the sample,
counting two for each male (2 112) and one for each female 62, totalling 286.
Thus, the frequency of the sex-linked ZF allele (p) is
p[(2 39)4629] / [2112 62] 153/286
0.535
Similarly, the frequency of the sex-linked ZS allele (q) is
q[(2 27)46 33)] / [2 112 62] 133/286
0.465
and checking pq 0.5350.4651
Thus, the frequency of the sex-linked F allele is 53.5% and that of S is
46.5%.

Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium for sex-linked loci
Sex-linked loci reach
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
under random mating with
different genotype frequencies in
females and males

If the allele frequencies in males and females are equal, then the population reaches equilibrium allele and genotype frequencies in one generation with random mating (and no other perturbing forces), as for
autosomal loci (Table 4.7). Female genotype frequencies for the three
genotypes in mammals are the same as those for autosomal loci, while
male genotype frequencies are p and q, the allele frequencies.
For birds and Lepidoptera with ZZ males ZW females, the males and
females are reversed from those in Table 4.7. Observed and Hardy–
Weinberg expected numbers for the sex-linked 6-pgd locus in the
Heliconius butterﬂy population are compared in Table 4.6. Neither the
male nor the female numbers deviate signiﬁcantly from Hardy–
Weinberg expectations. There is, however, a suspicious deﬁciency of
heterozygotes in males that could be due to combining individuals
from partially isolated populations.
Populations with different allelic frequencies in the two sexes, do
not attain equilibrium genotype frequencies in one generation, but
approach it asymptotically over generations. Equilibrium is attained
only when allele frequencies are equal in females and males (Falconer &
Mackay 1996).

Table 4.7

Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium genotype frequencies in females
and males for a sex-linked locus following random mating in a species with XX
females and XY males

Females
XA1XA1
p2

Males
XA1XA2
2pq

XA2XA2
q2

XA1Y
p

XA2Y
q

EXTENSIONS OF THE HARDY–WEINBERG EQUILIBRIUM

Polyploids
Many plants and a small number of animals are polyploids. They have
more than two doses of each chromosome. For example, some populations of the endangered grassland daisy in Australia are tetraploid
(Young & Murray 2000). They have four doses of each chromosome
rather than two, as in diploids. We refer to the chromosome number in
tetraploids as 4n, as compared to 2n in diploids. If all chromosomes
come from the same species, it is referred to as an autotetraploid, while
it is an allotetraploid if the chromosomes come from two different
species because of hybridization and chromosome doubling. For
example, a form of cord grass Spartinatownsendii is an allotetraploid
that formed spontaneously on the coast of England following the accidental introduction of Spartina alterniﬂora into the range of S. maritima
(Jones & Wilkins 1971).
In what follows, we consider only tetraploids, but the same principles apply to other even-number ploidies (6n hexaploid, 8n octoploid,
etc). Triploids (3n) usually have abnormal meiosis and are highly sterile.
Allele frequencies in tetraploids are calculated by the same allele
counting method used in diploids. However, remember that there are
four copies of each locus in each individual, and ﬁve genotypes for a
locus with two alleles (Table 4.8). Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium occurs
in tetraploids, but the genotype frequencies are different from those in
diploids (Table 4.8). The genotype frequencies at a locus with two alleles
in an autotetraploid are given as the terms of the binomial expansion (p
q)4. Recall that the genotype frequencies for a diploid are given by the
expansion of (pq)2.
At a polymorphic locus with two alleles in a tetraploid, there are
three heterozygous genotypes, rather than one as found in an equivalent diploid. The three heterozygotes (A1A1A1A2, A1A1A2A2 and A1A2A2A2)
have a total frequency of
He 4p3q 6p2q2 4pq3 2pq (2p2 3pq 2q2)
He 2pq (2 pq)

(4.6)

Thus, the frequency of heterozygotes of 2pq (2 pq) is considerably
greater than the 2pq frequency for an equivalent diploid. This is strictly
correct only for loci close to the centromere in autotetraploids.
Expected heterozygosities for loci distant from the centromere are

Table 4.8

Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium genotype frequencies in a random
mating autotetraploid

Genotypes
A1A1A1A1 A1A1A1A2 A1A1A2A2 A1A2A2A2 A2A2A2A2 Total
Frequency p4

4p3q

Example: p 0.6 and q0.4
Frequency 0.1296
0.3456

6p2q2

4pq3

q4

1

0.3456

0.1536

0.0256

1

Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
occurs in tetraploids, but results
in a higher frequency of
heterozygotes than found in
diploids when allele frequencies
are the same

89

90

GENETIC DIVERSITY: SINGLE LOCI

slightly lower than indicated above, but the difference is likely to be
small (Bever & Felber 1994).
For example, if we have two alleles with frequencies of 0.6 and 0.4,
the frequency of heterozygotes in an autotetraploid is 0.84, compared to
0.48 in an equivalent diploid. This has important implications when we
consider loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding in small populations
(Chapters 10–12), as well as for genetic management of polyploids
(Chapter 16).

More than one locus–linkage disequilibrium
Alleles at different loci are
expected to be randomly
associated in a large random
breeding population at equilibrium,
i.e. to show linkage equilibrium

If there is a deviation from
random combinations of allele
frequencies at different loci
(linkage disequilibrium), the fate
of an allele will be correlated with
that of neighbouring loci

In large randomly breeding populations at equilibrium, alleles at different loci are expected to be randomly associated. Consider two loci, A
and B with alleles A1, A2 and B1, B2, and frequencies pA, qA, pB, qB respectively. These loci and alleles form gametes A1B1, A1B2, A2B1 and A2B2.
Under random mating and independent assortment, these gametes
will have frequencies that are the product of their allele frequencies.
For example, gamete A1B2 will have frequency of pAqB. Random association of alleles at different loci is referred to as linkage equilibrium.
Alleles at most loci in large random mating populations are in linkage
equilibrium (Huttley et al. 1999).
Non-random association of alleles among loci is referred to as
linkage disequilibrium. Chance events in small populations, population bottlenecks, recent mixing of different populations and selection
all may cause non-random associations among loci. Loci that show deviations from linkage equilibrium (linkage disequilibrium) in large
random mating populations are often subject to strong forces of natural
selection. For example, important functional clusters of loci, such as the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC) that is involved in immune
response and disease resistance, show linkage disequilibrium due to
natural selection (see Box 4.2 below).
In small populations, neutral alleles that have no selective difference between genotypes may behave as if they are under selection, due
to non-random association with alleles at nearby loci that are being
strongly selected.
Linkage disequilibrium is of importance in populations of conservation concern, as:
• Linkage disequilibrium will be common in threatened species as
their population sizes are small
• Population bottlenecks frequently cause linkage disequilibrium
• Evolutionary processes are altered when there is linkage disequilibrium
• Functionally important gene clusters exhibiting linkage disequilibrium (such as the MHC) are of major importance to the persistence
of threatened species
• Linkage disequilibrium is one of the signals that can be used to
detect admixture of differentiated populations
• Linkage disequilibrium can be used to estimate genetically effective
population sizes (Chapter 10).

MORE THAN ONE LOCUS – LINKAGE DISEQUILIBRIUM

Table 4.9

Measuring linkage disequilibrium among alleles at two loci, A and
B. Each locus has two alleles A1, A2 and B1, B2 at frequencies pA, qA and pB, qB,
respectively

Gametic types (haplotypes)
A1B1

A1B2

A2B1

A2B2

Actual frequencies
r
Equilibrium frequencies pApB

s
pAqB

t
qApB

u
qAqB

1.0
1.0

Disequilibrium Drust
Numerical example pA 0.7, qA 0.3, pB 0.7, qB 0.3
Actual frequencies
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.3
Equilibrium frequencies 0.70.7 0.70.3 0.30.7 0.30.3
0.49
0.21
0.21
0.09
Disequilibrium D0.70.30.0 0.0 0.21

To demonstrate the effects of linkage disequilibrium, let us consider an
example where two different monomorphic populations with genotypes A1A1B1B1 and A2A2B2B2, are combined and allowed to mate at
random. Each autosomal locus is expected to attain individual
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium with one generation of random mating
(see above). However, alleles at different loci do not attain linkage equilibrium frequencies in one generation, they only approach it asymptotically at a rate dependent on the recombination frequency between the
two loci. In the above pooled population, let 70% of the pooled population have genotype A1A1B1B1 and 30% have genotype A2A2B2B2. There are
equal numbers of males and females for each of the two genotypes. Only
two gametic types (haplotypes) are produced, A1B1 and A2B2, so progeny
in the next generation will consist of only three genotypes A1A1B1B1,
A1A2B1B2 and A2A2B2B2, and none of the other six possible genotypes.
These loci are clearly in linkage disequilibrium.
In subsequent generations, the two other possible gametic types
A1B2 and A2B1 are generated by recombination in the multiply heterozygous genotype. For example, A1B1/A2B2 heterozygotes produce recombinant gametes A1B2 and A2B1 at frequencies of 21 c, where c is the rate of
recombination, as well as non-recombinant A1B1, A2B2 gametes in frequencies of 12 (1c). Eventually all nine possible genotypes will be
formed and attain an equilibrium frequency, i.e. linkage equilibrium.
As in the above example, until equilibrium is reached, genotypes
will deviate from their expected frequencies. Linkage disequilibrium is
the deviation of gametic frequencies from their equilibrium frequencies (Table 4.9).
The measure of linkage disequilibrium D is the difference between
the product of the frequencies of the A1B1 and A2B2 gametes (referred to
as r and u) and the product of the frequencies of the A1B2 and A2B1
gametes (s and t):

Linkage disequilibrium is measured
as the deviation of haplotype
frequencies from linkage
equilibrium

91

92

GENETIC DIVERSITY: SINGLE LOCI

D ru st

(4.7)

Note that under equilibrium ru st, since both ru and st are equal to
pAqApBqB, and D 0. In our example, the four gametic types had frequencies of 0.7, 0, 0, and 0.3 in the ﬁrst generation, so D 0.70.300 
0.21. The maximum value of D is 0.25, and the minimum 0.25. The
maximum value of D occurs when the frequencies of the four gametic
types are 0.5, 0, 0, and 0.5.
Linkage disequilibrium is found in the MHC, a cluster of loci
involved in immune response, transplant rejection and ﬁghting disease
organisms (Box 4.2). In general, loci further apart than 1 centimorgan
(1% crossing-over) in large random mating populations do not show
linkage disequilibrium unless they involve a cluster of loci that are
subject to balancing selection (Chapter 9). Linkage disequilibrium
between pairs of loci in the MHC is generally greater for more closely
linked loci (Hedrick et al. 1991). Linkage disequilibrium at the MHC is a
feature of all well-studied vertebrates.

Box 4.2 Linkage disequilibrium at the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) in humans
The MHC is a cluster of linked loci involved in immune response that is found in all
vertebrates (Edwards & Hedrick 1998). These loci have a major role in ﬁghting
pathogens. There are consistent non-random associations of alleles at different loci
(linkage disequilibrium) in the MHC. The data below show the associations between
alleles at the HLA-A and HLA-B loci in Caucasians based on 2106 haplotypes (data
after Spiess 1989). The data have been simpliﬁed to show only four alleles at one
locus and three at the other. There are actually many more alleles (for this reason, the
total of allele frequencies for each locus in our example do not add to unity).
Note the non-random association between alleles at the two loci, as shown by
the sign of the deviation from expectation. All of these are statistically signiﬁcant deviations. For example, the frequency of the A1–B7 haplotype was 0.0074. At linkage
equilibrium it would be expected to have a frequency of 0.14390.11430.0164,
so that it shows a deﬁciency of 0.0090. This deﬁciency is the linkage disequilibrium
associated with this haplotype and is 55% of the maximum value that D could have
for alleles with these frequencies.
Haplotype frequencies for HLA-A and HLA-B loci. The sign after each ﬁgure
indicates a deﬁciency (), or excess of () of the haplotype

HLA-A alleles

HLA-B allele

B7
B8
B35
B44

Overall HLA-B

A1

A2

A3

allele frequencies

0.0074()
0.0672()
0.0029()
0.0089()

0.0260()
0.0110()
0.0178()
0.0503()

0.0477()
0.0019()
0.0257()
0.0068()

0.1143
0.0971
0.1052
0.1242

0.2855

0.1335

Overall HLA-A allele frequencies
0.1439

SUMMARY

Linkage disequilibrium decays as recombination produces underrepresented gametes. Recombination results from independent segregation of unlinked loci and crossing-over between linked loci. In our
ﬁrst example above, linkage disequilibrium decayed with random
mating as A1B2 and A2B1 gametes were produced by recombination in
multiply heterozygous genotypes A1B1A2B2 and A1B2A2B1. The rate of
decay of disequilibrium depends on the recombination frequency as
shown below. After t generations, the remaining disequilibrium is
(Falconer & Mackay 1996):
Dt D0 (1 c)t

Linkage disequilibrium decays
at a rate dependent on the
recombination rate between the
loci

(4.8)

where c is the recombination frequency. The amount of recombination
between two loci depends on their positions on a chromosome. It generally increases with the distance between loci, reaching a maximum
value of 0.5 for independently assorting loci on different chromosomes.
Loci do not have to be linked to show disequilibrium. With unlinked loci,
c 0.5, meaning that the disequilibrium halves each generation and is
rapidly lost. Conversely, with tightly linked loci, disequilibrium decays
very slowly. For example, in the case in Table 4.9, D0 was 0.21, so for loci on
separate chromosomes it would drop to 0.21 (10.5) 0.105 in a single
generation. For linked loci showing only 10% recombination, it would
drop much less – to 0.21 (10.1) 0.189. Fig. 4.3 illustrates the decline in
linkage disequilibrium over 10 generations for loci with different recombination rates. Linkage disequilibrium declines rapidly for unlinked
loci, with approximate linkage equilibrium reached in ﬁve generations.
Conversely, decay of disequilibrium is slow for closely linked loci.
Fig. 4.3 Decay in linkage
disequilibrium between two loci
under random mating, with
recombination frequencies of 0.05,
0.1, 0.2 and 0.5 (unlinked loci). The
proportion of linkage
disequilibrium remaining (Dt / D0 ) is
plotted against generations (t).

Summary
1. Genetic diversity within a population is characterized by the frequencies of each of the genotypes. This is normally simpliﬁed by
reporting the allele (gene) frequencies at each locus.
2. In large random mating populations with no perturbing factors,
the allele and genotype frequencies at autosomal loci are in equilibrium after one generation (Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium).
3. Deviations from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium genotype frequencies allow us to detect inbreeding, population fragmentation, migration and selection.

93

94

GENETIC DIVERSITY: SINGLE LOCI

4. Inbreeding reduces the frequency of heterozygotes compared to
random mating.
5. If there is linkage disequilibrium between allele frequencies at
different loci, the fate of an allele will be affected by that of neighbouring loci. Linkage disequilibrium decays towards equilibrium at a rate
dependent on recombination frequency between the loci.
FURTHER READING

Falconer & Mackay (1996) Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. Contains a very
clear introduction to population genetics, with a focus on animal and plant
breeding.
Hartl & Clark (1997) Principles of Population Genetics. Clear introduction to population genetics with a molecular evolutionary focus.
Hedrick (2000) Genetics of Populations. Clearly written coverage of population
genetics with an evolutionary slant.
PROBLEMS

4.1 Allele frequency: Estimate the frequencies for the M and N
alleles in the following sample of humans from Greenland (after
Falconer & Mackay 1996).

Blood group
genotype
MM MN NN Total
Numbers 475 89
5
569
4.2 Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium: What are the expected
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium frequencies and numbers at the MN
blood group locus in the human population described in Problem 4.1?
Do the observed numbers differ from those expected according to the
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium?
4.3 Allele frequencies for a locus with four alleles: What are the frequencies of the 85, 91, 93 and 95 alleles at the 11B4E microsatellite
locus in the endangered Laysan ﬁnch of Hawaii (data of Tarr et al.
1998)? (The allele designations are sizes of PCR fragments.) Check that
the allele frequencies add to unity.
Genotypes
85/85 85/91 85/93 85/95 91/91 91/93 91/95 93/93 93/95 95/95
Numbers 2
13
0
0
15
2
12
0
0
0

4.4 Observed heterozygosity: What is the observed heterozygosity
for the microsatellite locus in Laysan ﬁnches in Problem 4.3?
4.5 Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium for a triallelic locus: What are the
expected genotypic frequencies for the microsatellite locus in Laysan
ﬁnches from Table 4.2? What are the expected numbers? Do the
observed numbers agree with Hardy–Weinberg expectations?
4.6 Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium in trisomics: If the frequencies of
the F and S alleles at an electrophoretic locus situated on chromosome
21 in humans are 0.6 and 0.4, what are the Hardy–Weinberg equilib-

PROBLEMS

rium genotype frequencies in a population of Down’s Syndrome sufferers (they have three doses of chromosome 21)?
4.7 Random mating: The three alleles at the human ABO blood
group have frequencies of about 0.3 A, 0.1 B and 0.6 O in Caucasians.
What is the expected frequency of AAOO matings?
4.8 Random mating: Is the human population in Ashibetsu, Japan,
mating at random with respect to the MN blood group locus? The
number of people with each of the blood group genotypes were (from
Strickberger 1985 after Matsunaga & Itoh):

MM
406

MN NN Total
744 332 1482

and the 741 mating couples had the following distribution of genotypes:

MMMM
MMMN
MMNN
MNMN
MNNN
NN NN

58
202
88
190
162
41

4.9 Effective number of alleles: What is the effective number of
alleles for the eider duck egg-white protein locus described in Table
4.1?
4.10 Allele frequency for a recessive: Assume that hernias in golden
lion tamarins are inherited as an autosomal recessive and that 96 individuals have the normal phenotype and 4 have hernias. What is the
frequency of the recessive allele causing hernias?
4.11 Linkage disequilibrium: What is the linkage disequilibrium D
in a population with the following gametic frequencies? What will be
the gametic frequencies at equilibrium?

Frequency

A1B1
0.2

A1B2 A2B1
0.5
0.2

A2B2
0.1

4.12 Decay of linkage disequilibrium: If the linkage disequilibrium
between two loci D is 0.20 initially, and the two loci show 5% recombination, what will be the value of D after 20 generations?

95

Chapter 5

Characterizing genetic
diversity: quantitative variation
Terms:
Additive,
additive variance,
dominance variance,
epistatic variance,
genotype environment interaction,
heritability,
heterosis,
interaction variance,
normal distribution,
overdominant,
quantitative genetic variation,
quantitative trait locus (QTL),
realized heritability,
reproductive ﬁtness,
selection differential

Distribution of adult body weights
in golden lion tamarins, a
quantitative character.

Characters of interest in conservation biology are primarily
quantitative. Variation for these traits is due to both genetic and
environmental factors. Components of quantitative genetic
variation determine the ability to undergo adaptive evolution, the
effects of inbreeding on reproductive ﬁtness, and the effects of
outcrossing on ﬁtness

IMPORTANCE OF QUANTITATIVE CHARACTERS

Importance of quantitative characters
In the previous chapter, we considered variation due to segregation of
alleles at single loci. However, the characteristics of most importance in
evolution, and in the conservation of evolutionary potential, do not
show such simple inheritance. The quantitative (or metric, or polygenic)
characters of most concern to conservation biologists are those related
to reproductive ﬁtness. This is number of fertile offspring contributed
by an individual that survive to reproductive age. Such characters
include all components of individual survival, reproductive rate,
mating ability, longevity, etc. In endangered species quantitative variation for reproductive ﬁtness is involved in the major genetic concerns in
conservation biology, namely:
• Reduction in reproductive ﬁtness due to inbreeding (inbreeding
depression)
• Loss of evolutionary potential due to small population sizes
• Impact of crossing between different populations on ﬁtness,
whether beneﬁcial (heterosis), or deleterious (outbreeding depression)
• Effects of translocating individuals from one environment to
another.
Study of this kind of variation is termed ‘quantitative’ genetics. For
example, Box 5.1 illustrates quantitative genetic variation for resistance
to an introduced root rot fungus in an Australian tree, and its conservation implications.
The four issues deﬁned above are explored in detail in Chapters
10–14. Here we introduce the concepts underlying quantitative genetics, its terminology, and its modes of analysis and prediction.
It may be thought that molecular measures of genetic diversity
answer the questions we wish to know in conservation genetics.
However, correlations between molecular and quantitative measures of
genetic diversity are low (see below). Consequently, molecular measures
of genetic variation provide, at best, only a very imprecise indication of
evolutionary potential.

Box 5.1 Quantitative genetic variation in resistance to an
introduced root rot fungus in a Western
Australian eucalypt tree and its conservation
implications (Stukely & Crane 1994)
The introduced ‘dieback’ root rot fungus is known to attack 90 Western Australian
native plant species, many rare or endangered. It has caused serious degradation to
many highly diverse plant communities in the southwest of Western Australia,
where tourism to view the wildﬂowers is a major industry. One victim of this dieback
is jarrah, a hardwood eucalypt tree of economic importance, and the ecosystem it
supports. Areas of jarrah forest that suffered dieback have previously been
replanted with exotics, such as pines and eastern Australian eucalypts (that are

The characters of greatest
concern in conservation biology
show quantitative variation among
individuals

97

98

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

relatively resistant to dieback) with subsequent loss, or alteration of habitat for birds,
mammals and invertebrates. To avoid such habitat loss, the objective now is to
revegetate with native species.
Occasional healthy jarrah trees persist in dieback affected sites, but it was not
known whether these had fortuitously escaped infection, or whether they were
genetically resistant to the disease. Seedlings of 16 families were either inoculated
with the fungus, or kept as uninfected controls in an adjacent, disease-free site. There
were clear and signiﬁcant differences among families in mortality rates at six years of
age in inoculated treatments, as shown in the ﬁgure below. Mortality rates ranged
from below 30% in family 5 to over 90% in family 11. Conversely, uninfected controls
did not differ signiﬁcantly in mortality. This demonstrates that there is genetic variation in resistance to the fungus. Since the families showed a continuous range of mortality, quantitative genetic variation is present, rather than single locus variation.

Heritable factors were responsible for 85% of the variation in resistance among
families. In a short-term experiment where stems were inoculated with the fungus,
43% of the variation in resistance among individuals was attributable to heritable
factors (a heritability of 43%).
The ﬁnding of heritable resistance indicates that replanting can be done with
dieback-resistant jarrah, rather than with introduced species, such as pines, that suppress other species. Consequently, forest habitat will be maintained for other threatened species. Further, other affected species (some of them rare or endangered)
may also show genetic variation for resistance.

Properties of quantitative characters
Quantitative characters typically
show continuous rather than
discrete distributions, are
inﬂuenced by many loci and are
strongly affected by the
environment

Properties of quantitative characters are contrasted with those of qualitative (usually single locus) traits in Table 5.1. Quantitative characters
typically have continuous, approximately normal distributions, rather
than discrete distributions (Fig. 5.1). They include characters such as
reproductive ﬁtness, longevity, height, weight, disease resistance, etc.

PROPERTIES OF QUANTITATIVE CHARACTERS

Table 5.1

Comparison of the characteristics of quantitative and qualitative characters

Quantitative

Qualitative

Distributions
Genotype–phenotype
relationship
Loci

Unimodal and continuous
Incomplete

Multimodal and discrete
Close

Many

Few

Environmental effects
Parameters for describing

Often large
Means, variances, h2, VA

Usually small

Examples

Reproductive ﬁtness, weight, height

p, q
Brown vs. yellow snail shells,
Adh Fast vs. Slow
electrophoretic mobility,
DNA sequence differences
at the haemoglobin locus

Fig. 5.1 Distributions of phenotypes for ﬁve quantitative characters that are
components of reproductive ﬁtness: (a) litter size in mice, (b) lifetime production of
litters per female in endangered black-footed ferrets, (c) clutch size in starlings, (d) clutch
size in a rattlesnake and (e) time to ﬂowering in thale cress plants. Normal distributions
are ﬁtted to the distributions. The large number of non-breeding individuals in blackfooted ferrets is probably due to poor adaptation to captive conditions. Data from (a)
Falconer & Mackay (1996), (b) Russell (1999), (c) and (d) Wright (1968) and (e) Jones &
Wilkins (1971).

As we shall see, quantitative characters are inﬂuenced by many loci plus
environmental inﬂuences, such as nutritional state. We are thus concerned with the inheritance of differences between individuals that are
of degree rather than of kind.
It is not possible to directly infer genotype from observed phenotype
for quantitative characters. Individuals with the same genotype may

The association between
genotype and phenotype is
typically weaker for quantitative
than qualitative characters

99

100

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

have different phenotypic values. Conversely, individuals with the same
phenotypic value may have very different genotypes. For example,
black-footed ferrets producing six litters (Fig. 5.1b) will, on average,
carry more alleles for large numbers of litters than those ferrets producing only one litter. However, both high and low groups will contain
some animals whose reproductive performance is heavily inﬂuenced by
positive or negative environmental inﬂuences during their development.

Environmental variation
A proportion of the observed
variation among individuals for
quantitative characters is
attributable to environmental,
rather than genetic, causes

Environmental differences affecting phenotype may arise from many
inﬂuences, including food supply, living conditions, disease status, etc.
in animals, and differences in soil fertility, temperature, light, crowding, etc. in plants. The endangered Seychelles warbler elegantly illustrates the impact of environmental factors on a quantitative trait
closely associated with reproductive ﬁtness. On Cousin Island, annual
production of offspring surviving to one year of age averaged 0.28 young
per pair. Within this island, offspring production was 7.3 times higher
in high-quality than in low-quality territories. When birds were translocated to Aride Island, where the insect food supply was over three
times greater than Cousin Island, production of young for the same
birds rose by a factor of 44 (Komdeur et al. 1998).

Basis of quantitative genetic variation
Quantitative characters are
typically inﬂuenced by genetic
variation at many loci

Quantitative characters are
analysed using statistical
parameters including means,
variances, covariances, etc.

The underlying genetic basis to quantitative characters is that they are
affected by a number of loci, each possessing alleles that add to, or
detract from, the magnitude of the character. Genetic diversity for
quantitative characters in outbred populations is due to the segregation of multiple polymorphic Mendelian loci, referred to as quantitative trait loci (QTL). The loci affecting quantitative characters,
individually, show the usual Mendelian properties of segregation and
linkage (see Frankham & Weber 2000).
A major challenge in the study of quantitative genetics is to determine how much of the observed variation is due to genetics, and how
much to the environment (i.e. to partition the variation into genetic
and environmental components). This is typically accomplished by
studying the resemblances among relatives who share a proportion of
their genetic constitution. Consequently, the parameters used to
describe quantitative traits, and to partition variation, are statistical
values: means, variances, covariances, regressions and correlations in
groups of organisms. These statistics are described in Box 5.2, using data
from a species of endangered Tahitian land snail.

BASIS OF QUANTITATIVE GENETIC VARIATION

Box 5.2 Statistics used to describe and analyse
quantitative characters, illustrated using data for
shell width in an endangered Tahitian snail
The following data describe the shell width for parents and offspring of 40 families of
an endangered Partula snail originating from the island of Moorea in Tahiti (data from
Murray & Clarke 1968). This and several other endangered species have been
depleted due to predation by an introduced carnivorous snail. Each pair of data
points represents the mean shell width of a female and male parent (P) together with
the mean shell width (mm) in their offspring (O).

Parent
means
P

Offspring
means
O

Parent
means
P

Offspring
means
O

Parent
means
P

Offspring
means
O

6.8
6.9
6.9
7.1
7.3
7.3
7.3
7.4
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5
7.5

7.3
7.4
7.6
7.5
7.3
7.2
7.4
7.7
7.6
7.5
7.7
7.4
7.8
7.6

7.5
7.6
7.6
7.6
7.6
7.6
7.6
7.7
7.7
7.8
7.8
7.8
7.8

7.3
7.7
7.7
7.9
7.4
7.5
7.4
7.6
7.9
7.5
7.8
7.9
7.6

7.8
7.9
7.9
7.9
7.9
7.9
8.0
8.0
8.0
8.1
8.1
8.1
8.5

7.5
7.6
7.7
7.7
7.7
7.8
7.7
7.9
7.8
7.8
7.8
7.9
8.1

The mean shell length of parents P is:
P

n

兺 P / n[6.8 6.9… 8.5] / 407.65 mm
i1

i

Similarly the mean for the offspring O is
n

兺 O / n7.63 mm

O

i

i1

The variance is a measure of the spread of the data around the mean. The phenotypic variance for the parents, VP , is

VP 

n

兺 (P  P) / (n1) [(6.8 7.65) … (8.5 7.65) ] / (40 1)
2

2

2

i

i1

0.125
The variance for the offspring VO is

VO 

n

兺 (O  O)

2

i1

0.043

i

/ (n1) [(7.3 7.63)2 … (8.1 7.63)2] / (40 1)

101

102

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

The standard deviations for parents and offspring, SDP and SDO, are the square
roots of the respective variances. Standard deviations are usually presented as a
measure of spread around the mean, as they have the same units of measurement as
the data (e.g. mm), while the unit for variance is squared (mm2).

SDP  √0.125 0.354
SDO  √0.043 0.207
Often a data set is described as mean SD, so for parents shell width is 7.650.35.
The covariance between offspring and parents (CovPO) measures the extent to
which they vary in concert (), vary independently (0), or in opposition (). It is
deﬁned as

CovPO 

n

兺 (P  P) (O  O) / (n1)
i1

i

i

[(6.8 7.65) (7.37.63)…(8.5 7.65) (8.17.63)]/(401)
0.050
The correlation between offspring and parents (rPO) is a standardized measure of
the extent to which they vary in concert. Correlations range from 1 to1. It is
deﬁned as

rPO CovPO / √(VP .VO)0.050 / √(0.125 0.043) 0.679
Thus, there is a positive correlation between offspring and parents; parents with
wider shells have offspring with wider than average shells, while parents with narrower shells have offspring with narrower than average shells.
The regression of offspring on parent (bOP) is the slope of the line of best ﬁt
relating offspring and parents, as shown in the ﬁgure above. It is deﬁned as

bOP CovPO / VP 0.050 / 0.125 0.40
This regression is of major importance as it measures the degree to which variation
is due to additive genetic causes (heritability) – it is the measure of genetic diversity
for quantitative characters. The heritability is 40% for Partula shell width, meaning that
40% of the observed variation is due to additively inherited differences and 60% to
minor differences in the environment experienced by different individuals.
Heritability is discussed in detail below.
Further details about the above measures are given in statistics textbooks. They
are easily calculated using scientiﬁc calculators, or statistical or spreadsheet software.

The heritability (h 2) is used to
measure genetic diversity for
quantitative characters

One of the central concepts of quantitative genetics is that of heritability. In its simplest form, this is the proportion of the total phenotypic
variance in a population due to genetic differences among individuals.
More speciﬁcally, heritability is the proportion of phenotypic variance
attributable to genetic variation that parents can pass on to their offspring.
Thus, it is the heritability of a character in a population that determines its evolutionary potential. Two examples illustrate this concept.
The Wollemi pine lacks genetic variation at hundreds of DNA marker
loci (Hogbin et al. 2000), and all individuals tested were susceptible to

METHODS FOR DETECTING QUANTITATIVE GENETIC VARIATION

dieback fungus (Woodford 2000). Variation among trees is of entirely
environmental origin and the capacity of this species to evolve is close
to zero. In contrast, resistance to root rot fungus in jarrah trees has a signiﬁcant heritability (Box 5.1), so jarrahs can evolve to resist the introduced dieback fungus.

Methods for detecting quantitative genetic
variation
Three methods are used to determine whether a portion of phenotypic
variance for quantitative characters derives from genetic variation
among individuals:
• Resemblances among relatives
• Variation within and among populations
• Comparisons of inbred with outbred populations.
Because of the major impact that environment can have on quantitative
characters, it is critical that all comparisons, whether of families, or
populations, be carried out contemporaneously in standardized environments.
By deﬁnition, the more closely related two individuals are, the more
similar will be their genetic makeup, being greatest between identical
twins (or clones), lower among full-sibs or between parents and offspring, and least among unrelated individuals. A correlation in phenotypic resemblance for relatives is an indication of heritable variation, as
seen for shell width in endangered Partula snails (Box 5.2). Similarly, a
higher correlation for closer than more distant relatives demonstrates
genetic variation for a character. Such resemblances among relatives
have been demonstrated for innumerable characters in many outbreeding species of animals and plants. Perhaps the best known are analyses
of personality traits, mental abilities, disease risk, etc. by comparisons
of monozygotic (genetically identical) with dizygotic (50% genetic identity) twins in humans.
A very similar rationale can be applied to comparisons of individuals derived from different populations, when they are compared under
the same environmental conditions (i.e. a ‘common garden’ experiment). Members of the same population will, on average, have greater
genetic similarity with each other than with members of other populations. If analysis of the total phenotypic variation, assessed across all
individuals, reveals that a part is attributable to population of origin,
then there is genetic variation among populations and, hence, a
genetic basis underlying the trait. For example, two populations of
tobacco differed in corolla length when grown in the same conditions
(Box 5.3).
Genetic variation among individuals within highly inbred (homozygous) populations is reduced in comparison with that in outbred
populations of the same species. In highly inbred populations, all phenotypic variation is due solely to environmental causes. Thus, if phenotypic variation within inbred populations is less than that in

Genetic variation for quantitative
characters can be detected using
data from different genotypes or
families compared under the same
environmental conditions

103

104

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

outbred populations, raised under the same environmental conditions, then a genetic component underlying the trait is clearly
present. This is illustrated for corolla length in tobacco in Box 5.3.
Variation was greatest in the F2 generation. This generation displays
both environmental and genetic heterogeneity among individuals.
The extent to which the outbred variation exceeds that within the
genetically invariant genotypes (both parents and the F1) is the genetic
variation (see Example 5.1).

Box 5.3 Quantitative genetic variation for corolla length
in tobacco (after Strickberger 1985, based on East
1916)
In a classical study on inheritance of a quantitative character, East crossed two highly
inbred (homozygous) parental populations (P1 and P2 ) of tobacco that differed in
corolla length. He grew them and their F1 and F2 (created by self-pollination of F1
individuals) crosses contemporaneously in the same ﬁeld. Quantitative genetic
variation in corolla length was shown by the difference in mean between the
two parental populations and their non-overlapping distributions (under the same
environmental conditions).

PARTITIONING GENETIC AND ENVIRONMENTAL VARIATION

The study demonstrated genetic variation for corolla length by a second means,
as variation was greater in the F2 than in the parents or the F1. If the loci affecting corolla
length show normal Mendelian segregation, we expect the F1 to show similar variation to the parental populations, while the F2 should show increased variation due to
allelic segregation. For example, if the parental populations are A1A1, and A2A2, the F1
will be A1A2, while the F2 will show segregation with 1⁄4 A1A1, 1⁄2 A1A2 and 1⁄4 A2A2. East
observed this type of segregation in his experiments. The variation among individuals
within the parental populations, and within the F1 is due to environmental variation,
while the variation in the F2 is due to environmental variation plus genetic variation
due to the segregation of multiple Mendelian loci, each of relatively small effect.
East veriﬁed that there were genetic differences among individuals in the F2 by
breeding F2 individuals with different corolla lengths and showing that their offspring
differed on average in the same directions as the parents. The increase in variance in
the F2 over that within the parent and F1 populations measures the extent of genetic
variation (Example 5.1).

Partitioning genetic and environmental variation
So far we have simply stated that the phenotypic value of an individual
is the consequence of the alleles it inherits together with the environmental inﬂuences it has encountered during its development.
Algebraically, the above statement can be expressed:
PGE

(5.1)

where Pphenotype, Ggenotype and Eenvironment. We now
describe how the genetic component can be partitioned from the environmental component.
Phenotypic variance (VP) within a population represents the sum
total of all contributions from genetic diversity (VG), the environment
(VE) and interactions between genotypes and environment (often
termed G E interactions):
VP VG VE 2 CovGE

(5.2)

where CovGE is the covariance between genetic and environmental
effects. A numerical example is given in Example 5.1 (note that in this
example the covariance term is negligible as the plants were raised
under the same conditions). Of the variation in corolla length in the F2,
68% was due to segregation of polymorphic loci (VG) and 32% to environmental variation (VE).

Example 5.1 Partitioning genetic and environmental variation
The variances for corolla length in tobacco for the data in Box 5.3 are
48 and 32 for the two homozygous parent populations, 46 in the F1
population and 130.5 in the F2. The variances in both parents and the
F1 are due only to environmental variance VE. Consequently, we have
three separate estimates of VE and average them.

Genetic and environmental
variation can be partitioned using
data from different genotypes or
families compared under the same
environmental conditions

105

106

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

VE (VP1 VP2 VF1) / 3(4832 46) / 342
Variation in the F2 is due to both genetic diversity and environmental
variation
VF2 VG VE 130.5
Since we have an estimate of VE, we can rearrange this equation to
estimate VG, as follows:
VG VF2 VE 130.54288.5
Thus, of the total F2 variance in corolla length, 88.5/130.568% is due
to segregation of polymorphic loci and the remaining 32% due to
environmental variation.

The covariance term in Equation 5.2 is expected to be zero if conditions
for different genotypes are equalized by randomly allocating individuals across the range of environments. This is routinely done with quantitative genetic experiments in domestic animals and plants, where
cultivation or rearing conditions can be standardized, but is difﬁcult to
achieve in wild populations. For example, in territorial species of birds
and mammals, the genetically ﬁttest parents may obtain the best territories (and the least ﬁt, the poorest territories). Offspring inheriting the
best ﬁtness genotypes also ‘inherit’ the best environments (and the least
ﬁt offspring genotypes are reared in the worst environments). This
results in a genotypeenvironment correlation that increases the
phenotypic resemblance among relatives.

Genotypeenvironment interaction
Genotypes may show different
performances in different
environments, termed
genotype environment
interactions

Differences in performance of genotypes in different environments are
referred to as genotypeenvironment interactions. They typically
develop when populations adapt to particular environmental conditions, and survive and reproduce better in their native conditions than
in other environments. Genotypeenvironment interactions may take
the form of altered rankings of performance in different environments
or magnitudes of differences that vary in diverse environments. A classical example is provided by the growth and survival of transplanted
individuals of the sticky cinquefoil plant from high, medium and low
elevations in California (Fig. 5.2). When grown in each of the three environments, strains generally grew best in the environment from which
they originated and poorest in the most dissimilar environment.
Genotypeenvironment interactions are of major signiﬁcance to
the genetic management of endangered species, as follows:
• The reproductive ﬁtness of translocated individuals cannot be predicted if there are signiﬁcant genotypeenvironment interactions
• Success of reintroduced populations may be compromised by
genetic adaptation to captivity – superior genotypes under captive
conditions may perform relatively poorly when released to the wild

GENOTYPE  ENVIRONMENT INTERACTION

Fig. 5.2 Genotype
environment interaction in the
sticky cinquefoil plant. Strains of
cinquefoil derived from high,
medium and low altitudes were
transplanted into their native and
different locations in California and
their growth and survival
monitored (after Clausen et al.
1940). Populations generally grow
best in their own environment and
poorest in the environment most
dissimilar from their own.

• Mixing of genetic material from fragmented populations may generate genotypes that do not perform well under some, or all, conditions
• Knowledge of genotypeenvironment interaction can strongly
inﬂuence the choice of populations for return to the wild.
These issues are discussed in Chapters 15–18.
Genotypeenvironment interactions must be distinguished from
the genotypeenvironment covariances and correlations described
above. Genotype environment correlations occur when genotypes are
non-randomly distributed over environments. By contrast, genotype 
environment interactions are detected by comparing all genotypes in
several common garden environments; if their relative performances

107

108

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

Genotypeenvironment
interactions are most common
when genotypic differences and
environmental differences are
large. Reproductive ﬁtness
characters are usually more prone
to genotype environment
interactions than other characters

differ in the different environments there is genotypeenvironment
interaction.
The likelihood of genotype environment interactions increases
with the magnitude of both genetic and environmental differences.
Thus, it is most likely to be detected in species with wide geographic,
ecological or altitudinal ranges (Fig. 5.2; Frankham & Weber 2000).
Further, quantitative traits closely associated with reproductive ﬁtness
appear to be more prone to genotypeenvironment interactions than
characters more peripheral to ﬁtness (peripheral characters). As plants
are immobile, they often exhibit local genetic adaptation to their immediate environment (soil chemical composition, grazing pressure, wind,
etc.), sometimes over remarkably short distances (Briggs & Walters
1997). Thus, genotypeenvironment interactions are more likely in
plants than animals.

The need for contemporary comparisons and
control populations
Comparisons of genotypes
must be carried out
contemporaneously under
identical conditions, so that
environmental differences are not
confused with genetic ones

Detection of genetic changes over
time requires that comparisons be
made with a genetically stable
control population

Genetic diversity for quantitative
characters is partitioned into
components reﬂecting adaptive
evolutionary potential (VA),
susceptibility to inbreeding
depression (VD) and effects of
outbreeding (VI )

Considerable care must be taken to discern whether change in a quantitative trait in a population results from genetic or environmental
causes. Changes in captive populations may derive from inbreeding
depression, outcrossing, or from unwitting improvement in husbandry
of the population. Juvenile survival increased with year of birth in both
the endangered Mexican wolf and the red wolf, presumably as a result
of improved husbandry in spite of increased inbreeding and lack of outcrossing (Kalinowski et al. 1999). Thus, it is imperative to compare genotypes contemporaneously under the same conditions. For example, the
deleterious effects of inbreeding on captive mammals were studied by
comparing the juvenile survival of inbred and non-inbred offspring
matched for zoo, enclosure in zoo, year of birth and density of population (Ballou & Ralls 1982).
To detect genetic changes over time (e.g. inbreeding depression, or
change due to selection) genetically stable populations must be maintained for comparison with the population of interest. Uncontrolled
environmental ﬂuctuations from generation to generation can then be
detected by phenotypic changes in the genetically stable control
populations. Control populations include randomly mated outbred
populations, related species, or samples derived from stored seed or
cryopreserved embryos.

Partitioning of quantitative genetic variation
In the previous sections we discussed how total phenotypic variation
can be partitioned into its genetic and environmental components. In a
similar manner, the genetic variance, VG, can be partitioned into components with critical importance in conservation.
Quantitative genetic variation has contributions from the average

PARTITIONING OF QUANTIATIVE GENETIC VARIATION

effects of loci VA, from their dominance deviations VD, and from interaction (epistatic) deviations among gene loci, VI.
VG VA VD VI

(5.3)

These are referred to as additive genetic variance (VA), dominance variance (VD) and interaction variance (VI). Each of these components has
major conservation implications, as follows:
• VA and especially the ratio VA/VP (the heritability) reﬂect the adaptive
evolutionary potential of the population for the character under
study
• VD reﬂects susceptibility to inbreeding depression
• VI inﬂuences the effects of outbreeding, whether beneﬁcial or deleterious.
In what follows, we indicate the genetic basis of these components of
genetic variation and how they are measured (see also Chapters 8, 12
and 15).

A single locus model illustrating partitioning of
variance
To understand the meaning of VA and VD, consider a single locus model
with two alleles per locus. The three genotypes A1A1, A1A2 and A2A2 are
assigned genotypic values of a, d and a (Fig. 5.3). Homozygotes differ in
genotypic value by 2a, and the heterozygotes differ from the mean of
the two homozygotes by d.
Genotypic values for additive, dominant and overdominant loci are
illustrated in Fig. 5.4. For an additive locus, heterozygotes are intermediate between homozygotes, so the three genotypes have values of a ,0
and a, with d being zero. If the A1 allele is dominant (A2 recessive) the

Genotype

A1 A 1

A1A2

A2A2

Fig. 5.3 Genotypic values
assigned to the three genotypes at
a locus along with their frequencies
with random mating.

|_____|________|_______________|
Genotypic
values

a

d

Frequencies p2

q2

2pq

Additive
(d 0)
a
0
a

a

0

Dominant (A1)
(d a)

•

•

Overdominant
(d 2a)

•

•

•
•
A1A1 A1A2 A2A2

•
A1A1 A1A2 A2A2

•

•

A1A1 A1A2 A2A2

Fig. 5.4 Genotypic values for
additive, dominant and
overdominant loci.

109

110

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

genotypes have values, a, a and a, respectively, so d a. Conversely, if
A1 is recessive, the genotypes have values a, a and a, and d a. For
an overdominant (heterozygote advantage) locus, the genotypic values
are a, a and a, so d 2a. Example 5.2 illustrates the computation of a
and d for litter sizes at the Booroola locus (B) in Merino sheep. The B
allele is partially dominant in this case.

Example 5.2 Calculating a and d for mean litter sizes for genotypes at
the Booroola locus in Merino sheep (after Lynch &
Walsh 1998)
The Booroola (B) allele increases litter size in Merino sheep. Mean
litter sizes for the three genotypes at the Booroola locus are:

Genotypes

Litter size

BB

Bb

bb

2.66

2.17

1.48

These are mean litter sizes under normal environmental conditions
and are therefore equivalent to genotypic values. The mid-point of the
genotypic value between the two homozygotes is (1.482.66) /
22.07. This is the zero point on the scale in Fig. 5.4. Consequently,
the value of a is computed as:
a BB valuemid-point 2.662.070.59
The dominance deviation, d, is
d Bb value – mid-point2.172.070.10.
Thus, each copy of the Booroola allele increases litter size by an
average of 0.59 lambs, and there is partially dominance with the
heterozygote having 0.10 lambs above the average for the two homozygotes.

Additive genetic variance (VA)
Additive genetic variation depends
on the level of heterozygosity in
the population and the average
effects of alleles

If we have a polymorphic locus with additive effects (d 0) and frequencies and genotypic values as given in Fig. 5.3, additive genetic variation
is deﬁned as:
VA 2pqa2

(5.4)

This relationship contains two essential elements. First, additive genetic
variation depends on the heterozygosity (2pq) in the population, there
being no additive genetic variation (and no potential for immediate
adaptive evolutionary change) in a homozygous population. VA is highest
when the heterozygosity is maximum, i.e. when pq0.5 (for two
alleles at a locus). Second, VA depends on a, half the difference in mean
between the homozygous genotypes. The larger the difference in genotypic value between the two homozygotes, the larger the value of VA.

EVOLUTIONARY POTENTIAL AND HERITABILITY

When dominance exists (d

0), the additive genetic variation is:

VA 2pq [a d (qp)]2

(5.5)

Thus, VA also depends on the dominance deviation, d. Even when there
is overdominance (a 0), there may still be additive genetic variation,
due to the remaining 2pq [d (q p)]2 term. However, this term is zero
when pq 0.5.
VA in a population is due to the combined impacts of all segregating
loci with effects on the character.

Dominance variance (VD)
For a locus with effects and frequencies deﬁned in Fig. 5.3, dominance
variance is deﬁned as:
VD (2pqd)2

(5.6)

Dominance variance depends on
the heterozygosity and the
dominance deviation d

Dominance variance is present at a segregating locus if alleles show
some degree of dominance (d 0). Clearly, it is zero if d is zero, or the
population is homozygous. The response of a character to inbreeding
depends on 2pqd and the extent of inbreeding (Chapter 12).
Consequently, characters and populations with higher levels of dominance variation will be more susceptible to the deleterious effects of
inbreeding than those with low VD.
VD in a population is due to the combined impacts of all segregating
loci exhibiting dominance effects on the character.

Interaction variance (VI )
The interaction variance VI arises from variation in the deviations of the
effects of multilocus genotypes from the sum of the average effects of
each component locus. It is similar to the concept applied to determine
the dominance deviation and its variance, but applied between loci,
rather than within them (Falconer & Mackay 1996). VI is one of the components determining whether crossing of populations has deleterious
or beneﬁcial effects (Chapter 15).
In practice, the partitioning of genetic variance is difﬁcult and
imprecise. Partitioning is generally into additive (VA) and non-additive
(VD VI) components, as it is very difﬁcult to separate VD and VI. Readers
are referred to Falconer & Mackay (1996) and Lynch & Walsh (1998) for
more detail.

Evolutionary potential and heritability
Conservation genetics is concerned with the evolution of quantitative
traits, and how their ability to adapt is affected by reduced population
size, fragmentation, and changes in the environment. The immediate

The immediate evolutionary
potential of a population is
determined by the heritability

111

112

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

evolutionary potential of a population is determined by the heritability.
We now explore this parameter in more detail.
Heritability (h2) is deﬁned as the proportion of total phenotypic variation due to additive genetic variation:
h2 VA / VP

A heritability estimate is speciﬁc to
a particular population in a
particular environment

The slope of the relationship
between offspring means and
parent means is a direct measure
of the heritability (h2) of a trait

(5.7)

Heritabilities range from 0 to 1. The former is found in highly inbred
populations with no genetic variation, while the latter is expected for a
character with no environmental variance in an outbred population, if
all the genetic variation is additive.
Heritabilities are speciﬁc to particular populations living under speciﬁc environmental conditions. Different populations may have different levels of genetic variation; those with greater additive variation will
have greater heritabilities in the same environment. For example, populations of fruit ﬂies lost allozyme genetic diversity over time, and their
heritabilities for sternopleural bristle number decreased correspondingly (Briscoe et al. 1992). For outbred populations measured in different
environments, the one in the least variable environment should have
the greatest heritability as higher environmental variances increase
total phenotypic variance, and thus decrease heritability. Despite these
provisos, heritability estimates show relatively consistent patterns in
magnitude for similar characters among populations within species,
and across species (see below).
Heritability and VA are fundamentally measures of how well quantitative traits are transmitted from one generation to the next. Figure 5.5
illustrates three contrasting strengths of relationship between parents
and offspring. Figure 5.5a shows an example of complete inheritance.
Parents with larger than average values for the trait produce offspring
with similar, larger, values, while smaller than average parents produce
smaller than average offspring. This population will have a high VA. In
this case, the slope deﬁning the relationship of parent mean to offspring mean (the regression) is 1. In this example, it is clear that environmental differences among parents, and among offspring, have
negligible inﬂuence on the phenotype for the trait (a heritability of 1).
An example that approaches this level of relationship is ﬁngerprint
ridge count in humans.
Inheritance is less complete in Fig. 5.5b. Parents with high phenotypic values produce, on average, offspring closer to the population
mean than they are and low value parents produce offspring not as low
as themselves. The slope of the relationship between offspring mean
and parent mean is 1. Some of the superiority or inferiority of the
parents is not due to additive variation and cannot be inherited by their
offspring (in this example, heritability has an intermediate value).
Many quantitative characters have relationships of this kind, including
shell width in Partula snails (Box 5.2) and body size in many species,
including endangered cotton-top tamarins (Cheverud et al. 1994).
There is no relationship between parent and offspring values in Fig.
5.5c. The slope of the relationship is 0 (h2 0). Parents with high and low
values of the trait have similar offspring with values randomly distrib-

Parent mean

Offspring mean

Offspring mean

Offspring mean

EVOLUTIONARY POTENTIAL AND HERITABILITY

Parent mean

Parent mean

Fig. 5.5 Hypothetical relationships between mean values of parents and mean values of
offspring for three cases, representing (a) complete, (b) incomplete and (c) zero
relationships between parents and offspring.

uted around the mean. In this case VA and h2 are zero, so there will be no
evolutionary change. Such relationships are found in homozygous populations, such as the Wollemi pine, where all differences among
parents are of environmental origin. Further, some reproductive characters in outbred populations, such as conception rate in cattle,
approach this value.
The relationship between parent mean (termed mid-parent value, P)
and offspring mean (O) is described by the following equation (provided
that environmental conditions are the same for parents and offspring):
O (1 h2) M h2 P

(5.8)

where Mpopulation mean for the trait and h2 is its heritability in the
population. The heritability is the slope of the line relating offspring
and parents (regression). As the heritability approaches zero, the offspring values cluster closer around the population mean, M, and all
parents, regardless of their own values, produce similar offspring. Box
5.2 illustrates the relationship between offspring and mid-parent
values for shell width in endangered Partula snails from the Tahitian
Islands and Example 5.3 estimates the heritability of shell width from
these data.

Example 5.3 Estimating the heritability of shell size in endangered
Partula snails from offspring–parent regression
The relationship between the shell width for parents and their offspring for 40 families of Partula snail is illustrated in Box 5.2. The ﬁtted
line is the linear regression of offspring mean on mid-parent mean
and has a slope of 0.400.07. This slope estimates the heritability.
This means that 40% of the variation in shell length for this population, under these environmental conditions, is due to additive
genetic causes.

113

114

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

Predicting response to selection
Response to directional selection
for a quantitative character
depends on the selection applied
and the heritability of the
character

Evolutionary potential is a measure of how rapidly and how much a population can adapt in response to a selective force. The genetic change
(response) produced by directional selection (selection favouring one
extreme) can be predicted from the intensity of selection, and the heritability. This is illustrated graphically in Fig. 5.6, where directional selection corresponds to selecting individuals with the highest value to be
parents. These parents have a mean S units above the mean of all individuals in the parent generation. S is termed the selection differential.
Some of this superiority is due to environmental effects and some to
genotypic differences, the heritability being the proportion due to additive genetic effects. Consequently, response to selection R (the difference in the offspring of selected parents compared to that of offspring
of unselected parents) is
RS h2

(5.9)

Thus, selection response (evolutionary change) will occur if selection is
applied (S 0, or S 0), and there is additive genetic variation for the
character (h2 0). There can be no selection response in highly inbred
(homozygous) populations lacking genetic variation (h2 0).
Where parents have a higher value than the mean of their generation, the offspring mean will increase over that of offspring from randomly selected parents. Conversely, when selected parents have a lower value
than the mean of their generation, the offspring mean will decrease.
Example 5.4 illustrates prediction of response to selection for
Darwin’s medium ground ﬁnch from the Galapagos Islands. The predicted change in bill width (response to selection) was 0.19 mm.

Fig. 5.6 Predicting response to directional selection (after Falconer & Mackay 1996).
The plot of values for a quantitative character in offspring is given against the mean of
their parents for a quantitative character. The line is the linear regression of offspring
mean on mid-parent mean (slope of h2). A perpendicular is taken from the mean of
selected parents S (ﬁlled circles), on the x axis to the regression line, and then a
perpendicular is dropped from this point to the y axis (at R). R is the superiority of the
offspring of selected parents compared to that of unselected parents. R is predicted to be S
slope of the line (h2).

EVOLUTIONARY POTENTIAL AND HERITABILITY

Example 5.4 Predicting response to directional selection for bill
width in Darwin’s medium ground ﬁnch on the
Galapagos Islands (after Grant & Grant 1995, 2000)
Over an 18-month period of drought and no breeding from the middle
of 1976 to the end of 1978, the ﬁnches suffered 85% mortality.
Survivors had beaks that were 0.25 mm wider than the original population (S). The heritability for bill width in this population is 74.5%.
Hence, we predict a genetic change (R), as follows:
RS h2 0.25 0.745 0.19 mm
Thus, bill width in offspring is expected to increase by 0.19 mm. An
increase of 0.25 mm was observed in the average bill width in the offspring.
If selection is applied to reduce the value of a character, S is negative and the mean is expected to drop. Natural selection in the ﬁnches
favoured small bill width in 1984–86, resulting in a selection differential of 0.10 mm. The predicted change in mean is:
RS h2 0.10 0.745 0.07 mm
Thus, we predict a reduction in bill width of 0.07 mm. The observed
change in mean was a reduction of 0.16 mm. This change is in the predicted direction, but the magnitude is not as well predicted. (The analysis for the ﬁnches is more complicated than this due to selection
operating on several characters, but that does not affect the conclusions we have reached.)

The accuracy of predictions
In general, Equation 5.9 provides reasonable predictions of short-term
selection response, especially for peripheral characters (Falconer &
Mackay 1996; Roff 1997). For example, Fig. 5.7 illustrates the relationship between observed and predicted selection response for Darwin’s
medium ground ﬁnch in the Galapagos where the forces of natural
selection vary across years largely as a result of El Niño climatic cycles.
Observed changes showed relatively good agreement with predictions.
Equation 5.9 gives only an average prediction. If just single pairs of
parents were used, then there would be a wide variation in the outcome.
In some cases selected parents would have higher means for genetic
reasons, in others for environmental reasons and, in most cases, it would
result from a combination of both factors. Replicate selected populations from the same source population typically vary somewhat in selection response. Further, predictions from Equation 5.9 are strictly valid for
only one generation, as the genetic makeup of the population will change
as a consequence of selection. In practice, it provides reasonable predictions for at least ﬁve generations (Falconer & Mackay 1996). Importantly,
the prediction applies only to the particular population under the environmental conditions where the heritability was measured.

The agreement between
predicted and observed selection
response for quantitative
characters is usually good

115

116

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

Fig. 5.7 Comparison of
observed and predicted response
(in standard deviation units) to
natural selection in Darwin’s
medium ground ﬁnch on the
Galapagos Islands (after Roff 1997,
based on Grant & Grant 1992).
The straight line represents perfect
agreement between observed and
predicted selection response. 1 
weight, 2wing length, 3 tarsus
length, 4bill length, 5 bill depth
and 6 bill width. Circles
 1976–77, triangles 1984–86.

Response to selection for ﬁtness
characters is usually asymmetrical
with poorer response for
increased than reduced ﬁtness

Equation 5.9 predicts symmetrical response to selection in both the
high and low directions, provided equal selection is applied to each. An
important exception to the usual agreement between predicted and
observed selection response occurs for reproductive ﬁtness characters.
These show a consistent pattern of asymmetry in response to selection,
with less response to selection for increased than reduced ﬁtness
(Frankham 1990a).
While this is not predicted, asymmetrical response to selection for
ﬁtness traits is not biologically surprising. Reproductive ﬁtness is continuously subject to directional natural selection. Thus, we would
expect less response for improved than reduced ﬁtness.

Magnitudes of heritabilities
Most quantitative characters in
naturally outbreeding species
show heritable variation (h2 0)

Heritabilities are consistently
lower for characters related to
reproductive ﬁtness than for more
peripheral characters

Since we wish to understand the potential for evolutionary change in
quantitative traits in natural populations, it is important that we
have estimates of the magnitude of their heritabilities. Not surprisingly, data from natural populations are limited. Estimates of heritabilities for a range of ﬁtness, size and beak characters in natural
populations of birds are given in Table 5.2. Most characters in most
species have h2  0. A similar conclusion applies for essentially all
outbred populations.
Heritabilities are typically lower for reproductive ﬁtness characters
than for size or for peripheral characters (Table 5.3). Averages of heritabilities for wild bird species were 24% for ﬁtness characters, 57% for
size and 67% for peripheral (beak size) characters. The average of estimates from humans, domestic and laboratory species also indicated
lower heritabilities for ﬁtness characters than for size, or peripheral
characters. This ﬁnding is supported by meta-analyses. Heritabilities

EVOLUTIONARY POTENTIAL AND HERITABILITY

Table 5.2

Heritabilities of ﬁtness, body size (or tarsus length) and bill size for birds in nature. Values greater than
100% or less than 0 can arise due to sampling variation in small experiments. Parent–offspring environmental correlations and biases due to maternal effects can also lead to values of greater than 100%

h2 (%)
Species
Barnacle goose
Blue tit
Canada goose
Collared ﬂycatcher
Darwin’s medium ground ﬁnch
Darwin’s cactus ﬁnch
Darwin’s large cactus ﬁnch
European bee-eater
European starling
Great tit
Indigo bunting
Lesser snow goose
Penguin
Pied ﬂycatcher
Pigeon
Red grouse
Song sparrow
Tree swallow
Willow tit
Means

Fitness

5, 0, 29, 32
17

34
37, 48

Body size
35, 54, 76
62, 70a
11
47, 59
42, 61, 95
37, 110, 126
54, 95
28
49a
59, 59, 61, 64, 76
38

Bill size

46
35, 48, 56, 40, 44
75, 102, 103,108
2, 13, 44, 129
67, 69, 104, 137

49, 71, 68

20, 61

30

24.5

92
50a
28, 50
35, 50
27, 36a, 71, 101a
4, 54
60

76

57.2

67.4

Note:
a
Progeny cross-fostered to minimize postnatal maternal effects.
Sources: After Smith (1993); Weigensberg & Roff (1996); Lynch & Walsh (1998).

across 1120 estimates from animals (excluding fruit ﬂies) tended to be
lower for life history characters (related to reproductive ﬁtness), than
for behavioural, physiological, or morphological characters (Table 5.3).
A similar conclusion applied to fruit ﬂy species.
Lower heritabilities for ﬁtness than for peripheral characters were
thought to be due to directional natural selection depleting additive
genetic variation for reproductive ﬁtness and its components (Roff
1997). However, differences seem to be due to higher environmental variances or higher non-additive genetic variation (VD VI), rather than to
lower additive genetic variation for ﬁtness characters (Merila & Sheldon
2000).
Individual heritability estimates for different characters in different species vary widely (Table 5.2). Much of this variation is due to the
large standard errors on individual estimates. Some estimates fall
outside the expected range of 0 to 100%. Values greater than 100% or less
than zero can arise due to sampling variation in small experiments.

50, 58
40a, 123, 71, 59

117

118

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

Table 5.3

Mean heritabilities for different characters in (1) humans, domestic and laboratory animals, (2) animals excluding fruit ﬂies and (3) fruit ﬂies

h2 (%)
Species group

Fitness

Size

Peripheral/Sundry

(1) Mean of humans,
(2) domestic and laboratory
(2) animalsa

11

50

48

Life
history Behaviour Physiology Morphology
(2) Animals (excluding
(2) fruit ﬂies)b

26

30

33

46

(3) Fruit ﬂiesb

12

18

—

32

Notes:
a
After Strickberger (1985); Falconer & Mackay (1996); Morris (1998).
b
From Roff (1997).

Parent–offspring environmental correlations and biases due to maternal effects can also lead to values of greater than 100%.

Heritabilities in endangered species
Very few heritability estimates exist for endangered species (Table 5.4).
Since molecular measures of genetic diversity are generally lower in
endangered than in related endangered species (Chapter 3), we might
expect heritabilities to differ in the same direction. In fact, four of the
ﬁve estimates are lower than estimates for comparable characters in
non-endangered species, but there are insufﬁcient data to decide the
issue. There is clearly a need for many more estimates of heritabilities to
be made in threatened species.

Table 5.4

Heritabilities in endangered and in comparable non-endangered species

Endangered species

Character

h2

Non-endangered species

Characters

h2

Cotton-top tamarin
Snails
Partula taeniata

Body weight

35

Laboratory and domestic animals

Body size

50

Shell length
Shell width
Shell length
Shell width

36
40
81
53

Arianta arbustorum

Shell width

70

Partula suturalis

Sources: Cook (1965); Murray & Clarke (1968); Cheverud et al. (1994).

EVOLUTIONARY POTENTIAL AND HERITABILITY

Estimating heritabilities
We saw above how heritabilities could be estimated from the regression
of offspring means on parental means. In addition, they are estimated
using regression of offspring mean on that of one parent, and from fullsib correlations, and half-sib correlations. In each case, the degree of
genetic relationship between the relatives must be taken into account.
For example, the heritability equals the regression of offspring on midparent, is twice the regression of offspring on one parent, twice the fullsib correlation and four times the half-sib correlation. In Example 5.5
the heritability for clutch size in lesser snow geese is estimated from
twice the regression of daughter’s mean on mother’s mean. Falconer &
Mackay (1996) and Lynch & Walsh (1998) give further details of these
methods.
Heritability estimates may be biased by genotype  environmental
correlations. Similarity between relatives due to exposure to similar
environments may be interpreted as similarity due to shared genotypes. Maternal effects are a particularly important cause of bias. A
maternal effect is indicated if heritability estimates are different
between mother–offspring (contains maternal effects) and father–offspring regression (no maternal effects), or between a full-sib estimate
(maternal effects) and a half-sib estimate (no maternal effects) (see
Falconer & Mackay 1996; Lynch & Walsh 1998). Cross-fostering can be
used to eliminate the contribution of maternal effects to heritability
estimates and has been used in a number of bird studies in the ﬁeld
(Roff 1997).

Example 5.5 Estimating the heritability for clutch size in lesser snow
geese from regression of daughter’s mean on mother’s
mean
Findlay & Cooke (1983) recorded clutch sizes of 132 mother–daughter
pairs in lesser snow geese in Manitoba, Canada. Mean clutch sizes of
daughters are plotted against those of their mothers in the ﬁgure
below. Points indicate single observations, larger circles multiple
observations (more than one daughter per mother, and more than
one clutch recorded per female).
The regression of daughter’s mean clutch size (D) on mother’s
mean clutch size (M) is
D2.538 0.306 M
The slope of this line, given on the ﬁgure, is equal to half the heritability, so we estimate heritability as:
h2 2 0.306 0.612

Heritabilities are estimated from
phenotypic resemblances
between relatives for quantitative
characters

119

120

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

Thus, the heritability of clutch size in the lesser snow goose is 61%,
indicating that mean clutch size can be rapidly adjusted towards its
optimum value in any given environment.

Precision
Estimates of heritabilities are
imprecise unless they are based
on hundreds to thousands of
individuals

The precision of heritability estimates depends on the number of families, total number of individuals studied and on the magnitude of the
heritability itself. In general, several hundred to a few thousand
progeny from 30 or more parental groups need to be measured to
obtain precise estimates of heritabilities (Falconer & Mackay 1996). For
example, the standard error with 100 offspring–mid-parent groups is
 0.15 and that for a half-sib correlation based on 1000 offspring
would be  0.06 when the heritability is about 0.10. Consequently, estimating heritabilities with precision is very difﬁcult for endangered
species.

Susceptibility to inbreeding depression
VD reﬂects the susceptibility of
characters and populations to
inbreeding depression

The impact of inbreeding on a trait in a particular population
depends upon 2pqd F, where F is the inbreeding coefﬁcient (Chapter
12). Since VD  (2pqd)2, its magnitude reﬂects the susceptibility of characters to inbreeding depression. Since this is one of the most important issues in conservation genetics, we need to understand how to
estimate VD, and to review information on its magnitude for different
characters.

CORRELATIONS BETWEEN MOLECULAR AND QUANTITATIVE GENETIC VARIATION

Estimating VD
To estimate VD, data need to be collected on many groups of full-sibs
and many groups of paternal half-sibs. The covariances between fullsibs depends both on both VA and VD, while the covariance between
half-sibs is dependent only on VA (Table 5.5). We can obtain an estimate
of VD by subtracting 8 times the half-sib covariance from 4 times the
full-sib covariance. In doing so, it is assumed that there are no common environmental effects (VE c ) contributing to similarities among
full-sibs.

VD is typically estimated from the
differences between full-sib and
half-sib covariances

Table 5.5 Covariances between full-sibs and half-sibs and their composition
in terms of VA, VD and VE . Estimation of VD is shown in the bottom part of the
c
table
Relatives

Covariance

Full-sibs
Half-sibs

CovFS  1⁄2 VA  1⁄4 VD VEc
CovHS  1⁄4 VA
4 CovFS 2 VA VD 4 VEc
8 CovHS 2 VA
VD 4 VEc

Source: After Falconer & Mackay (1996).

Magnitude of VD
Non-additive genetic variation is highest for the ﬁtness character and
lowest for peripheral characters (Table 5.6). Consequently, we expect
that ﬁtness characters will be more susceptible to inbreeding depression than peripheral characters. This prediction is borne out in practice
(Chapter 12).

Table 5.6

Dominance variance for life history, behavioural, physiological
and morphological characters, expressed as a percentage of genetic variance
(VD /VG ) and as a percentage of phenotypic variance (VD /VP ), based upon a metaanalysis. Values for life-history characters are higher on average than for other
characters

Measure

Life history

Behaviour

Physiology

Morphology

VD /VG
VD /VP

54
31

24
4

27
21

17
13

Source: Crnokrak & Roff (1995).

Reproductive ﬁtness characters
typically show greater dominance
variance than peripheral
characters

121

122

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

Correlations between molecular and
quantitative genetic variation
Correlations between quantitative
genetic variation and molecular
measures of genetic diversity are
low and are zero for life history
traits

Since additive genetic variation determines the ability of a population
to evolve (as we shall see below), its dependence on heterozygosity provides the connection between heterozygosity and evolutionary potential. If single locus heterozygosities for DNA and allozyme loci are
correlated with heterozygosity at loci inﬂuencing quantitative characters, then they will reﬂect the evolutionary potential of populations.
This correlation, although intuitively appealing, is controversial.
A meta-analysis based on 71 data sets found an average correlation
of only 0.22 between molecular diversity and quantitative genetic variation (Reed & Frankham, 2001). Further, the correlation did not differ
signiﬁcantly from zero for life history traits (0.11), but was higher and
signiﬁcant for morphological traits (0.30). The most probable explanation for the lack of correlation for life history traits is that selection
operates on reproductive ﬁtness (life history) characters, but has little
impact on molecular genetic markers. Consequently, molecular measures of genetic variation provide, at best, only a very imprecise indication of evolutionary potential.

Organization of quantitative genetic variation
Reproductive ﬁtness and
peripheral characters differ in
average dominance of alleles, in
symmetry of allelic frequencies
and in the importance of
interactions among loci

Fig. 5.8 Distribution of effects of
quantitative trait loci (QTL) for
several traits in maize (after
Frankham & Weber 2000 based on
data of Tanksley). A small proportion
of QTL have large effects, but most
have small effects.

The basic parameters underlying quantitative genetic variation, the
number of loci involved, alleles per locus, dominance and effects of
alleles are still poorly known. This is especially true for reproductive
ﬁtness characters. Current information about QTL indicates (Falconer &
Mackay 1996; Frankham & Weber 2000):
• There are no clear differences between the loci affecting qualitative
and quantitative characters. Alleles affecting quantitative characters
are often alleles at loci with known major qualitative effects.
• Fewer than 20 loci account for a substantial proportion of quantitative genetic variation for most characters.
• Quantitative variation is due to a small proportion of loci with large
effects and a large proportion with small effects (Fig. 5.8).
• Deleterious alleles are rare and beneﬁcial ones common.

FURTHER READING

• QTL exhibit the full range of dominance from recessive to dominant,
to overdominant, with the majority being in the additive range. For
ﬁtness characters, deleterious alleles are partially recessive and
favourable alleles partially dominant. For peripheral traits, there is
little directional dominance.
• QTL often show interactions among loci, especially for ﬁtness characters.
Importantly, ﬁtness characters differ from peripheral characters in
showing directional dominance of effects, asymmetrical allele frequencies, greater levels of interactions and probably have more loci
inﬂuencing them. These characteristics have important conservation
implications, especially in terms of the impact of inbreeding (Chapter
12).

Summary
1. Characters of importance in conservation biology are primarily
quantitative. The ability of a population to reproduce and survive
(reproductive ﬁtness) is a quantitative character.
2. Variation for quantitative characters among individuals is due to
both genetic and environmental effects.
3. Groups of individuals must be studied for quantitative characters, and statistical analyses used to study and partition variation.
4. Genetic diversity for quantitative characters is due to the segregation of multiple Mendelian loci (QTL).
5. The evolutionary potential of a character in a population is determined by its additive genetic variation and heritability (the additive
genetic variation as a proportion of the total variation).
6. Heritabilities are typically lower for reproductive ﬁtness characters than for characters peripheral to ﬁtness.
7. Heritabilities are typically estimated from the resemblances
between relatives for quantitative characters, e.g. offspring–parent
regressions.
8. Variance due to dominance deviations reﬂects the susceptibility
of characters and populations to inbreeding depression. It is greater
for ﬁtness than for peripheral characters.
9. The interaction variance is important in the context of crossing
different populations.
10. Different genotypes may show altered ranking in different environments (genotypeenvironment interactions); this is important in
the context of translocating individuals.
FURTHER READING

Arnold (1995) A review of monitoring quantitative genetic variation and evolution in captive populations; fairly advanced.
Falconer & Mackay (1996) Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. An excellent readable textbook on quantitative genetics with a focus on applications in
animal and plant breeding.

123

124

GENETIC DIVERSITY: QUANTITATIVE VARIATION

Frankham (1999) A review on quantitative genetics in conservation biology.
Lynch (1996) A review of the importance of quantitative genetics in conservation biology; advanced.
Lynch & Walsh (1998) Genetics and Analysis of Quantitative Traits. A comprehensive
advanced treatment of quantitative genetics.
Roff (1997) Evolutionary Quantitative Genetics. A readable textbook on quantitative genetics with an evolutionary focus and many examples from wild populations.
Storfer (1996) A brief intelligible review about assessing quantitative genetic
variation in endangered species.
PROBLEMS

5.1 Statistics: Compute the parent and offspring means and variances and the covariance between parent and offspring values for the
following data set on shell size in 21 families of Partula snails, an
endangered species originating from Tahiti (data from Murray &
Clarke 1968). Each pair of data represents the mean shell length of the
parents (P) and their offspring (O) for a single family.
P
O
P
O
P
O
18.5 17.5
19.8 19.2
20.4 19.3
18.6 18.3
19.8 17.8
20.7 21.3
18.7 19.1
19.9 19.4
20.7 20.7
18.9 19.0
20.0 19.9
20.7 19.1
19.2 18.7
20.1 18.5
21.2 20.3
19.4 17.4
20.3 21.6
21.2 19.3
19.6 18.3
20.3 18.9
21.4 20.2
5.2 Heritability: Compute the regression of offspring on parent for
the data on shell length in endangered Partula snails in Problem 5.1.
Compute the heritability from the regression coefﬁcient. Plot the relationship and insert the regression line.
5.3 Heritability: For the following hypothetical data on lifetime offspring numbers in seven families of endangered California condors,
compute the regression of offspring mean on parent mean and calculate the heritability. Plot the relationship between offspring mean and
parent mean and insert the regression line.
Family
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Offspring mean
5.4 5.6 5.8 6.0 6.2 6.4 6.6
Parent mean
3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 8.0 9.0
5.4 Heritability: If the slope of the regression of offspring phenotype on father’s mean for body size in the Barnacle goose is 0.27
(Weigensberg & Roff 1996), what is the heritability of body size in this
population?
5.5 Genotypic values: Specify the genotypic values for a locus with
alleles A1 and A2 where A2 is recessive (in terms of the symbols a, d and
a), similar to Fig. 5.3.
5.6 Relationship between heterozygosity and quantitative genetic
variation: What happens to VA, VD and h2 if the heterozygosity
increases by 10%?
5.7 Inbreeding and quantitative genetic variation: What happens to
h2, VA and VD if there is inbreeding and heterozygosity drops by 50%?

PROBLEMS

5.8 Selection differential: If the breeding individuals for an endangered species in captivity have a mean ‘wildness’ score of 8, and the
whole population has a mean of 10, what is the selection differential
(S)?
5.9 Response to selection for a quantitative character: What is the
expected response to selection for body size in cotton-top tamarins if
individuals producing offspring have a mean body size of 490 g, while
the population mean body size is 450 g and the heritability of body
size is 35%?
5.10 Response to selection: What is the expected response to selection for depth of bill in Darwin’s medium ground ﬁnch on the
Galapagos Islands due to the drought in 1977 (Grant & Grant 1995,
2000)? The heritability of bill depth in this population is 0.73. Bill
depth was 9.42 mm before the drought and 9.96 mm in those that survived the drought.

125

Chapter 6

Evolution in large populations.
I. Natural selection and
adaptation
Terms:
Adaptive evolution,
convergent evolution,
directional selection,
disruptive selection,
ecotype,
ﬁtness,
ﬁxation,
lethal,
natural selection,
partial dominance,
relative ﬁtness,
reproductive ﬁtness,
selection coefﬁcient,
stabilizing selection

Industrial melanism in the peppered
moth; peppered and melanic
(black) moths on trees in polluted
(blackened tree trunk) and
unpolluted (tree with lichen) areas
(Europe). The melanic form is
better camouﬂaged in the polluted
area and the peppered moth in the
unpolluted area (from Kettlewell
1973).

Species must evolve to cope with environmental change. Adaptive
evolutionary changes in large natural populations occur through
the impact of selection increasing the frequency of beneﬁcial alleles

THE NEED TO EVOLVE

The need to evolve
Species have to cope with a plethora of environmental changes. There
are continual changes over time in pests, parasites, diseases and competitors, as well as changes wrought by human activities. Disease organisms evolve new strains, and new diseases arise, pathogens switch hosts
and diseases spread to new locations (Garrett 1994). Adaptations in competitors, pests and parasites are such common events that Van Valen
(1973) proposed that species had to evolve continually to avoid falling
behind competing organisms (the ‘Red Queen’ hypothesis). Climatic
cycles, such as the El Niño–La Niña cycle, result in hot-dry periods with
drought and wildﬁres that alternate with cool-wet periods with ﬂoods.
On the geological time scale of millions of years, there are major climatic shifts between ice ages and warm periods.
Global warming is occurring as a consequence of the burning of fossil
fuels. Impacts of this warming on living organisms are already evident
and many more changes are predicted (Hughes 2000). Species have to
move, or adapt to the changed climatic conditions. Birds, butterﬂies and
plants have already altered their ranges in response to global warming.
Coral reefs are experiencing increased frequencies of bleaching and
mass deaths due to warming. Several disease organisms have moved their
ranges and many others are predicted to do so (Hughes 2000). An adaptive
evolutionary change as a result of climate change has already been
observed in a fruit ﬂy population (Rodríguez-Trelles & Rodríguez 1998).
Alterations in disease organisms are probably the most pervasive
and frequent environmental change faced by species. For example, 300
plagues affecting humans are recorded in Chinese history between 243
bc and 1911, approximately one every seven years (McNeill 1976). Disease
outbreaks may have devastating impacts on species. Plague killed
nearly 20 million Europeans in the 14th century, while rinderpest eliminated 95% of the great wildebeest and Cape buffalo herds in East Africa
in the 1890s (O’Brien & Evermann 1988). New inﬂuenza strains arise
every few years and spread throughout the world.
Many diseases have crossed species boundaries, including HIV–1 (a
cause of AIDS) from chimpanzees to humans, canine distemper from dogs
to lions in Africa and to black-footed ferrets in the USA, and Hendra virus
from fruit bats to horses and humans in Australia (Daszak et al. 2000).
Human activities are also spreading disease organisms from their
original locations. For example, toxoplasmosis has moved with eutherian mammals from Europe to Australia and infected susceptible marsupials, increasing their mortality rates (Daszak et al. 2000). Further, avian
disease pathogens introduced by European settlers into Hawaii caused
extinctions of nearly half of the endemic land birds.
Environmental challenges exert new selective forces, so species
must adapt to cope with them. Adaptation may take the form of either
physiological or behavioural modiﬁcations where individuals change
to cope with altered conditions, or genetic adaptation through natural
selection altering the genetic composition of the populations.

Environmental change is a
ubiquitous feature of the
conditions faced by species.
Consequently, species need to be
able to evolve to avoid extinction
due to environmental change

In the face of environmental
change, species must adapt, or
face extinction

127

128

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

Adaptive evolutionary changes
may allow populations to cope
with conditions that no individual
could previously survive

Genetic adaptation of species to
their environmental conditions is
ubiquitous in species with genetic
diversity

Individuals may adapt physiologically by modiﬁcation in haemoglobin levels to cope with altitude, immune responses to ﬁght diseases,
induction of enzymes to cope with altered diets, etc. There is, however,
a limit to physiological adaptation. If environment changes are greater
than any individual can cope with then the species becomes extinct.
Evolutionary change through natural selection is the second means
for adjusting to environmental change. This is referred to as adaptive
evolution. Natural selection is differential reproduction and survival of
different genotypes. When adaptive evolutionary changes continue
over time, they may allow a population to cope with conditions more
extreme than any individual could originally tolerate.
Adaptive evolution is observed wherever large genetically variable
populations are subjected to altered biotic or physical environments. It
is of major importance in ﬁve conservation contexts:
• Preservation of the ability of species to evolve in response to new
environments
• Loss of adaptive evolutionary potential in small populations
• Most endangered species now exist only on the periphery of their
historical range (Channell & Lomollno 2000), so they must adapt to
what was previously a marginal environment
• Genetic adaptation to captivity and its deleterious effects on reintroduction success (Chapter 18)
• Adaptation of translocated populations to their new environment.
This chapter provides evidence for the ubiquity of adaptive evolutionary change, considers the factors controlling the evolution of populations and discusses the impact of selection on populations.
Species adapt through natural selection to their environmental conditions, provided they have the necessary genetic diversity. Adaptive
evolution has been described in a large number of animals and plants
(Endler 1986; Briggs & Walters 1997; Thompson 1998). Endler (1986)
alone reported adaptive changes in over 139 species. Evolutionary
changes have been documented in animals for morphology, behaviour,
colour form, host plant resistance, prey size, body size, alcohol tolerance, life history attributes, disease resistance, predator avoidance, tolerance to pollutants, biocide resistance, etc. Adaptive changes in colour
and shape to provide better camouﬂage are widespread (Cott 1940). For
example, many land snails are polymorphic for shell colour and
banding; natural selection favours better camouﬂaged forms – yellow
banded shells in tall, grassy habitats and unbanded brown or pink shells
in woodlands (Futuyma 1998).
Humans in Eurasia have evolved resistance to a range of diseases,
including smallpox and measles; other populations that have evolved in
the absence of these diseases have been devastated when exposed to
them (Diamond 1997). Humans from malarial areas have evolved a
variety of different genetic mechanisms of resistance that are very rare
or absent elsewhere.
Adaptive evolutionary changes to a wide range of conditions have
been reported in plants, including those to soil conditions, water stress,

THE NEED TO EVOLVE

ﬂooding, light regimes, exposure to wind, grazing, air pollution and
herbicides (Briggs & Walters 1997). Plants have evolved a wide range of
secondary compounds to avoid being eaten by herbivores. For example,
white clover and bird’s-foot trefoil are polymorphic for the production
of cyanogenic glucosides that provide protection from herbivory by
slugs and snails (Briggs & Walters 1997). Plant populations adapted to
different ecological conditions are so common that they have their own
term (ecotypes).
Adaptive evolutionary changes have allowed species to inhabit
almost every imaginable niche on Earth; species inhabit altitudes from
6500 m on Mount Everest to deep ocean trenches, from arctic saline
pools at 23 °C to hot thermal springs and deep sea vents, from oceans
and freshwater to deserts, while plants have adapted to grow in almost
every soil on the planet (Dobzhansky et al. 1977).
Adaptation to local environments has important implications in
conservation. Translocations are likely to be more successful when populations are moved to similar, rather than to different environments
(Chapters 16 and 18). Further, crossing of populations adapted to different environments may be deleterious (Chapters 13 and 15).
Convergent evolution of similar forms in equivalent ecological
niches, but derived from different progenitors, illustrates the pervasive
inﬂuence of adaptive evolution. For example, there are morphologically
similar forms amongst marsupials in Australia and eutherian
mammals from other parts of the world, e.g. the marsupial versus
eutherian wolves, moles and mice, etc. (Futuyma 1998).
Measurable adaptive evolutionary changes have occurred from year
to year in beak and body dimensions in Darwin’s medium ground ﬁnch
in response to environmental changes associated with El Niño–Southern
Oscillation climate changes (Chapter 5). Rapid evolutionary changes in
migration rates have been described in birds and plants. The blackcap
bird has established a novel wintering area in Britain in the last 30 years,
distinct from its traditional area in the Mediterranean (Berthold et al.
1992). Plants of nine species that migrated to 240 islands off the coast of
British Columbia in Canada underwent two evolutionary changes in
dispersal ability (Cody & Overton 1996). The initial change was in the
direction of increased dispersal ability as only seeds with high dispersal
ability reach the islands. Within 10 years of reaching the islands, the
plants evolved lowered dispersal ability, as seeds with high dispersal
ability were more likely to be lost into the ocean.
Humans have been responsible for many environmental changes due
to pollution, translocations of species, species extinctions, etc. In many
cases, adaptive evolutionary changes have been recorded in affected
species. Rabbits in Australia evolved resistance to the myxoma virus
when it was introduced as a control measure (Box 6.1). Over 200 species
of moths worldwide have evolved industrial melanism in polluted industrial areas (Kettlewell 1973). Several species of plants have evolved tolerance to heavy metals in the process of colonizing polluted heavy metal
mine wastes and plants are progressively evolving resistance to herbi-

Different species evolve similar
characteristics when placed in
similar environments – convergent
evolution

Adaptive evolutionary changes
may be rapid

Evolutionary changes have been
observed in response to many
human caused environmental
changes

129

130

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

cides (Briggs & Walters 1997). Increased resistance to toxic cyanobacteria
has evolved in water ﬂeas as a consequence of cyanobacterial blooms
following eutrophication of Lake Constance in central Europe (Hairston
et al. 1999). A population of a rare sub-species of checkerspot butterﬂy in
Nevada has altered host preference, now preferring an introduced plant
weed to its ancestral diet (Singer et al. 1993).
The evolution of resistance to biocontrol agents (insecticides, pesticides, antibiotics, etc.) is a universal phenomenon (Georghiou 1986). For
example, hundreds of insect species have evolved resistance to insecticides (McKenzie 1996) and microbes rapidly evolve resistance to each
new antibiotic (Garrett 1994). Rats and mice have evolved resistance to
warfarin and other anti-coagulant rodenticides (Futuyma 1998).
Even species extinctions can result in evolutionary change. The
extinction of its favoured lobeloid host plant caused a Hawaiian honeycreeper (Vestiaria) to evolve a shorter beak as alternative host plants had
shorter corollas (Smith et al. 1995).

Box 6.1 Rapid adaptive evolutionary changes in rabbits in
Australia following the introduction of myxoma
virus as a control agent (Fenner & Ratcliffe
1965)

European settlers introduced rabbits into Australia in the 19th century for sport
hunting. Several unsuccessful attempts were made until genuine wild rabbits were
introduced in 1859. The wild rabbits rapidly increased in numbers until they reached
plague proportions throughout much of the country. Rabbits caused many native
plant species to decline and were one of the causes in the decline of native marsupial bilbies (they also burrow).
When myxoma virus was introduced into Australia to control rabbits in 1950,
mortality rates of infected rabbits were over 99%. Strong directional selection

FACTORS CONTROLLING THE EVOLUTION OF POPULATIONS

resulted in rapid increases in genetic resistance of rabbits to the myxoma virus. The
myxoma virus also evolved lower virulence, as this increased the probability of being
transmitted. The mortality to a less severe virus strain dropped from around 90% to
25% in 1958 (the sixth epizootic), as shown below. The data below reﬂect only the
genetic changes in rabbit resistance as the same virus strain was used throughout the
study.

Conservation biology is concerned with preserving species as
dynamic entities that can evolve to cope with environmental change.
Retaining the ability to evolve requires the preservation of genetic diversity. Consequently, we must understand the factors that inﬂuence the
evolution of natural populations.
In this chapter and the next we will consider the evolution of large
natural populations, while Chapter 8 contrasts this with the evolution
of small populations.

Preserving the ability to evolve in
response to environmental change
is a major concern in conservation
biology

Factors controlling the evolution of populations
An evolving population is a complex system inﬂuenced by mutation,
migration, selection and chance, operating within the context of the
breeding system (Fig. 6.1). To understand the interactions of these
factors in their full complexity is difﬁcult. Consequently, we seek to
understand the components of an evolving population by modelling it
with none of the factors operating, then with the factors one at a time,
followed by two at a time, etc. By doing this we can see how large an
effect each factor has and what role it is likely to play in evolution.
Further, we seek to identify circumstances where factors can be
ignored, as it is rare for all factors to have important effects simultaneously. For example, mutations occur at very low rates, so we can often
ignore them over the short term.
In Chapter 4, we showed that allele and genotype frequencies are
in equilibrium at an autosomal locus after one generation of random
mating (Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium) in populations with no

Populations evolve through the
action of mutation, migration,
selection and chance

131

132

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

Fig. 6.1 An evolving population
as a complex system.

Evolution at its simplest level is a
change in the frequency of an
allele

Simple mathematical models have
a crucial role in illuminating
genetics of the evolutionary
process

impacts of mutation, migration, selection or chance. In this chapter
and the next we consider the independent action of mutation, selection and migration, and then the joint actions of mutation with selection and migration with selection. Chance effects are generally minor
in large populations, so we will defer detailed treatment of them until
Chapter 8.
Evolution involves a change in the genetic composition of a population. At its simplest level, this involves a change in the frequency of an
allele due to mutation, migration, selection or chance.
The impacts of these factors can be summarized as:
• Mutation is the source of all genetic diversity, but is a weak evolutionary force over the short term
• Selection is the only force causing adaptive evolutionary change
• Migration reduces differences between populations generated by
mutation, selection and chance
• Chance effects in small populations lead to loss of genetic diversity
and reduced adaptive evolutionary change
• Fragmentation and reduced migration lead to random differentiation among sub-populations derived from the same original source
population.
These insights have been obtained principally from detailed consideration of population models.

Role of mathematical models
To investigate the evolutionary impacts of selection, mutation, migration and chance we will build simple mathematical models. Wilson
(1975) summarized the value of such models. They can:

SELECTION

• Establish quantitative laws to describe underlying processes
• Provide testable predictions
• Provide expressions for estimating parameters that are difﬁcult or
impossible to estimate otherwise
• Predict the existence of still undiscovered phenomena and unexpected relations among phenomena.
The models we build are usually simpliﬁcations of the real world. To
determine whether our models explain that world, we require quantitative predictions that can be evaluated against experimental or observational data. For example, equations to predict the decline in
frequency of a recessive lethal allele are evaluated later in this chapter
and applied to predict changes in the frequency of chondrodystrophy
(a lethal dwarﬁsm) in California condors. In Chapter 10, equations
which predict that equalizing family sizes effectively doubles the size
of populations (and so maximizes the use of scarce captive breeding
spaces) are presented, and their predictions validated in tests using
fruit ﬂies.
Often methods for estimating parameters that we wish to know are
not obvious. Parameters that have been estimated using models
include:
• Mutation rates in humans (from the balance between mutation and
selection)
• Magnitude of selection on industrial melanism in moths (from
models of the time taken for changes in frequency)
• Migration rates in human populations (from allele frequencies in
current, source and immigrant populations)
• Extent of gene ﬂow among populations and species (from allele frequencies in different populations)
• Number and effect of deleterious alleles in populations of endangered species (from the effect of inbreeding on mortality).
By building mathematical models of evolutionary processes, new
insights are often revealed. For example, cost–beneﬁt analyses of altruistic behaviour led to the predictions that it would typically involve
close relatives, and that it would be more common in haplo-diploid
species such as the Hymenoptera than in diploids.

Selection
Selection arises because different genotypes have different rates of
reproduction and survival (reproductive ﬁtness). Such selection
changes the frequency of alleles. Alleles whose carriers have relatively
larger numbers of fertile offspring surviving to reproductive age
increase in frequency, while alleles whose carriers have fewer offspring
decrease in frequency.
Selection operates at all stages of the life cycle; in animals this
involves mating ability and fertility of males and females, fertilizing
ability of sperm (sometimes ability of sperm to compete), number of off-

Selection is the only force that
causes adaptive evolution

133

134

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

Fig. 6.2 Selection model for a
recessive lethal.

spring per female, survival of offspring to reproductive age and longevity. In plants, selection can involve pollen production, ability of pollen
to reach the stigma of ﬂowers, germinate, grow down the style and fertilize, number of ova, viability of the fertilized zygotes, their ability to
disperse, germinate and grow to sexual maturity, and the fertility of the
resulting plant. Selection may also operate via impacts of individual
behaviour on relatives (parental care, helpers). For simplicity, we will
use models that involve differential survival of individuals from zygote
formation to adult. The consequences of selection on other stages of the
life cycle are similar.

Recessive lethal
Selection reduces the frequency
of deleterious alleles

The most intensive selection that can apply against a recessive allele is
when all homozygotes die (lethal). For example, all individuals homozygous for chondrodystrophic dwarﬁsm (dwdw) in endangered
California condors die around hatching time. We consider a simple
model with discrete generations, random mating and viability selection (Fig. 6.2).
The effect of selection against chondrodystrophy in California
condors is derived in Table 6.1. We begin with a normal allele () at a
frequency of p and the recessive lethal (dw) allele at a frequency of q.
With random mating, the genotype frequencies at zygote formation are
the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium frequencies p2, 2pq and q2. However,
the three genotypes have different survival. The important factor in the
genetic effects of selection is not the absolute survival, but the relative
survival of the three genotypes. For example, if the ,dw and dwdw
genotypes have 75%, 75% and 0% survival, it is the relative values 1, 1 and
0 that determine the impact of selection; we term these values the relative ﬁtnesses.

SELECTION

Table 6.1

Modelling the impact of selection against chondrodystrophy (a
recessive lethal) in California condors

Phenotype
Normal

Normal

Dwarf

Genotype

Zygotic frequencies
Relative ﬁtnesses
After selection
(frequencyﬁtness)
Adjusted frequencies



dw

dwdw

Total

p2
1

2pq
1

q2
0 (lethal)

1.0

p2 1

2pq1

q2 00

1q2

p2
1  q2

2pq
1  q2

0

1

The frequency of surviving adults is obtained by multiplying the
initial frequencies by the relative ﬁtnesses. For example, the frequency
of lethal homozygotes goes from q2 at fertilization to q2 00 in adults.
After selection, we have lost some of the population (q2), so the total no
longer adds to 1. We must therefore divide by the total (1q2) to obtain
relative frequencies, as shown.
The allele frequency in the succeeding generation is then obtained
by determining the allele frequency in survivors using the allele counting method described in Chapter 4. The methods for deriving allele frequency changes due to all other forms of selection are similar to that
used here.
The frequency of the dw allele in the next generation after selection
(q1) is
q1 

pq
q(1  q)
q


1  q2 (1  q)(1  q) 1  q

(6.1)

Note that 1 q can be substituted for p, as pq 1.
The change in frequency q is:
qq1 q 
q

q
q  q(1  q)
q
1q
1q

(6.2)

 q2
1q

Thus, the lethal dw allele always declines in frequency, as the sign of q
is negative. However, the rate of decline slows markedly at lower frequencies as it depends on the square of the frequency (Fig. 6.3). Example
6.1 uses Equation 6.1 to calculate the change in frequency of the dw
alleles in California condors.

135

136

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

Example 6.1 Change in frequency of the chondrodystrophy allele in
endangered California condors
How rapidly does the frequency of the recessive lethal chondrodystrophy allele decline due to selection? The allele had an initial frequency
at hatching of about 0.17 (Example 4.5). All homozygotes died, so the
frequency was reduced in surviving adults. The expected frequency of
the deleterious allele in adults as a result of this natural selection can
be predicted by using Equation 6.1 and substituting q 0.17, as
follows:
q1 

q
0.17 / (10.17)0.145
1q

Thus, the frequency is expected to have dropped from 17% to 14.5% as
a result of one generation of natural selection, a drop of about 15%.
Does Equation 6.1 predict the behaviour of lethal alleles in real populations? The observed frequency of a recessive lethal allele in an
experimental fruit ﬂy population declined continuously at approximately the predicted rate (Fig. 6.3). The decline in lethal frequency
slows down over time as expected from the equation above. An important implication of this relationship is that it becomes progressively
harder to reduce the frequency of a deleterious recessive allele as its frequency declines.
The observed decline is slightly faster than predicted. This suggests that heterozygotes have a slightly reduced ﬁtness compared to
homozygous normal individuals, i.e. the lethal allele is only partially
recessive. ‘Recessive’ alleles frequently have a small impact in heterozygotes.
Fig. 6.3 Change in frequency of a
recessive lethal allele (q) over
generations in a fruit ﬂy population.
The solid line is the observed
change and the dashed line is the
decline expected according to
Equation 6.1 (after Wallace 1963).

SELECTION

Adaptive evolutionary change
In conservation genetics, we are concerned both with selection against
deleterious mutations and with selection favouring alleles that
improve the ability of a population to adapt to changing environments.
We will use industrial melanism in the peppered moth in the UK as an
example illustrating adaptive evolutionary change (Kettlewell 1973;
Majerus 1998; Grant 1999). Camouﬂage is critical to the survival of the
peppered moth as it is active at night and rests on trees during the day;
if it is not camouﬂaged it is vulnerable to predation by birds. Prior to the
industrial revolution, its peppered wings were well camouﬂaged as it
rested on speckled lichen-covered tree trunks in the midlands of
England (chapter frontispiece). However, sulfur pollution during the
industrial revolution killed most lichen and soot darkened trees.
Consequently, the speckled moth became clearly visible on blackened
tree trunks. The previously rare dark variants (melanics) were better
camouﬂaged on the black trunks. This resulted in a higher frequency of
the melanic allele (M) in the industrial areas than in relatively unpolluted areas (Fig. 6.4). The melanic form of the peppered moth was ﬁrst
recorded in 1848, but by 1900 they represented about 99% of all moths
in the polluted midlands of England.
A model of this selection is developed below. This model shows that
the frequency of the M allele always increases until the allele is ﬁxed
(p1), as the sign of p is positive. The rate of change depends on the
strength of selection against the non-melanic form (s, the selection
coefﬁcient) and the allele frequencies p and q.
Pollution controls would be expected to reverse the selective forces
and to result in a decline in the frequency of industrial melanism. As
predicted, the frequency of the melanics (now poorly camouﬂaged) has
been reduced markedly. At one site near Liverpool, the frequency of
melanics has dropped from 90% in 1959 to 10% now, and similar
declines have been observed in other areas of the UK. Parallel changes
have also occurred in the northern American sub-species of the peppered moth (Grant 1999).
The melanic form of the moth is due to a single dominant allele. The
impacts of selection on the melanic and typical allele frequencies are
given below (the insularia allele is ignored here, but this does not affect
our conclusions). We begin with frequencies for melanic (M) and typical
(t) alleles of p and q, respectively. We will assume that we are dealing
with a large random mating population with no migration or mutation. Selection is assumed to occur on adults, but before reproduction.
Since the tt genotype has poorer survival than melanics in polluted
areas, but we do not necessarily know the precise value, we give it a relative ﬁtness of 1 s, where s is the selection coefﬁcient. The value of s
represents the reduction in ﬁtness of the tt genotype compared to the
ﬁttest genotypes, MM and Mt.

Selection increases the frequency
of advantageous alleles

137

138

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

Fig. 6.4 Adaptive changes in the
frequency of industrial melanism
due to selection in polluted areas
(after Kettlewell 1973; Majerus
1998; Grant 1999). Map of the UK
with pie diagrams showing the
frequency of the melanic, a milder
melanic (insularia) and the nonmelanic (typical) forms of the
peppered moths (after Kettlewell
1958). The melanic form had high
frequencies in industrial areas
(Midlands, around London in the
southeast and around Glasgow
toward the northwest) and low
frequencies in less polluted areas.

Melanic
MM
2

Melanic
Mt

Typical
tt
2

Total

Zygotic frequencies

p

2pq

q

Relative ﬁtnesses

1

1

1s

After selection

p2

2pq

q2(1s)

1 sq2

Adjusted frequencies

p2
1  sq2

2pq
1  sq2

q2  sq2
1  sq2

1

Frequency of M after selection (p1) is
p1 

p2
2pq
(1⁄2)
1  sq2
1  sq2



p2  pq p (p  q)

1  sq2
1  sq2



p
1  sq2

1

SELECTION

The change in frequency of M ( p) is
pp1 p


p
p  p (1  sq2 )
p
2
1  sq
1  sq2



spq2
1  sq2

Thus, the melanic allele increases in frequency, as the sign of p is positive. The rate of increase depends upon the selection coefﬁcient and
upon the allele frequencies. This can be illustrated using a numerical
example.
If the melanic allele was at a frequency p of 0.005 in 1848, and typicals had only 70% the survival of melanics (s 0.3) in polluted areas,
then the frequency of the melanic allele would change in one generation to
p1 

p
0.005 / [1 (0.3 0.9952)]0.0071
1  sq2

This represents ⬃40% increase in the frequency of the melanic allele.
The change in frequency is
pp1 p0.0071 0.005 0.0021
Thus, the melanic allele increased by 0.0021, from 0.005 to 0.0071, in the
ﬁrst generation.

Other selection models
Models with four different degrees of dominance with respect to ﬁtness
are illustrated in Fig. 6.5. In each case, the selection coefﬁcient (s) represents the reduction in relative ﬁtness of the genotype compared to that
in the most ﬁt genotype (ﬁtness 1). Values of s range from 0 to 1. In the
additive case, the heterozygote has a ﬁtness intermediate between the
two homozygotes, while in the completely dominant case its ﬁtness is
equal to that of the A1A1 homozygote. In the partial dominance case,
the heterozygote has a ﬁtness nearer one homozygote (here A1A1) than
the other, with its position on the scale depending on the value of h. In
the overdominant case the heterozygote has a higher ﬁtness than
either homozygote.
Selection coefﬁcients are calculated from survivals of the genotypes
by ﬁrst converting the survivals into relative ﬁtnesses by dividing by the
highest value of survival for the three genotypes. In the additive
example, the percentage survivals of 90, 70 and 50 are all divided by 90
to give relative ﬁtnesses of 90/901, 70/900.778 and 50/900.556,
respectively. The relative ﬁtness of A2A2 (0.556) is equated to 1s, giving
a s value of 0.444.
The changes in allele frequency for different degrees of dominance

The impact of selection on the
frequencies of alleles depends on
the strength of the selection, on
the dominance of the alleles, and
on the frequencies of the alleles

139

140

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

Fig. 6.5 Degrees of dominance
with respect to ﬁtness and
examples of % survival, relative
ﬁtness and selection coefﬁcients (s)
for each.

Additive (no dominance)
A1A2
A2A2
A1A1
•
•

Examples (% survival,
relative ﬁtness and
selection coefficients)
A1A1
A1A2
A2A2
90
70
50
1
0.78
0.56
s0.44

•
⊥___________⊥___________⊥

1

1  1⁄2 s

1s

Complete dominance (A1)
A1A2
A2A2
A1A1
•
•

A1A1
85
1

A1A2
85
1

A2A2
75
0.882
s0.118

A1A1
80
1

A1A2
78
0.975
hs0.025

A2A2
70
0.875
s0.125

A1A1
83
0.922
s10.078

A1A2
90
1

A2A2
80
0.889
s20.111

•
⊥___________⊥___________⊥

1

1

1s

Partial dominance (A1)
A1A2
A2A2
A1A1
•
•
•
⊥___________⊥___________⊥

1

A1 A 1

1 hs

1s

Overdominance
A1A2
A2A2
•

•
•
⊥___________⊥___________⊥

1 s1

1

1 s2

with autosomal and sex-linked loci are shown in Table 6.2. These are
important in both the context of adaptive changes due to selection, and
in the context of the deleterious alleles that are exposed by inbreeding.
Consequently, we will spend some time on the details of selection.
The change in allele frequency due to one generation of selection
against a recessive A2 allele (Table 6.2 c) is
q spq2 / (1 sq2)

(6.3)

SELECTION

Table 6.2

Changes in allele frequency in one generation, with different dominance relationships for ﬁtness for
autosomal and sex-linked loci. Initial frequencies are p and q for A1 and A2, respectively

Initial frequencies and ﬁtness of genotypes
Autosomal
A1A1
A1A2
p

2

Change in frequency

qq1 q0

A2A2
2

2pq

q

(a) Additive: selection against A2
1 1⁄2 s

1

1⁄2 spq / (1sq)

1s

(b) Partial dominance of A1, selection against A2
1

1hs

 spq[qh(pq)] /[12hspqsq2]

1s

(c) Complete dominance of A1, selection against A2 (⬅ A2 recessive)
1

1 s

1

 spq2 / (1sq2)

(d) Complete dominance of A1, selection against A1 (⬅ A2 recessive)
1 s

1 s

spq2 / [1s(1q2)]

1

(e) Overdominance, selection against A1A1 and A2A2
1s1
1
1s2
Sex-linkeda
Females
A1

A1

X X
p2

A1

A2

X X
2pq

pq (s1ps2q) / [ 1 s1p2 s2q2]

Males
A2

A2

X X
q2

A1

X Y XA2Y
p
q

q

(f ) Sex-linked recessive, selection against A2
1

1

1s

1

1 s

1/3 spq / (1sq) (approx)

(g) Additive sex-linked, selection against A2
1

1  1⁄2s

1s

1

1 s

Note:
a
For birds and Lepidoptera, the sexes must be reversed.

Three important points are revealed by this equation:
• The negative sign indicates that the deleterious A2 allele declines in
frequency until it is completely eliminated
• The rate of change depends on the amount of selection (s)
• The rate of change depends on the allele frequencies, p and q.
Considering all the models in Table 6.2, the direction of change is
always against the allele whose carriers have the lowest ﬁtness. For
example, the signs are opposite in direction for selection against A2
(Table 6.2c), compared to selection against A1 (Table 6.2d). Overdominance is slightly more complex, so we will defer treatment of it
until Chapter 9.

2/3 spq / (1sq)

141

142

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

Fig. 6.6 Fate of rare, but
favourable alleles over time.
Change in frequency over
generations for advantageous
dominant, recessive and additive
alleles. All have selection
coefﬁcients of 1% and all begin at a
frequency p1% (after Nei 1975).

For equivalent circumstances
selection has greater impact on
haploid loci than on autosomal
diploid loci, with sex-linked loci
intermediate

All expressions for change in allele frequency contain the term spq,
so they all depend on the intensity of selection and heterozygosity.
The pattern of change in allele frequencies over time differs for dominant, additive and recessive alleles subject to the same selection coefﬁcient and all beginning with the same frequency of the favoured allele
(Fig. 6.6). A favoured dominant allele initially increases more rapidly
than additive or recessive alleles. However, its rate of change slows
markedly when it reaches a high frequency as the recessive homozygote, against which selection is acting, becomes increasingly rare.
Conversely, the favoured recessive initially increases very slowly, and
only when its frequency reaches about 10% does it rapidly rises in frequency to ﬁxation (the population becomes all homozygotes and p1).
The dominant and recessive patterns are the mirror images of each
other. The trajectory for the additive allele is intermediate between
these; its initial increase is slightly slower than that for the dominant,
but it continues to increase and goes to ﬁxation.
Selection of the same intensity has a greater impact on a haploid
locus ( qspq / [1 sq]) than on an additive autosomal diploid locus,
with an additive sex-linked locus intermediate (see Table 6.2); their q
values for equivalent situations are in the ratios 1: 1/2: 2/3. Further,
selection against a recessive is much more effective for a sex-linked than
an autosomal locus. These observations become of major importance
when we consider the balance between mutation and selection in the
next chapter.

Number of generations required for a given change
in allele frequency
The number of generations for a
given change in frequency
depends on the selection
coefﬁcient, the mode of
inheritance and the dominance of
the allele

How long does it take for an allele frequency to change by a given
amount under selection? This clearly depends on the intensity of selection, and on the mode of inheritance. We can obtain exact solutions in
some cases, and approximate solutions are available in other cases
when selection is weak (Crow & Kimura 1970).

SELECTION

For a recessive lethal, an expression for the time taken in generations can be obtained by rearranging Equation 6.1. If we refer to the
allele frequencies after 0, 1, 2, t generations as q0, q1, q2, qt, then
q1 q0 / (1 q0)
and
q2 q1 / (1 q1)
by substituting for q1, and simplifying,
q2 q0 / (1 2q0)
by extension:
qt q0 / (1tq0)

(6.4)

By rearranging this expression we obtain the number of generations, t,
required to change the allele frequency from q0 to qt:
t (q0 qt) / q0qt 1/qt 1/q0

(6.5)

How many generations will it take to reduce the frequency of the
chondrodystrophy allele in California condors from 17% to 1%? Using
Equation 6.5, we predict that it will take 94 generations (Example 6.2).
As we saw earlier, selection is very ineffective in changing the frequency
of a rare recessive allele, as a large proportion of the recessive alleles are
hidden from selection in heterozygotes. For example, the number of
generations required to change the frequency of a recessive lethal allele
from 0.1 to 0.01 is 90 generations, while it takes 900 generations to
change it from 0.01 to 0.001.
When selection is less intense, the time taken for a given change in
allele frequency is longer. It also depends on the dominance relationships at the locus, as is evident from Fig. 6.6.

Example 6.2 How long will it take to reduce the frequency of the
recessive lethal chondrodystrophy allele in California
condors to a frequency of 1%?
The current frequency of the recessive lethal chondrodystrophy allele
in California condors is approximately 0.17. To determine the number
of generations required to reduce its frequency to 0.01, we use
Equation 6.5 and substitute 0.17 for q0 and 0.01 for qt, as follows:
t 1/qt 1/q0 (1/0.01) (1/0.17) 100 5.994.1 generations
Consequently, it will take 94 generations to reduce the frequency of
the chondrodystrophy allele to 1% as a result of natural selection.

Selection coefﬁcients
Expressions for change in allele frequencies ( q) can be used (after rearrangement) to estimate selection coefﬁcients. For example, Haldane

143

144

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

(1924) estimated the magnitude of selective differences between
melanic and typical phenotypes of peppered moths (Box 6.2). He estimated that typical moths had a relative ﬁtness about 1/3 lower than
melanics in polluted environments, a value that led to ridicule at the
time. However, subsequent work by Kettlewell (1973) found selection
coefﬁcients of about the magnitude predicted by Haldane.

Box 6.2 Magnitude of selection involved in industrial
melanism in the peppered moth (after Haldane
1924 and Kettlewell 1973)
The melanic form of peppered moths increased from a frequency of about 1% to
about 99% in 52 years in the polluted midlands of England. Haldane (1924) used the
following reasoning to derive an approximate expression for the time in generations
for a dominant favourable (M) allele to increase in frequency from p0 to pt:

Zygotic frequencies
Relative ﬁtnesses

Melanic
MM

Melanic
Mt

Typical
tt

p2
1

2pq
1

q2
1 s

1

0.99
0.01

p0 0.005
pt 0.90

Frequencies 1848
Frequencies 1900

0.01
0.99

Total

The value for q0 is obtained by equating q02 0.99, taking square roots to obtain
q0 0.995, and equating p0 1 q0 1 0.995 0.005.
Similarly, pt is obtained by equating qt2 0.01, taking square roots to obtain qt 0.1,
and equating pt 1 qt 1 0.1 0.9.
The equation for change in frequency of the melanic allele (Fig. 6.4)
pspq2 / (1 sp2)
can be equated to the rate of change in allele frequency with time (dp / dt) and integrated to obtain an expression for number of generations t.
t

冦 冤

冥

1
1
1
pt (1  p0 )
ln


s
p0 (1  pt )
1  pt 1  p0

冧

As peppered moths breed annually, t52 generations. Consequently, the selection
coefﬁcient is
s

冦冤

冥

1
1
1
0.90  0.995

ln

52
0.005  0.10
0.100 0.995

冧

⬖s0.32
i.e. the survival of typical moths was predicted to be 32% lower in each generation
than that of melanic moths in polluted areas.
Thirty years later, experiments done by Kettlewell yielded a selection coefﬁcient
of about this magnitude, as shown below. Kettlewell captured melanic and typical
moths, marked and re-released them. A second sample of moths was captured
shortly afterwards.

SELECTION ON QUANTITATIVE CHARACTERS

Polluted area

Numbers marked
and released
Released moths
recaptured

Unpolluted

Melanic

Typical

Melanic

Typical

447

137

473

496

27.5%

13.1%

6.34%

12.5%

The recapture rate for melanics was approximately twice as high as that for typicals
in the polluted area, yielding a selection coefﬁcient of about 50%. Selection in unpolluted areas was approximately as strong in the opposite direction. The selection coefﬁcient is higher than predicted by Haldane, attributable both to the use of a very
heavily polluted area to carry out the experiment, and to migration of moths from
unpolluted areas.

Selection coefﬁcients for morphological characters may be strong, especially for morphological polymorphisms involved in camouﬂage.
However, selection on protein and DNA polymorphism is thought to be
very much weaker, around 1% or less. For example, selection coefﬁcients
are typically only 1% or less at the MHC, where evidence of selection is
compelling (Satta et al. 1994). Many polymorphisms at the DNA level may
involve no selective differences, or very weak selection. The extent of
selection on allozyme polymorphisms is a matter of vigorous debate as
to whether they are neutral, or subject to weak selection (Chapter 9).

Selection on quantitative characters
So far we have discussed the effects of selection on allele frequencies at
single loci. For quantitative characters, this is an oversimpliﬁcation as
variation for quantitative traits is determined by segregation at multiple loci in combination with varying inputs from environmental effects
(Chapter 5). Consequently, we will switch from discussing the effects of
selection on allele frequencies to the effects of selection on phenotypic
means and variances.
There are three basic forms of selection that operate on quantitative
characters: directional, stabilizing and disruptive (Fig. 6.7). Directional
selection favours phenotypes towards one direction and results in a
shift in the mean in this direction (provided there is genetic variation)
(Chapter 5). Stabilizing selection favours phenotypic intermediates
and results in no change in the mean, but may result in reduced variation in future generations. Disruptive selection favours both phenotypic extremes and does not alter the mean, but may lead to increased
variation in future generations.
In a constant and relatively uniform environment, reproductive
ﬁtness is subject to directional selection, while characters more peripheral to reproduction and survival typically exhibit selection favouring
phenotypic intermediates (stabilizing selection). In heterogeneous envi-

Adaptive evolutionary change
results from natural selection on
reproductive ﬁtness, a quantitative
character

Natural selection on quantitative
characters affects the character
mean and/or variance

145

146

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

Fig. 6.7 Forms of selection operating on quantitative characters (after Futuyma 1979).
Stabilizing, directional and disruptive selection are shown. The upper panels indicate the
relationships between phenotype and ﬁtness, the middle panels the phenotypic
distributions before selection and the bottom panels the distributions after selection in
the subsequent generation. The shaded areas in the middle panels indicate the portions of
the distribution favoured by selection.

ronments, selection may vary in different directions in different habitats (disruptive). We elaborate on these three forms of selection below.

Directional selection
Consistent selection in the one
direction (directional selection)
results in phenotypic change in the
direction of selection, provided
there is genetic diversity

Directional selection occurs when the environment is changing in a
consistent manner such as global warming, increasing levels of pollutants in air, water, or soil (around cities, mines, or intensive agriculture), or when new diseases affect a population. Directional selection
has been shown to produce large changes in outbred populations of
many species of wild and domestic animals and plants, for reproductive
rate, growth rate in body size, behaviour, chemical composition, tolerance to heavy metals, resistance to disease, etc. (Frankham & Weber
2000). For example, selection for tameness changed silver foxes from
extremely hostile aggressive animals to ones approaching the tameness
of domestic dogs within 17 generations (Box 6.3).
Reproductive ﬁtness, even in a relatively constant environment, is
subject to directional selection; the individuals with the highest ﬁtness
have the most offspring surviving to reproductive maturity and make
the greatest genetic contributions to the next generation.
One example of adaptive evolutionary change with important conservation implications is worthy of recording in detail. King (1939)
brought wild rats into captivity and maintained them under relatively

DIRECTIONAL SELECTION

constant conditions for 14 years (25 generations) under ‘natural’ selection. Over this time their reproductive lifespan increased from about
204 days to 440 days, the number of litters per female increased from 3.7
litters to 10.2, average litter size was relatively unchanged and female
sterility decreased (from 37.3% to 5.8% in generations 1–8, to 0% in later
generations). In addition, the female rats became better mothers and
the adults increased in weight by 17%–20%. Reproductive ﬁtness in the
captive environment has increased by about three-fold. Similar adaptive increases in reproductive ﬁtness have also been observed in fruit
ﬂies brought into captivity (Gilligan 2001). Captive populations of
endangered species are likely to show similar adaptation to captivity.
Disturbingly, this will typically result in decreased ﬁtness when they are
reintroduced to the wild (see Chapter 18).

Box 6.3 Response to directional selection for tameness in
foxes (after Belyaev 1979)
Silver foxes are farmed for their fur. They were so hostile towards humans that they
could not be handled without special precautions against being bitten. Initially 30%
were extremely aggressive towards humans, 20% were fearful, 40% were aggressively fearful and only 10% displayed a quiet exploratory reaction without fear or
aggression. Directional selection for tameness resulted in a major genetic shift over
17 generations. The foxes of the selected population were not only unafraid of
people, but they now displayed a positive reaction to human contact, and answered
to nicknames. Like dogs, these foxes seek contact with familiar persons, tend to get
close to them, and lick their hands and faces. These changes were due to genetic
changes, not improved handling.
Reproductive functions in the selected foxes also changed. The reproductive
season was prolonged with out-of-season oestrus in some females. Selection for
tameness brought about a change in the hypothalamic–hypophyseal–adrenal system,
in levels of steroid sex hormones and in serotonin levels. The characteristics of these
domesticated foxes are similar to those of other domesticated animal species. These
changes are instructive in the conservation context, as related changes may be occurring in endangered species in captivity, albeit much more slowly.

Adaptive evolutionary change may utilize either pre-existing genetic
diversity, or that arising due to mutation. Most adaptation in the short
to medium term is due to pre-existing genetic diversity, since there may
be a long waiting time for beneﬁcial mutations to occur in any but vast
populations (Chapter 7). Species that evolved heavy metal tolerance and
colonized polluted mine tailings in Great Britain were those with preexisting genetic variation for heavy metal tolerance. Species without
the prerequisite genetic variation did not evolve resistance (Bradshaw
1991). The American chestnut has been driven almost to extinction by
the introduced chestnut blight disease, presumably because it did not
have genetic diversity for resistance to the disease and no disease-resistant mutations have occurred since (Burdon 1987). Conversely, microbe
populations are so vast that new mutations occur at most loci in every
generation, and they can adapt rapidly by relying on new mutations.

Selection response in the short
term operates primarily on preexisting genetic diversity, rather
than on new mutations, as
mutation is a rare event

147

148

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

Long-term adaptive changes
Directional selection for many
generations in large populations
may produce extremely large
genetic changes

Large changes in phenotype over time have been observed in many populations subjected to directional selection, especially of laboratory and
domestic species (Fig. 6.8). One of the most rapid and sustained
responses to selection was for ﬂying speed in fruit ﬂies from about 2 cm
per second to 170 over 100 generations (Fig. 6.8b).
In the fossil record, the height of the molar tooth in the horse
lineage increased from ⬃ 4.7 mm to 52.5 mm over about 40 million
years (Manly 1985). This was presumably an adaptation to a change
from browsing on leaves and succulent plants to feeding on grass
which contains silica and wears teeth rapidly (Futuyma 1998). It only
requires selective deaths of about one individual in a million per generation to account for this evolutionary change. Brain size increased
markedly in the human lineage from about 400 cm3 to 1400 cm3 in 3
million years (Futuyma 1998). Changes per unit time wrought by artiﬁcial selection are typically greater than those found in either the fossil
record or in species colonizing new regions within recent history
(Futuyma 1998).

Fig. 6.8 Long-term response to directional selection. (a) Two-way selection for oil
content in maize seeds (after Dudley 1977). (b) Selection for increased ﬂying speed in
replicate populations of fruit ﬂies (after Weber 1996). (c) Two-way selection for 6-week
body weight in mice (after Roberts 1966). (d) Selection for litter size in mice (after
Falconer 1977); the bold solid line shows the impacts of selection for increased litter size,
the dotted line selection for decreased litter size, while the ﬁne solid line is an unselected
control population.

STABILIZING SELECTION

Stabilizing selection
Stabilizing selection is the most frequent form of selection found for
quantitative characters in populations in stable habitats. Phenotypic
intermediates are favoured with this form of selection. For example, stabilizing selection is found for birth weight in humans (Fig. 6.9). The
smallest and largest babies have poorer survival than intermediate
weight babies. Large babies are more likely to die from birth complications, while small babies are often insufﬁciently mature to survive
(these effects are now greatly reduced by medical intervention).
Similarly, intermediate sized eggs in ducks and domestic fowl hatch
best, and higher survival has been found for individuals with intermediate phenotypes for shell size in snails, body size in lizards and body
dimensions in female sparrows following a severe storm (Lerner 1954).
As stabilizing selection favours phenotypic intermediates, it is
not expected to change the mean of the character. In its simplest form,
stabilizing selection is expected to reduce genetic diversity (Roff 1997).
However, selection favouring heterozygotes also causes phenotypic stabilizing selection (Robertson 1956), leading to the retention of genetic
diversity (Chapter 9).

For populations that have been in
the same relatively stable
environment for a long period,
most quantitative characters are
subject to selection that favours
phenotypic intermediates
(stabilizing selection)

Fig. 6.9 Stabilizing selection for
birth weight in humans (after
Mather 1973).

Disruptive selection
Populations of conservation concern are often fragmented. Different
fragments may have dissimilar environmental conditions, such that
natural selection operates in diverse directions across fragments. For
example, selection favours genotypes that tolerate heavy metals (Cu, Zn,
Cd, etc.) in several grass species on polluted mine tailings in Wales, but
operates against them in nearby non-contaminated pastures (Box 7.2;
Bradshaw & McNeilly 1981).

When the environment is
heterogeneous in space, selection
may act in different directions in
dissimilar habitats (disruptive
selection)

149

150

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

The overall consequence of disruptive selection in fragmented habitats is generation of local adaptation, i.e. adaptation is to each separate environment, rather than to the average of environments. One
possible long-term outcome of disruptive selection is speciation
(Chapter 15).

Summary
1. Change is a ubiquitous feature of the environmental conditions
faced by species.
2. Species must evolve if they are to survive environmental changes
that are more severe than individuals can cope with behaviourally or
physiologically.
3. Adaptive evolution occurs through natural selection acting on
genetic diversity within populations. At its simplest level it represents
the change in frequency of a beneﬁcial allele.
4. The impact of selection on a single locus depends upon selection
coefﬁcients, allele frequencies, dominance and the mode of inheritance.
5. The impact of selection on a quantitative character depends on
the form of selection, the intensity of selection and the heritability.
FURTHER READING

Briggs & Walters (1997) Plant Variation and Evolution. Reviews evidence for adaptive genetic changes in plants.
Crow & Kimura (1970) Introduction to Population Genetics Theory. In spite of its age
this is still the classic reference for theoretical population genetics. More
mathematical and advanced than this text.
Endler (1986) Natural Selection in the Wild. An excellent book reviewing evidence
and methods for detecting natural selection in the wild.
Falconer & Mackay (1996) Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. This textbook
provides a very clear treatment of the topics in this chapter with a focus on
animal breeding applications
Futuyma (1998) Evolutionary Biology. A textbook with a broad readable
coverage of evolution, adaptations and the genetic processes underlying
them.
Hartl & Clarke (1997) Principles of Population Genetics. A widely used textbook on
population genetics.
Hedrick (2000) Genetics of Populations. A widely respected textbook in population
genetics. Has a more extensive treatment of many of the topics in this
chapter.
Karieva et al. (1993) Biotic Interactions and Climate Change. Contains a series of
chapters by different authors on the likely biological impacts of global
climate change including the potential for evolutionary adaptation.
Mousseau et al. (2000) Adaptive Genetic Variation in the Wild. Recent reviews on
natural selection and adaptation in the wild.

PROBLEMS

PROBLEMS

6.1 Selection coefﬁcients: If the three genotypes at a locus showing
partial dominance have survival rates as shown, determine the relative ﬁtnesses and the value of s and hs.
A2A2
A1 A1 A1 A 2
⊥______⊥________________________⊥

1
1hs
1 s
90% 88%
40%
6.2 Selection: What will be the frequency of the chondrodystrophy
allele (recessive lethal) in endangered California condors in the next
three generations as a result of natural selection, if the initial frequency is 14.5% (Example 6.1)?
6.3 Selection: How many generations will it take for the frequency
of chondrodystrophy (recessive lethal) to drop from 17% to 0.1% as a
result of natural selection?
6.4 Selection: For a dominant allele (A) with the relative ﬁtnesses
below and an initial frequency p of 0.3, follow the genotype frequencies through from the zygotic stage, through selection, to the adjusted
frequencies. Compute the new frequency of the allele after selection p1
and the change in frequency p.
Genotypes
AA Aa aa Total
Genotype frequencies
at fertilization
1
Relative ﬁtnesses
1
1
0.9
After selection
Adjust so total is 1
New frequency of Ap1 
Change in frequency pp1 p0 
6.5 Selection: Derive the expression for the change in frequency as
a result of selection against an additive deleterious allele, given that
the initial frequency of the deleterious allele is q and the relative ﬁtnesses are as shown in the table below.
Genotypes
AA Aa aa Total
Genotype frequencies
1
at fertilization
Relative ﬁtnesses
1
1 12 s
1 s
After selection
Adjust so total is 1
New frequency of Ap1 
Change in frequency pp1 p0 
6.6 Impact of selection: Assume that we are dealing with an allele
that was favoured in the wild, but is deleterious in captivity. By how
much would the frequency of the allele change if its initial frequency
was 0.9 and was selected against with a selection coefﬁcient of 0.1, as

151

152

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – I

(a) additive, (b) recessive, (c) dominant and (d) partial recessive with
hs0.02?
PR ACTIC AL EXERCISES: COMPUTER SIMUL ATIONS

Use a computer simulation program such as POPGEN to simulate the
following:
1. Selection against chondrodystrophy (recessive lethal) in
California condors.
The relative ﬁtnesses of the three genotypes at this locus are

dw
dwdw
1
1
0 [need to use 0.000001 in POPGEN]
Commence with a frequency of the dw allele of 0.17 and simulate
100 generations of selection against this condition. What do you
observe?
2. Selection for industrial melanism in peppered moths (favoured
dominant allele). Industrial melanism increased in frequency from an
allele frequency of about 0.005 in 1848 to about 0.90 in 1900 (52 generations). By trial and error, ﬁnd a value of s that is adequate to explain
this evolutionary event (e.g. try a relative ﬁtness for tt of 0.5, and subsequently try other values for W11). The selection model is
tt
Mt
MM
1 s
1
1
3. The impact of different selection coefﬁcients on change in frequency of an advantageous additive allele. Compare the allele frequency trajectories with selection coefﬁcients of 0.4, 0.1 and 0.01.
Begin all cases with an initial frequency of 0.01. How long does each
take to go to ﬁxation? You will need to run the simulations for 1000
generations.
aa
Aa
AA
1 s
1  12 s
1
What is the effect of different sized selection coefﬁcients on the
rate of allele frequency change?
4. Effect of dominance on allele frequency changes. Compare the
allele frequency trajectories for advantageous dominant, additive and
recessive alleles for loci with the following relative ﬁtnesses. In each
case begin with a frequency of 0.01 for the favoured allele and run for
2000 generations.
aa
Aa
AA
Dominant
0.9
1
1
Additive
0.9
0.95
1
Recessive
0.9
0.9
1
How do they differ?
What difference does it make to the recessive case if it is partially
recessive with a slight effect in the heterozygote (try a heterozygote
ﬁtness of 0.902)?

PRACTICAL EXERCISES

5. Evolution of resistance to a biocide in a pest species. Predation by
European red foxes is a major factor threatening small mammals in
Australia. Sodium ﬂuoroacetate poison (1080) is widely used to control
foxes. If a dominant allele for 1080 resistance exists with an initial frequency of 0.1%, how long will it take for it to rise in frequency to 50%
in a region with continuous baiting with 1080 (and no migration)?
Assume that the relative ﬁtnesses of RR, RS and SS under baiting are 1,
1 and 0.5, respectively.

153

Chapter 7

Evolution in large populations.
II. Mutation, migration and their
interactions with selection
Terms:
Cline,
genetic load,
introgression,
mutation,
mutation load,
mutation–selection balance,
neutral mutation,
silent substitutions,
stable equilibrium,
transposon

Mutation–selection balance: white
mutant chinchilla in South America
being taken by a great horned owl,
while camouﬂaged agouti
chinchillas survive.

Mutation and migration are the only means for regaining lost
genetic diversity. The balance between mutation and selection
results in a load of rare deleterious alleles in species that result in
inbreeding depression

ORIGIN AND REGENERATION OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

Factors controlling the evolution of populations
An evolving population is a complex system inﬂuenced by mutation,
migration, selection and chance, operating within the context of the
breeding system. In Chapter 6 we dealt with selection and its role in
adaptive evolution. In this chapter we consider mutation, and migration, and the joint actions of mutation with selection and migration
with selection, again in the context of large populations. These are
essentially deterministic forces; responses of large populations are predictable and different replicate populations subject to the same conditions will behave very similarly.

Importance of mutation, migration and their
interactions with selection in conservation
Mutation and migration, and their interactions with selection have six
important implications in conservation genetics:
• Regeneration of genetic diversity due to mutation. Genetic diversity,
lost by chance and selection, regenerates through mutation. We deal
with the rate at which this occurs.
• Recovery of genetic diversity by migration. When genetic diversity is
lost in small threatened populations, it can be recovered by migration from other genetically distinct populations. This may occur
through natural migration, or deliberate translocations. This is an
extremely important tool in the genetic management of fragmented
populations (Chapters 13 and 16).
• Migration often reverses inbreeding depression.
• The impact of gene ﬂow (migration) from related species (introgression). Many rare species are being ‘hybridized out of existence’ by
crossing with common related species (Chapter 16).
• Maintenance of genetic diversity. Mutation and migration are often
important determinants in the maintenance of genetic diversity
(Chapter 9).
• The load of deleterious alleles in populations. The balance between
deleterious mutation and selection results in an ever-present but
changing pool of rare deleterious mutations (mutation load) in populations. Inbreeding exposes these mutations (mostly recessive),
resulting in reduced reproduction and survival (Chapters 11 and 12).
This in turn increases extinction risk in threatened species.

Origin and regeneration of genetic diversity
Genetic diversity is the raw material required for adaptive evolutionary
change. Most naturally outbreeding species and large populations carry
a substantial store of genetic diversity. However, genetic diversity is lost

Populations evolve through the
action of mutation, migration,
selection and chance

155

156

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – II

by chance in small populations and as a result of directional selection.
This leads to the questions:
• How is genetic diversity produced?
• How quickly can it be regenerated?
Mutation is the ultimate source of genetic diversity, while recombination can produce new combinations of alleles. If genetic diversity is lost,
it can be regenerated by mutation, but this is a very slow process.
Alternatively, genetic diversity can be restored by natural or artiﬁcial
immigration between populations that differ in allelic content.

Mutation
Mutation is the ultimate source of
all genetic diversity

Mutations typically occur at a very
low rate

A mutation is a sudden genetic change in an allele or chromosome. All
genetic diversity originates from mutation. Mutations include all
changes in DNA sequence at a locus, the order of loci along chromosomes and changes in chromosome number. Most of these arise spontaneously from errors in DNA replication, or other errors during meiosis.
In this chapter we concentrate on single locus mutations. They are
generated by base substitutions, additions and deletions in the DNA, by
gene duplications and by insertions and excisions of mobile segments of
DNA (transposons). It has come as a surprise that half or more of spontaneous mutations in fruit ﬂies (and probably all eukaryotes) are due to
transposons that can best be viewed as DNA parasites (Finnegan 1989).
Chromosomalmutations(duplications,deletions,inversions,translocations and polyploidy) are important in tracing speciation, and in hybrid
infertility, so we shall defer consideration of them until Chapter 15.
The patterns of genetic diversity in populations are the result of a
variety of forces that act to eliminate or increase and disperse these
novel alleles and chromosome arrangements among individuals and
populations. In conservation genetics we are concerned with:
• How rapidly do mutations add genetic diversity to populations?
• How do mutations affect the adaptive potential and reproductive
ﬁtness of populations?
• How important is the accumulation of deleterious alleles to ﬁtness
decline in small populations?
The most important mutations are those at loci affecting ﬁtness traits,
most notably lethal or deleterious mutations. Some mutations, such as
the melanic allele in moths, actually increase ﬁtness. However, many
mutations that occur in non-coding regions of the genome and those
that do not result in amino acid substitutions in proteins (silent substitutions) probably have little or no impact on ﬁtness (neutral mutations). Neutral mutations are, however, important as molecular
markers and clocks that provide valuable information on genetic differences among individuals, populations and species.
The rate of mutation is critical to its role in evolution. For a range of
loci in eukaryotic species, the typical spontaneous mutation rate of
morphological mutations is one new mutation per locus per 100000
gametes per generation (Table 7.1). Rates of reverse mutation (mutant to

MUTATION

Table 7.1

Spontaneous mutation rates for different loci and characters in a
variety of eukaryote species. Approximate mean rates are given as the frequency of new mutations per locus, per generation, except where speciﬁed
otherwise

Type of mutation

Rate

Morphological mutations
Mice, maize and fruit ﬂies (normal → mutant)
Reverse mutation (mutant → normal)

⬃ 1105 / locus
0.3105 / locus

Electrophoretic variants (mobility change)

0.1105 / locus

Microsatellites
Mammals
Fruit ﬂies

1 104 / locus
0.7 105 / locus

DNA nucleotides

108109 / base

mtDNA nucleotides
Mammals

5–10nuclear

Quantitative characters
Fruit ﬂies, mice, maize

103 VE / trait

Source: Houle et al. (1996); Hedrick (2000).

normal) are typically lower. Apart from microsatellites, mutation rates
are similar in humans, mice, maize and fruit ﬂies, and are assumed to
be similar across all eukaryotes.
Mutation rates for different classes of loci differ. Rates for morphological mutations are higher than for electrophoretic variants, but
microsatellite loci in mammals have higher rates. Mutation rates per
nucleotide base are clearly lower as there are typically 1000 or more
bases per gene locus. Mitochondrial DNA has a much higher mutation
rate than nuclear loci, making it a valuable tool in studying short-term
evolutionary processes (Chapter 19).
Loci affecting quantitative characters mutate in a similar manner to
single loci, the cumulative rate being approximately 103 times the
environmental variance per generation for a range of characters across
a range of species (Table 7.1). This relatively high rate, compared to
single loci, is due to the fact that a mutation at any of the many loci
underlying the character can affect the trait. Quantitative trait loci
appear to mutate by the same range of mechanisms known for qualitative gene loci (Frankham 1990b).
Spontaneous mutation rates are considered to be almost constant
over time. However, mutation rates may be elevated under stressful conditions (Hoffmann & Parsons 1997). Further, mutation rates are
increased by particular environmental agents, such as radiation and
chemical mutagens, including mutagenic compounds found in some
plants. As these factors are rarely experienced and stress has only a
modest effect on mutation rate, they are unlikely to materially inﬂuence conclusions we reach about the evolutionary impact of mutation.

157

158

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – II

Deleterious mutations occur at
thousands of loci in the genome,
so their cumulative rate is
relatively high

As mutation rates are very low,
mutation is a very weak
evolutionary force and can be
ignored in the short term for
many circumstances

Deleterious mutations occur at many loci, so their cumulative rates
per haploid genome are much higher than the rates given above for
single loci. These cumulative rates are of major importance when we
consider the total load of mutations in populations and the impact of
inbreeding on them. For example, the total rate of recessive lethal mutation is about 0.01 per haploid genome per generation in fruit ﬂies, nematodes and ferns (Drake et al. 1998). We can readily account for this in
fruit ﬂies as the product of the mutation rate per locus per generation
(105), times the number of loci that can produce lethal mutations (3600
out of 12 000; Miklos & Rubin 1996). As there are other deleterious mutations that are not lethal, the cumulative rate of deleterious mutation is
considerably higher. This has been estimated to be 0.1–0.4 per haploid
genome per generation in fruit ﬂies, 0.1–0.8 in plants, 0.01 for rodents
and 0.6–1.6 for humans, chimpanzees and gorillas (Drake et al. 1998;
Eyre-Walker & Keightley 1999). Other estimates are, if anything, higher
than these (Lynch et al. 1999). While there are uncertainties and controversies about these estimates, the overall rates of deleterious mutation
per genome are relatively high.
Mutation is normally a recurrent process where mutations continue
to arise over time. It is in fact a slow chemical reaction. We can model
the impact of mutation on a population by considering a single locus
with two alleles A1 and A2 at frequencies of p and q, with mutations only
changing A1 into A2 at a rate of u per generation, as follows:
Mutation rate
Initial allele frequencies

u
A1 → A2
p0
q0

The frequency of the A1 allele in the next generation p1 is the frequency
of alleles that do not mutate, namely
p1 p0 (1 u)

(7.1)

Thus, the frequency of the A1 allele declines.
The change in frequency of the A1 allele ( p) is the difference
between the frequencies in the two generations
pp1 p0 p0(1u) p0
pup0

Genetic diversity is only
regenerated by mutation over
periods of hundreds to millions of
generations

(7.2)

Consequently, the frequency of A1 declines by an amount that depends
on the mutation rate u and the starting frequency p0. There is a corresponding increase in the frequency of A2 ( q up0). Since the mutation rate is approximately 105 for morphological mutations, the
maximum change in allele frequency is 105 when p1. This is very
small and can be ignored in many circumstances.
When genetic diversity is lost from a species, it is only regenerated
by mutation. The time taken to regenerate genetic diversity is a major
issue in conservation genetics. As can be seen from Box 7.1, regeneration
times are very long, typically taking thousands to millions of generations for single locus variation. Regeneration times depend on mutation rates, so they are shorter for quantitative characters and

MUTATION

microsatellites (in mammals) and longer for allozymes and single locus
morphological variation (Chapter 14).
This discussion assumes no selection. Selection favouring beneﬁcial
mutation (alleles increasing ﬁtness) will shorten regeneration times,
while selection against deleterious mutations will extend them. Most
mutations are deleterious, so the estimates below are likely to be underestimates.

Box 7.1 Time to regenerate genetic diversity by mutation
Several endangered species have lost much of their genetic diversity, presumably as
a consequence of small population size (Chapters 3, 8 and 10). For example, the
cheetah is presumed to have lost its genetic diversity 10 000 years ago (O’Brien
1994). The northern elephant seal has no allozyme genetic diversity, probably as a
result of a population size bottleneck due to hunting, while the related southern elephant seal has relatively normal levels of genetic diversity (Bonnell & Selander 1974).
The lost genetic diversity is only regenerated by mutation. How long does this
take? We can address this question in a simple manner by asking how long it would
take to regenerate a frequency of 0.5 for an allele that had been lost. From Equation
7.1, the change in allele frequency due to mutation is
p1 p0 (1u)
This equation represents any single generation transition in frequency, so we can write
p2 p1 (1u)
and by substituting for p1 from above, we obtain
p2 p0 (1u)2
Consequently the expression for the frequency after t generations pt is:
pt p0 (1u)t ⬃ p0 eut
By taking natural logarithms (ln) and rearranging, we obtain the following expression
for the number of generations t for the frequency to change from p0 to pt as
t

ln p0  ln pt
u

The conditions we speciﬁed translate into p0 1 and pt 0.5. If we consider allozymes with a mutation rate of approximately u106, then
t[ln 1ln 0.5] / 106 693147 generations
For microsatellites in mammals u104, so the number of generations will be
t[ln 1 ln 0.5] / 104 6931 generations
Clearly, genetic diversity is only regenerated very slowly by mutation. More detailed
consideration of the regeneration of mutation suggests that 105107 generations are
required to regenerate single locus morphological or allozyme diversity (Lande &
Barrowclough 1987) and 104 generations to regenerate microsatellite genetic diversity in mammals.

159

160

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – II

The balance between forward and
reverse mutations results in an
equilibrium with both alleles
present. Other stronger forces
often overwhelm this

Mutation typically occurs in both directions. Since there are two opposing forces, this results in an equilibrium. If the mutation rates in the
two directions are u and v, the equilibrium occurs when the mutations
occurring in each direction are equal (upvq), resulting in an equilibrium frequency:
u
→ A
A1 ←
2
v
q̂ 

u
(u  v)

(7.3)

Thus, the equilibrium frequency for the A2 allele depends only on u and
v, the forward and reverse mutation rates. This is a stable equilibrium
as the frequencies move back towards the equilibrium point, if perturbed.
To obtain an equilibrium frequency, we can insert numerical values
of forward and reverse mutation rates (Example 7.1). It takes a very long
time to reach this equilibrium, so we can only observe it in species with
short generation times, e.g. bacteria. As the forces generating this equilibrium are very weak, it is easily overwhelmed by other stronger
factors, such as natural selection.

Example 7.1 Equilibrium frequency due to the balance between
forward and reverse mutations
Typically reverse mutation rates for morphological mutations are
lower than forward rates (Table 7.1), so we consider a case where u 
105, and v 3106. Substituting these values into Equation 7.2, we
obtain:
q̂ 

105
u
10 / 130.77
 5
(u  v) 10  3  10 6

Thus, the equilibrium frequency of the A2 allele is 77%, and that of
the normal A1 allele 1 0.770.23.

Selective value of mutations
The majority of newly arisen
mutations are deleterious

New mutations are being continually added to populations, albeit at a
slow rate. These consist of
• neutral mutations,
• deleterious mutations,
• favourable mutations, and
• mutations favoured in some circumstances, but not in others.

SELECTIVE VALUE OF MUTATIONS

Fig. 7.1 Hypothetical
distribution of effects of new
mutations in functional loci on
reproductive ﬁtness. Some
mutations are lethal, most are
deleterious, some are neutral, or near
neutral (shaded region) and a small
proportion is advantageous.

Most mutations outside functional loci are expected to be neutral or
nearly so. Mutations within functional loci will be predominantly deleterious as random changes in the DNA sequence of a locus will usually
be from a functional allele to an equal, or less-functional state. Some are
lethal and a small proportion is advantageous, as shown in the hypothetical distribution in Fig. 7.1. For example, mean ﬁtness declines if the
mutation rate is increased using mutagenic agents such as -rays, chemical mutagens or transposons (Mackay 1989). Similarly, if initially homozygous populations are allowed to accumulate spontaneous mutations
with minimal natural selection, the mean ﬁtness declines with time
(Garcia-Dorado et al. 1999; Hedrick 2000). Conversely, for quantitative
characters that are not closely associated with ﬁtness, such as bristle
number in fruit ﬂies, mutation increases the variance, but has little
effect on the mean.
The distribution of effects of mutations is a critical issue in two conservation contexts:
• maintenance of genetic diversity (Chapter 9)
• accumulation of newly arisen mildly deleterious mutations
(Chapter 14).
There is limited evidence on the proportions of mutations that fall into
the different categories. About 90% of spontaneous mutations in fruit
ﬂies are deleterious and only 10% fall in the neutral and near neutral
category (Lande 1995a). The proportion of mutations that is favourable
is presumed to be no more than 1%–2%.
Some mutations are deleterious in some conditions, but favourable
in others (Kondrashov & Houle 1994). However, we are unaware of any
estimates of the proportion of mutations falling into this class. It is very
difﬁcult to study mutations, especially those of very small effect as they
require vast experiments to detect and their effects may be confounded
with the impact of other factors.
Selection acts to reduce the frequencies of deleterious mutations.
The next section considers the balance between mutation and selection.

161

162

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – II

Mutation–selection balance and the mutation
load
Low frequencies of deleterious
alleles are found at many loci in all
outbreeding populations, due to
the balance between their
addition by mutations and their
removal by natural selection

While selection is capable of removing deleterious alleles from populations, in reality the time taken is so long that new mutations usually
occur before previous mutations have been eliminated, especially for
recessive alleles. A balance (equilibrium) is reached between addition of
deleterious alleles by mutation and their removal by selection (mutation–selection balance). Consequently, low frequencies of deleterious
alleles are found in all naturally outbreeding populations (mutation
load). This is illustrated for humans in Table 7.2. We refer to this as the
mutation load. These mutations are extremely important in understanding the deleterious consequences of inbreeding (Chapters 11 and
12).
Several important points summarize mutation loads:
• Mutational loads are found in essentially all species, including
several threatened species (Table 7.3)
• Deleterious alleles are normally found only at low frequencies, typically much less than 1% at any locus
• Deleterious alleles are found at many loci
• There are characteristic differences in frequencies of deleterious
alleles according to the mode of inheritance (Table 7.2). For mutations that are equally deleterious, autosomal recessives have the
highest frequencies and autosomal dominants the lowest, with sexlinked recessives intermediate. This arises from the differential
effectiveness of selection on mutations with different modes of
inheritance.

Table 7.2

Frequencies of deleterious mutations in Caucasian humans, listed
according to mode of inheritance

Disease

Frequency

Autosomal dominant
Achondroplasia
Retinoblastoma
Huntington’s chorea

5105
5 105
5104

Autosomal recessive
Albinism
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Phenylketonuria
Cystic ﬁbrosis
Tay–Sachs syndrome

3 103
2103
7 103
2.5 103
1103

Sex-linked recessive
Haemophilia
Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy

1104
2104

Source: Nei (1975).

MUTATION–SELECTION BALANCE AND THE MUTATION LOAD

Table 7.3

Deleterious mutations found segregating in threatened species or

populations

Species

Deleterious mutation

Reference

Brown bear
California condor
Golden lion tamarin
Gray wolf
Przewalski’s horse
Red-ruffed lemur

blindness
chondrodystrophy
hernia, liver enzyme defect
blindness
vitamin E maladsorption
hairlessness, funnel chest

1
2
3, 4
5
3
3

References: 1, Laikre et al. (1996); 2, Ralls et al. (2000); 3, Ryder (1988); 4, Schulman et al.
(1993); 5, Laikre & Ryman (1991).

Fig. 7.2 Flow chart for
mutation–selection balance.

To understand the different allele frequencies for genetic diseases with
different modes of inheritance, we derive expressions for allele frequency equilibria due to mutation–selection balance using the ﬂow
chart in Fig. 7.2.
We will begin by deriving the expression for the equilibrium frequency for a deleterious recessive allele. The change in allele frequency
is due to the combined impacts of mutation ( qmutation) and selection
( qselection), as follows:
q  qmutation  qselection
Deleterious alleles increase due to mutation (up) (Equation 7.2) and are
removed by selection spq2/ (1 sq2) (Table 6.2c). Therefore
q up

spq2
⬃ upspq2
1  sq2

(the denominator is essentially 1 as sq2 is a very small quantity for rare
alleles).

The mutation–selection
equilibrium frequency for a given
mode of inheritance depends only
on the mutation rate and the
selection coefﬁcient

163

164

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – II

At equilibrium, q0, so
up ⬃spq2
and
q2 ⬃u / s
Thus, the equilibrium frequency q̂ is:
q̂⬃ √(u/s)

(7.4)

The equilibrium between mutation and selection depends only upon
the mutation rate and the selection coefﬁcient. This equilibrium results
in low frequencies of deleterious alleles in random mating populations.
The frequency will be highest for mildly deleterious alleles, and least for
lethal alleles. For example, if the mutation rate is 105, and the mutation
is lethal (s 1), the equilibrium frequency is √105/1 3.2103, while
if the selection coefﬁcient is 0.1, the equilibrium frequency is 102.
Equilibrium frequencies for autosomal and sex-linked loci with
different degrees of dominance, derived using the same rationale as
above, are shown in Table 7.4. While the equilibria differ depending upon
degree of dominance and whether the locus is autosomal or sex-linked,
all depend only on the mutation rate and the selection coefﬁcient.
Equilibrium frequencies are higher for recessive than dominant alleles,
with additive alleles intermediate (for alleles with the same selection
coefﬁcients and mutation rates). Further, for recessives the equilibrium
frequencies are higher for autosomal than for sex-linked loci due to the
greater efﬁciency of selection against recessives in the hemizygous sex.
Overall, the equilibrium frequencies accord with the observed patterns
of frequencies of deleterious alleles in humans (Table 7.2).
Alleles are rarely completely recessive (Simmons & Crow 1983). This
has a substantial effect on their equilibrium frequencies. For example,
‘recessive’ lethals in fruit ﬂies generally reduce heterozygote ﬁtness by
1%–3%. A 2% reduction in heterozygote survival results in an equilibrium frequency for a lethal of 5104, nearly an order of magnitude
lower than that for a completely recessive lethal (Table 7.4).

Mutation–selection balance in polyploids
Mutation–selection equilibrium
frequencies for recessives are
higher in polyploids than in
diploids, but similar for partial
recessives

Many species of plants are polyploid (Chapter 4). We will consider mutation–selection equilibria in polyploids as a prelude to considering the
impact of inbreeding in polyploids versus diploids (Chapters 11 and 12).
In what follows, we will concentrate on tetraploids, as they are sufﬁcient to illustrate the relevant principles.
Equilibrium frequencies for completely recessive alleles are typically higher in tetraploids than for equivalent diploid loci (Table 7.4). For
example, a lethal with a mutation rate of 105 will have an equilibrium
frequency of about 0.056 in a tetraploid and 3 103 in a diploid. There
is more opportunity for deleterious recessives alleles to be hidden from

MUTATION–SELECTION BALANCE AND THE MUTATION LOAD

Table 7.4

Mutation–selection equilibrium frequencies in diploids and tetraploids for alleles with different degrees of dominance. Examples of the
expected equilibrium frequencies for lethal alleles (s 1) with mutation rates
(u) of 105 are shown, along with that for a partial recessive (hs0.02).

Mode of inheritance
and dominance

Equilibrium
frequency Expected equilibrium
(q̂)
frequency for lethal

Diploid
Autosomal
Recessive
Partial recessive
Dominant
Additive

u/hs
u/s
2u/s

3.16 103
5 104
105
2 105

Sex-linked
Recessive

3u/s

3 105

u/s

105

(u/s)1/4

0.056

(u/s)1/4
(u/s)1/4

0.056
0.056

u/hs

5 104

Haploid
Tetraploid
Recessive
allotetraploid
autotetraploid
close to centromere
distant from centromere
Partial recessive
allotetraploid

√(u/s)

Source: Lande & Schemske (1985); (Falconer & Mackay (1996).

selection as ploidy rises, i.e. selection against deleterious alleles is most
effective for haploid loci, followed by sex-linked, diploid and weakest for
tetraploid loci. Equilibrium frequencies under mutation–selection
balance rise correspondingly. By contrast, partial recessive mutations
have similar equilibria in diploids and tetraploids. As most deleterious
mutations appear to be partial recessives, the latter situation is more
realistic.

Estimating mutation rates from mutation–selection
balance
It is extremely difﬁcult to detect recessive mutations in diploid
species as the genotypes of heterozygotes and homozygous normals
cannot be distinguished phenotypically. For example, haemophilia,
the sex-linked bleeding disease, is frequent in the descendants of

Many estimates of mutation rates
have been obtained from the
balance between mutation and
selection

165

166

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – II

Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom, but it is not possible to determine in which of her ancestors the mutation occurred, or if it
occurred in her.
The equations for mutation–selection equilibrium can be used to
obtain estimates of mutation rates in species where this cannot be
done directly (most species). For example, the ﬁrst estimate of a mutation rate in humans was obtained for the sex-linked haemophilia allele,
based on estimates of the equilibrium frequency and on the selection
coefﬁcient derived from hospital records (Example 7.2). The estimate
was approximately 3  105, in line with estimates from fruit ﬂies and
plants, species where mutations rates had been estimated by more
direct methods.

Example 7.2 Estimating the mutation rate for haemophilia in humans
from mutation–selection equilibrium (after Falconer &
Mackay 1996)
Haldane recognized that the equation for mutation–selection equilibrium could be rearranged to provide an estimate of the mutation
rate. Taking the equation for mutation–selection equilibrium for a
sex-linked recessive (Table 7.4) and rearranging, we obtain:
u sq̂ / 3
Using hospital records in Denmark, Haldane estimated that the frequency of haemophilia in males (q) lay between 4 105 and 17 105,
so we shall use the mid-point of these values, 10.5105. The survival
rate of haemophiliacs relative to normal males (1s) was 0.25. Thus,
the selection coefﬁcient is 0.75. Consequently, the estimate of mutation rate is
u sq̂ / 3 [0.75 10.5105] / 32.6105
Thus, the ﬁrst estimate of mutation rate in humans was approximately 3105.

Mutation–selection balance and ﬁtness
Outbreeding populations contain
a load of rare partially recessive
alleles that reduce reproductive
ﬁtness when homozygous

Mutation–selection balance affects both single loci and quantitative
characters such as reproductive ﬁtness. The impact of these deleterious
alleles on ﬁtness can be measured experimentally by making chromosomes homozygous. In fruit ﬂies most chromosomal homozygotes
have reduced egg–adult survival (viability) (Fig. 7.3). Similar results
have been obtained for autosomes in a range of fruit ﬂy species. The
effects on total reproductive ﬁtness are even greater. The mean reproductive ﬁtness of chromosomal homozygotes is reduced by 70%–90%

MIGRATION

Fig. 7.3 Viabilities of second
chromosome homozygotes and
heterozygotes in fruit ﬂies (after
Hedrick 1983). Only 40% of the
genome is being made homozygous
in this experiment. The average
effect on ﬁtness of making a
chromosome homozygous is
deleterious, with some homozygotes
being lethal, a majority less
deleterious, and a minority relatively
normal.

compared to that of chromosomal heterozygotes in a range of tests
(Latter & Sved 1994). Almost all chromosomes sampled from outbreeding species carry alleles that are deleterious when homozygous.
However, different samples of the same chromosome carry different
complements of deleterious alleles, i.e. individually rare deleterious
alleles are found at many separate loci. Inbreeding experiments also
provide data on the impact of deleterious alleles on ﬁtness (Chapter
12). These experiments lead to conclusions similar to those described
above and extend them to a very wide range of species, including
endangered species.

Migration
The gene pools of populations diverge over time as a result of chance
and selection. Such differences are reduced by migration (Chapter 13).
The impact of migration is illustrated by B blood group allele frequencies in human populations across Eurasia (Fig. 7.4). Prior to about ad
500, the B allele was essentially absent from Western Europe, but it
existed in high frequencies in the east. However, between ad 500 and
1500, Mongols and Tartars invaded Europe. As was typical of such military invasions, they left a trail of rape and pillage, and they left some of
their alleles behind. Note the gradual decrease in frequency of the B
blood group allele from east to west (termed a cline).
The effect of migration on allele frequencies is modelled in Fig. 7.5.
The change in allele frequency due to migration is
q m (qm qo)

(7.5)

Thus, the change in allele frequency depends on the proportion of
alleles contributed by migrants (m), and on the difference in frequency
between the immigrants (qm) and the native (original) population (qo).

The introduction of immigrants
from one population into another
reduces genetic differentiation
among populations and may
restore lost genetic diversity

The genetic impact of migration
depends on the proportion of
alleles contributed by migrants
and on the difference in frequency
between the native population
and the immigrants

167

168

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – II

Fig. 7.4 B blood group allele
frequencies across Eurasia,
resulting from the Mongol and
Tartar invasions between AD 500
and 1500. (© Oxford University
Press 1976. Reprinted from The
Distribution of the Human Blood
Groups and Other Polymorphisms,
Mourant, A.E., C. Kopé and
K. Domaniewska-Sobczak (1976)
2nd edn, by permission of Oxford
University Press.) Prior to this, the
B blood group allele was presumed
to be absent from Western
Europeans as it still is in native
Basques in Spain, and in other
isolated populations.

Fig. 7.5 Modelling the impact of
migration on the genetic
composition of a population.

The change in frequency from the original population to the new
population after immigration is
qq1 qo qo m (qm qo)qom (qm qo)
Thus, the change in frequency depends on the proportion of
migrants and the difference in allele frequency between
migrants and residents.
Migration may have very large effects on allele frequencies. For
example, if immigrants are homozygous for an allele absent from the
native population, and 20% of the population in the next generation are
immigrants, then the immigrant allele increases in frequency from 0 to
0.2 in a single generation.
Equation 7.5 can be used to estimate the migration rate from allele frequency data. Many species are threatened by gene ﬂow (introgression)
from related non-endangered species (Chapter 16). The extent of admix-

MIGRATION–SELECTION EQUILIBRIA AND CLINES

ture from domestic dog genes in the endangered Ethiopian wolf is determined in Example 7.3. Approximately 22% of the genetic material in the
Web Valley population of Ethiopian wolves derives from domestic dogs.

Example 7.3 Estimating dog introgression in the endangered
Ethiopian wolf from microsatellite allele frequencies
(data from Gottelli et al. 1994)
Ethiopian wolves are genetically distinct from domestic dogs, but
hybridization occurs in areas where they co-occur, as in Web Valley,
Ethiopia (Box 4.1). The population from the Sanetti Plateau is relatively pure. The extent of admixture from domestic dogs in the Web
population of Ethiopian wolves can be estimated using the allele frequencies at microsatellite locus 344. Dogs lack the J allele, while ‘pure’
Ethiopian wolves are homozygous for it. Frequencies of this allele are:

J allele frequency
Sanetti population
Web population
Domestic dogs

qo
q1
qm

1.00 (‘old’)
0.78 (‘new’ – containing dog admixture)
0.00 (‘migrants’)

All the non-J alleles in the Web population have come from dogs. The
equation from Fig. 7.5 can be rearranged to provide an expression for
the migration rate m
q1 qo m (qm qo)
m

q 1  q0
qm  q0

Upon substituting allele frequencies from above into this expression,
we obtain
m

0.78  1.0
0.22
0  1.0

Thus, the Web Valley population of Ethiopian wolves contains about
22% of its genetic composition from domestic dogs. This is the accumulated contribution of alleles from dogs, not a per generation estimate. Phenotypically abnormal individuals, suspected of being
hybrid individuals, represent about 17% of the population. Estimates
can also be made from other microsatellite loci and the best estimate
would come from combining information from all informative loci.

Migration–selection equilibria and clines
Clines can also form when there is a balance between selection for different alleles in different habitats (local adaptation) and there is migration
(gene ﬂow) across habitats. For example, there is such a cline in heavy
metal tolerance in colonial bent grass plants passing from polluted mine

Migration among populations
subject to differential selection
may lead to gradation in allele
frequencies (clines)

169

170

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – II

wastes to nearby unpolluted pasture in Wales (Box 7.2). Selection favours
heavy-metal-tolerant plants on the mine waste, but acts against them in
the unpolluted surrounding pasture. Pollen ﬂow (migration) moves
alleles among the populations, such that there is a gradation in frequency of heavy-metal-tolerant plants across the transition zone
between the two habitats. Heavy metal tolerance declines with distance
in the downwind directions, as less pollen reaches more distant pasture.
Clines are common for morphological and quantitative characters. In
fact, they are so common that they are accorded the status of ecogeographic rules (Futuyma 1998). Bergmann’s rule states that races from
cooler climates are larger than races from warmer climates. Allen’s rule
states that in warm-blooded animals, protruding parts (e.g. ears, tail) are
shorter in races from colder climates than in races from warmer climates.
Gloger’s rule states that races of warm-blooded vertebrates are more
darkly pigmented in warm and humid areas than in cool and dark areas.
While these rules refer to phenotypes, they typically reﬂect both
environmental and genetic differences. Fruit ﬂies in Europe show a latitudinal cline in wing length. This is due, at least partially, to genetic differences, as it is still found when ﬂies from different regions are raised
under the same laboratory conditions. This cline is due to natural selection as it evolved again, within 20 years, when this species of fruit ﬂy was
introduced into North America (Huey et al. 2000). Clines seem to be more
frequent in quantitative characters than for allozymes or DNA markers
(see Hedrick & Savolainen 1996).

Box 7.2 Cline in heavy metal tolerance in colonial bent
grass due to migration–selection equilibrium
(Bradshaw & McNeilly 1981)
Genetically determined heavy metal tolerance is high on the polluted slagheaps from
old mines in Wales, but low in the surrounding pastures that are relatively unpolluted
by heavy metals. Pollen ﬂows predominantly from plants on mine wastes in the direction of the prevailing wind. This creates a gradient of heavy metal tolerance that
declines with distance from the mine. Selection favours heavy metal tolerance on the
mine wastes, and acts against tolerant plants on the normal pasture. Heavy metal tol-

MIGRATION–SELECTION EQUILIBRIA AND CLINES

erance has evolved in several different species of grasses (including colonial bent grass,
Anthoxanthum odoratum and Festuca ovina), allowing them to colonize polluted mine
tailings (Jones & Wilkins 1971; Briggs & Walters 1997). However, only species with
pre-existing genetic variation for heavy metal tolerance succeeded in colonizing mine
wastes. Those species without the prerequisite genetic variation failed to colonize.

Clines are expected to be steep (i.e. large changes over short distances)
when dispersal rates are low and more gradual when dispersal rates are
high. For example, clines in the frequency of industrial melanic versus
typical moths from highly polluted to essentially unpolluted regions of
Britain are steeper for the weakly dispersing scalloped hazel moth than
for the more strongly dispersing peppered moth (Bishop & Cook 1975).
Species that disperse readily over long distances show less local differentiation and fewer clines than species with lesser dispersal ability
(Chapter 13). Plants show considerable local adaptations to soil and
climate (as they cannot escape them), and probably develop clines more
frequently than animals.
Simple models can be constructed to provide expressions for the
equilibrium between migration and selection (Fig. 7.6). The equilibrium
frequency is derived for this simple case. This equilibrium depends only
upon the migration rate (m), the selection coefﬁcient (s) and the allele
frequency in the migrants (qm), i.e. it does not depend on the allele frequency in the initial population. When migration rates are high and
selection is weak, migration dominates the process and essentially
erases local adaptation (‘swamping’). Conversely, when migration rates
are low and selection is strong, there will be local adaptation. This is
consistent with the effects of dispersal rates on the steepness of clines,
as described above. Example 7.4 illustrates the equilibrium achieved for
given values of the selection coefﬁcient, migration rate and frequency
in the immigrants.

The shape of clines is related to
dispersal ability of species

The migration–selection
equilibrium frequency depends on
the intensity of selection, the
proportion of immigrants and the
allele frequency in the immigrants

Fig. 7.6 Model of the balance
between migration and selection. A
large random mating population is
subject to additive viability
selection that is being balanced by
migration from a population with a
different allele frequency.

171

172

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – II

q selection 

 12 sq(1  q) 1 2 1
⬃ 2 sq  2 sq
1  sq

q migration m (qm q)

Overall q q selection  q migration
 12 sq2  21 sq m (qm q)  12 sq2 q (m  12 s) m qm
(the denominator ⬃ 1, assuming sq is small).
At equilibrium q 0, so the equilibrium frequencies are obtained
as the solutions of the quadratic equation, yielding (Li 1976):
q̂ 

(2m  s) √{(2m  s) 2  8s m qm}
2s

While there are two solutions to the equation, only one of them will be
possible (frequency between 0 and 1).

Example 7.4 Migration–selection equilibrium
If s 0.2, m 0.1 and qm 0.1, we obtain the equilibrium frequency by
substituting into the expression for allele frequency equilibrium due
to the opposing forces of selection and migration for an additive locus
given above:
q̂ 

(2m  s) √{(2m  s) 2  8s m qm}
2s

q̂ 

(2  0.1  0.2)√[(2 0.1  0.2) 2  80.1 0.2 0.1]
20.2

q̂ (0.4  √[0.16 0.016]) / 0.4
q̂ 0.0513 (or 1.95, an impossible solution)
Thus, the equilibrium frequency is 5.1% due to the balance between
migration and selection.

Clines may reﬂect changes in selection across environmental gradients,
such as temperature, altitude, etc. They may also occur as the result of
short-term historical migration events (Fig. 7.4).
Clines due to migration–selection balance will be disrupted in
threatened species if habitat fragmentation eliminates allele ﬂow. This
will alter the balance between local adaptation and ‘swamping’ in the
direction of local adaptation.
Migration–selection balance can arise between wild and captive
populations of endangered species when there is regular movement of
wild individuals into captivity, or vice versa. For example, the wild population of nene (Hawaiian goose) is regularly augmented by captivebred individuals, as are many ﬁsh species. Selective forces are typically
different in wild and captive environments. Captive populations adapt
to their captive environment and are likely to have reduced reproductive ﬁtness when returned to their natural habitat (Chapter 17).

PROBLEMS

Summary
1. Mutation is the ultimate source of all genetic diversity.
2. Mutation and migration are the only means for regaining
genetic diversity lost through chance or selection.
3. Mutations occur at a very low rate, so mutation is a weak evolutionary force over the short term.
4. All naturally outbreeding populations contain a load of deleterious mutations due to mutation–selection balance. When populations
are inbred, these mutations cause reduced reproductive ﬁtness
(inbreeding depression).
5. Migration breaks down genetic differentiation caused by natural
selection and chance.
6. Migration from an introduced species may compromise the
genetic integrity of an endangered species.
7. Migration and selection may result in a balance, or a cline.
FURTHER READING

Crow & Kimura (1970) Introduction to Population Genetics Theory. Relatively
advanced treatment of topics in this chapter.
Falconer & Mackay (1996) Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. Provides a very
clear treatment of the topics in this chapter.
Futuyma (1998) Evolutionary Biology. Contains a broad readable coverage of evolutionary genetics.
Hartl & Clarke (1997) Principles of Population Genetics. This widely used textbook
covers many of the topics in this chapter.
PROBLEMS

7.1 Mutation: By how much will the frequency of a microsatellite
allele in cheetahs change due to mutation in one generation, if the
allele has a current frequency of 0.1 and the mutation rate from other
alleles to this allele is 104?
7.2 Forward and reverse mutation: What is the equilibrium frequency due to forward and reverse mutation at a locus where the
mutation rates are 105 and 106, respectively?
7.3 Regeneration of genetic diversity by mutation: Northern elephant seals lost all of their allozyme variation as a result of a population size bottleneck caused by over-exploitation. How many
generations would it take for an allele that had been lost to reach a frequency of 0.4 due to mutation alone, assuming a mutation rate of 4
106?
7.4 Mutation–selection equilibrium: What equilibrium frequency
would you expect for the recessive lethal chondrodystrophy in
California condors as a result of mutation–selection balance, if the
mutation rate was 2105?
7.5 Mutation–selection equilibrium: What mutation rate would be
needed to explain the current frequency of chondrodystrophy among
captive hatchlings of about 17%? Is this a realistic mutation rate? Why
do you think the frequency of the lethal allele is so high?

173

174

EVOLUTION IN LARGE POPULATIONS – II

7.6 Mutation–selection equilibrium: Derive the equilibrium frequency for an additive autosomal locus as a result of mutation–
selection equilibrium. Use the expressions from Equation 7.2 and
Table 6.2 to obtain an expression for the overall change in allele frequency (remember to insert q, not p).
q qmutation  qselection 
(hint: it is reasonable to assume that the denominator of the selection term is approximately unity for a rare allele)
At equilibrium q 
⬖
7.7 Mutation–selection equilibrium: Estimate the mutation rate for
a dominant autosomal dwarﬁsm in humans using the appropriate
mutation selection equilibrium equation. The phenotypic frequency
of affected babies at birth is 10/94 000, and their relative ﬁtness is
approximately 20% (after Strickberger 1985).
7.8 Mutation–selection equilibrium: Compute the equilibrium frequencies for loci that are autosomal recessive, additive autosomal,
autosomal dominant, sex-linked recessive and haploid, given that the
selection coefﬁcient is 0.10 and the mutation rate 105 per locus per
generation. What are the impacts of ploidy (haploid vs. diploid) and
dominance on the equilibrium frequencies?
7.9 Migration: Use the migration equation to estimate the extent of
racial admixture in US African Americans in Georgia from Fya allele
frequencies at the Duffy blood group locus (data from Strickberger
1985):
Fya frequency
Africans
US Caucasians
US African Americans

0.000
0.422
0.045

Chapter 8

Evolution in small populations
Populations of conservation concern are small, or declining.
Mutation, migration, selection and chance determine evolution in
both small and large populations. However, chance has a much
greater impact and selection is less effective in small populations
than in large populations

Terms:
Binomial distribution,
bottleneck,
effective population size,
evolutionary potential,
ﬁxation,
idealized population,
inbreeding,
Poisson distribution,
random genetic drift,
stochastic

Mauritius kestrel: a species that
survived a population size
bottleneck of a single pair.

176

EVOLUTION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Importance of small populations in conservation
biology
Species of conservation concern
have, by deﬁnition, small or
declining population sizes

Small or declining populations of threatened and endangered species
are more prone to extinction than large stable populations. Population
size is the most inﬂuential of the ﬁve criteria for listing species as endangered under the IUCN system (J. O’Grady et al., unpublished data).
Species whose adult population sizes are less than 50, 250 or 1000 are
respectively critically endangered, endangered and vulnerable (Chapter
1). For example, there are only ⬃75 (adults plus juveniles) critically
endangered northern hairy-nosed wombats surviving in Australia,
while the Mauna Kea silversword in Hawaii declined to about two dozen
plants. Some species have reached such low numbers that they exist, or
have existed, only in captivity. These include Arabian oryx, black-footed
ferret, European bison, Père David’s deer, Przewalski’s horse, scimitarhorned oryx, California condor, Socorro dove, Guam rail, four species of
ﬁsh, eleven species of Partula snail, Cooke’s kok’io plant, Franklin tree,
and Malheur wirelettuce (WCMC 1992; Falk et al. 1996).
Over-exploitation has reduced population sizes in many species that
were previously present in large numbers. American plains bison once
numbered about 30–40 million on the prairies but were reduced to
about 500 (Ehrlich & Ehrlich 1981), while European bison were reduced
to 13 from, presumably, millions. Elephants, rhinoceroses and many ﬁsh
have similarly experienced major reductions through over-exploitation.
Harvesting has depleted many tree species, cacti and American ginseng.
The numbers of many frog species have recently crashed, perhaps due to
a fungal disease (Daszak et al. 2000). Numerous species with once large
population sizes and continuous distributions have been fragmented by
habitat clearance causing reductions in overall numbers, and separation into small, partially isolated populations.
Some species have experienced population size reductions (bottlenecks), but have since recovered. The Mauritius kestrel was reduced to a
single pair but has now recovered to 400–500 birds (Box 8.1). Northern
elephant seals dropped from many thousands to 20–30 but now number
over 100000 (Box 8.2), while the Lord Howe Island woodhen declined to
20–30 individuals but has since built up to about 200 birds. These populations pay a genetic cost for their bottlenecks; they have reduced
genetic diversity, higher levels of inbreeding, lower reproductive ﬁtness
and compromised ability to evolve (Box 8.1).

Box 8.1 A population size bottleneck in the Mauritius
kestrel and its genetic consequences (after
Groombridge et al. 2000)
The decline of the Mauritius kestrel began with the destruction of native forest and
the plunge towards extinction resulted from thinning of eggshells and greatly reduced
hatchability following use of DDT insecticide beginning in the 1940s. In 1974, its

IMPORTANCE OF SMALL POPULATIONS IN CONSERVATION BIOLOGY

population numbered only four individuals, with the subsequent population
descending from only a single breeding pair. Under intensive management the population grew to 400–500 birds by 1997, but it experienced six generations at
numbers of less than 50.
While this is a success story, the Mauritius kestrel carries genetic scars from its
near extinction. It now has a very low level of genetic diversity for 12 microsatellite
loci, compared to six other kestrel populations (see below). The Mauritius kestrel has
72% lower allelic diversity and 85% lower heterozygosity than the mean of the nonendangered kestrels. Prior to its decline, the Mauritius kestrel had substantial genetic
diversity, based on ancestral museum skins from 1829–94, but even then its genetic
diversity was lower than the non-endangered species. The Seychelles kestrel went
through a parallel decline and recovery and also has low genetic diversity. It was rare
during the 1960s and had become extinct on many outlying islands. However, it has
now recovered to a population size of over 400 pairs.

Species

A

He

Sample size

Endangered
Mauritius kestrel
Restored
Ancestral
Seychelles kestrel

1.41
3.10
1.25

0.10
0.23
0.12

350
26
8

Non-endangered
European kestrel
Canary Island kestrel
South African rock kestrel
Greater kestrel
Lesser kestrel

5.50
4.41
5.00
4.50
5.41

0.68
0.64
0.63
0.59
0.70

10
8
10
10
8

The reproductive ﬁtness of the Mauritius kestrel has been adversely affected by
inbreeding in the early post-bottleneck population; it has lowered fertility and productivity than comparable falcons and higher adult mortality in captivity.

Small population size is a pervasive concern in conservation biology.
Not only do such populations suffer the genetic constraints described
above and have an increased probability of extinction, but also the evolutionary process in small populations is fundamentally different from
that in large populations. Consequently, it is critical that we consider
the special evolutionary problems confronted by small populations.
Mutation, selection and migration have essentially deterministic
effects in large populations. Replicate populations and replicate loci
subject to them behave in the same way. The effects of chance are generally minimal, except for neutral alleles. Conversely, in small populations, the role of chance predominates and the effects of selection are
typically reduced or even eliminated. Chance introduces a random, or
stochastic, element into the evolution of populations, i.e. replicate loci
and populations exhibit a diversity of outcomes. Small populations also
become inbred at a faster rate than do large populations, as inbreeding
is unavoidable.

Mutation, migration, selection and
chance are responsible for
evolution in both small and large
populations. However, the role of
chance is much greater and the
impact of selection less, in small
than large populations

177

178

EVOLUTION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

We begin by considering the effects of chance alone. Following that
we will, in turn, consider inbreeding, selection, mutation and mutation–selection equilibrium in small populations. The role of migration
in small populations is deferred to Chapter 13 where we consider population fragmentation.

Impact of small population size: chance effects
Chance effects arise from random
sampling of gametes in small
populations

When a small population reproduces, the subsequent generation is
derived from a sample of parental gametes. Each offspring receives one
allele, selected at random, from each parent. Just by chance, some
alleles, especially rare ones, may not be passed on to the offspring and
may be lost. The frequencies of alleles that are transmitted to the following generation are likely to differ from those in the parents (Fig. 8.1).
Over multiple generations allele frequencies change, or drift, from one
generation to the next, a process termed random genetic drift.

Fig. 8.1 Genetic drift in allele
frequencies in a small population of
golden lion tamarins. Allele A3 is lost
by chance. Further, the frequencies of
A1 and A2 change from one generation
to the next, with A1 rising and A2 falling.

Genetic drift
Genetic drift has major impacts on
the evolution of small populations

The effects of chance are greater
in small than in larger populations

It may seem that chance effects would have minor impacts on the
genetic composition of populations. However, random sampling of
gametes within small populations has three consequences of major
importance in evolution and conservation:
• Random changes in allele frequencies from one generation to the
next
• Loss of genetic diversity and ﬁxation of alleles within populations
• Diversiﬁcation among replicate populations from the same original
source (e.g. fragmented populations).
The above three features are illustrated in the ﬂour beetle populations (Fig. 8.2). First, individual populations show random ﬂuctuations
in allele frequencies from generation to generation. For example, in the
N10 population marked with an asterisk in the upper panel the wildtype allele begins at a frequency of 0.5, drops in frequency for three
generations, and goes through regular rises and falls until generation
20 when its frequency is approximately 0.65. Note that the ﬂuctuations
in frequencies for populations of size 10 are much greater than for

IMPACT OF SMALL POPULATION SIZE: CHANCE EFFECTS

Fig. 8.2 Random genetic drift of the wild-type and black alleles at a body colour locus
in the red ﬂour beetle. Two population sizes N 10 and N 100 were used, with 12
replicates of each. All populations began with frequencies of 0.5 for the two alleles and
were maintained by random sampling of either 10 or 100 individuals to be parents of each
succeeding generation (after Falconer & Mackay 1996). Large variation in allele frequencies
occurred in the small (N10) populations due to random genetic drift both among replicates
and from generation to generation in individual replicates. Conversely, allele frequencies in the
large populations showed greater consistency. Selection favoured the wild-type allele over the
black mutation.

populations with N100, clearly illustrating that genetic drift is
greater in smaller populations.
Second, there is random diversiﬁcation among replicate populations, particularly in the N10 populations. These populations all
began with allele frequencies of 0.5, yet end up with frequencies
ranging from 0 to 1. Again, the diversiﬁcation among replicate populations is much less for the N100 populations.
Third, some populations lose genetic diversity and become ﬁxed.
Seven of the 12 N10 populations became ﬁxed over 20 generations. Six
of the seven populations became ﬁxed for the wild-type allele (all /)
and one for the black allele (all b/b). On average, we expect equal
numbers of each type to be ﬁxed if the alleles are not subject to selection, given that the two alleles were equally frequent initially. None of
the large populations became ﬁxed over the 20 generations.

Modelling drift in allele frequencies
The characteristics of chance effects can be understood by modelling
the sampling process in the absence of selection, mutation and migration (Fig. 8.3). Let us ﬁrst consider sampling alleles for an offspring from
a selﬁng individual with genotype A1A2. This is akin to tossing two coins.
The possible outcomes are two heads, two tails, a head and a tail, or a tail
and a head, all with probabilities of 1⁄4. The chance that only heads (or
only tails) are obtained as (1⁄2)2  1⁄4. Thus, if only one offspring is produced,

Genetic drift can be predicted
using binomial sampling theory

179

180

EVOLUTION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Fig. 8.3 Simple model of a small
population with no mutation,
migration or selection.

The extent of variation in allele
frequencies among replicate
populations or loci depends on
the allele frequencies and on the
population size.

there is a 50% chance that one or the other allele will not be passed on.
With N offspring, there are 2N coins tossed and the chance that all are
heads (or tails) is now (1⁄2)2N. Consequently, it is much less likely that A1 or
A2 will be lost if N is large. Further, the allele frequencies in the offspring
will be more similar to that of the parent in larger populations. Just as
in statistical theory, a larger (genetic) sample size always provides a
better estimate (of parental allele frequencies) than a smaller one.
This simple case shows that basic probability theory can be used to
calculate changes in allele frequency from one generation to the next
due to random sampling of alleles. In the following discussion, we
assume that populations breed randomly, which is equivalent to stating
that the alleles in the offspring are a random sample of the parental
gene pool.
When a population of size N reproduces, 2N gametes are sampled to
produce subsequent generations (Fig. 8.3). We can predict the outcome
of sampling of gametes using binomial sampling theory with replicate
populations. Replicate populations are needed because the sampling
process is stochastic and we cannot predict the outcome of any one
sample. Hence, by considering what would happen if we applied the
same sampling process to replicate populations, we can evaluate the
full range of possible outcomes. The concept of using replicate populations and loci to estimate the range of possible outcomes from stochastic factors in experimental and theoretical situations is frequently used
in conservation genetics.
If the population being sampled has two alleles A1 and A2 at initial
frequencies of p0 and q0, respectively (and there are no other forces), the
mean frequency of the A1 allele in the next generation (p1) over a large
number of replicate populations is unchanged
p1 p0
However, there will be random variation among replicate populations
in their allele frequencies. In the simple case where N2 (Example 8.1),
the expected distribution of allele frequencies in replicate populations

IMPACT OF SMALL POPULATION SIZE: CHANCE EFFECTS

are given by terms of the binomial expansion of (pq)4. There are ﬁve
possible outcomes, the ﬁrst and the last outcomes are homozygous
(ﬁxed). Consequently, the average heterozygosity across all replicate
populations is reduced (see below). However, the mean allele frequency
is unchanged from that in the source population.

Example 8.1 Expected distribution of allele frequencies in
populations of size N2
If we take many samples of 2 individuals (4 gametes) from the same
population where alleles A1 and A2 have frequencies of p and q, respectively, the expected distribution of allele frequencies is given by the
terms of the binomial expansion (pq)4. The power of 4 is the number
of gametes sampled, twice the number of individuals sampled. The
terms of this expansion are given below, along with the frequencies
for the case where p0.6 and q0.4.

Outcome

p

frequency (f )

Example (p0.6, q0.4)

4 A1, 0 A2
3 A1, 1 A2
2 A1, 2 A2
1 A1, 3 A2
0 A1, 4 A2

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

p4
4p3q
6p2q2
4pq3
q4

0.64
0.1296
4 0.63 0.4 0.3456
6 0.62 0.42 0.3456
4 0.60.43 0.1536
0.44
0.0256

Totals

1

1.0000

Thus, we expect ﬁve outcomes with frequencies of A1 of 1, 0.75, 0.5,
0.25 and 0. For the example with initial base population frequencies
of p0.6 and q0.4, the proportions of each outcome are expected to
be 12.96%, 34.56%, 34.56%, 15.36% and 2.56%, respectively.
The mean frequency is
Mean p兺pi fi
(1 0.1296 )(0.75 0.3456)(0.5 0.3456)(0.25 
0.1536)0
0.6
Thus, the mean frequency is unchanged.
For a population with size N, the expected distribution of outcomes for
a locus with two alleles is given by the terms of the binomial expansion
(pq)2N (akin to the tossing of a biased coin). The probability that a population has all A1 alleles is p2N, while the probability that it has all A2
alleles is q2N. These two situations correspond to populations that have
lost all their genetic diversity. The probability that a population has r A1
alleles and 2Nr A2 alleles is
(2Nr)prq2Nr
where (2N
) is the binomial function 2N! / [r! (2Nr)!].
r
The expected distributions of allele frequencies over many replicate

181

182

EVOLUTION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Fig. 8.4 Expected distribution of
allele frequencies when many
replicate samples of sizes 10 and
100 are taken from a population
with an allele frequency for A1 of
0.6.

populations of sizes 10 and 100 are shown in Fig. 8.4. Among replicate
populations (or loci), the variance around the mean allele frequency is
given by the binomial sampling variation:
2

p

p0q0
2N

(8.1)

Consequently, the variance in allele frequency depends on the allele frequencies and the population size. Variance is higher in small than large
populations. Further, the variance is greatest when the two alleles have
frequencies of 0.5, and less when allele frequencies are unequal. When
there are two alleles, p2  q2.
Sampling occurs in every generation in small populations, and the
effects are cumulative. This can be seen in Fig. 8.2, where the replicate
populations of size 10 diverge more with passing generations. The
cumulative effects of genetic drift with time are extremely important in
conservation genetics. However, the theory is more complex, and is
deferred until Chapters 10, 11 and 13.

Fixation
The probability of losing an allele
in a single generation is higher in a
small than in a large population
and greater for rare than for
common alleles

Genetic drift will ultimately cause all except one allele to be lost. The
surviving allele is ﬁxed. In each generation there is a probability that
each allele will become ﬁxed, or lost. The probability of losing an allele
is dependent on its frequency and on the population size. In the two
allele case, the probability of losing one allele is the probability of ﬁxing
the other allele.
The probability that a gamete does not contain allele A1 is (1p).
Consequently, the probability that a random mating population loses
allele A1 (all individuals in the population become A2A2) in a single generation is the probability that a gamete does not contain allele A1 raised
to the power of the number of gametes sampled, namely

IMPACT OF SMALL POPULATION SIZE: CHANCE EFFECTS

Pr (losing A1) (1p)2N
Similarly, the chance of losing allele A2 (all individuals becoming A1A1),
is (1q)2N. For example, for a population of size 4, with alleles A1 and A2
at initial frequencies of 0.25 and 0.75, respectively, the chance of losing
A1 in one generation of sampling is (1 0.25)8 0.100. The probability of
losing A2 is (10.75)8 1.53105. Note that the rarer allele has a far
greater probability of being lost. For a population of size 100, the chance
of losing alleles with these frequencies in one generation is essentially
zero. Thus, the probability of losing an allele is dependent on the population size.

Effects of population bottlenecks
Genetic diversity is typically lost as a consequence of short periods at
small sizes (bottlenecks), or continued small population sizes. The
northern elephant seal suffered a bottleneck due to over-hunting and
has no allozyme genetic diversity (Box 8.2) and many endangered
species have been bottlenecked (Table 8.1). Bottlenecks often occur
during the founding of island populations. Founders may be as few as a
single pair (inseminated female) of animals, or a single plant propagule
capable of self-fertilizing or asexual reproduction. For example, the Isle
Royale gray wolves were founded in about 1950 by a single pair that
reached the island in Lake Superior, during an extremely cold winter, by
crossing an ice bridge from the mainland (Wayne et al. 1991).

Box 8.2 Population bottleneck in the northern elephant
seal

Northern elephant seals were hunted for their fur and oil, and suffered such a severe
decline that they were thought to be extinct. Fortunately, a small population of about
20–30 survived on Isla Guadalupe in the Paciﬁc. This species has large harems, so it
may have been reduced to only a single harem. (Illustration from Austin & Short
1984.)

Genetic diversity is reduced by
population size reductions

183

184

EVOLUTION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

In their classic study, Bonnell & Selander (1974) showed that this bottlenecked
population had no genetic diversity at 20 allozyme loci, while the related southern
elephant seal had normal levels of genetic diversity. Subsequently, Hoelzel et al.
(1993) found that the northern elephant seal had only two mtDNA variants compared to 23 in southern elephant seals.
Following protection from hunting, the northern elephant seal has recovered to
numbers of over 100 000 and it has been removed from the endangered species list.
This demonstrates that a population size bottleneck does not necessarily doom a
species to immediate extinction. However, the loss of genetic diversity is likely to
make it more prone to extinction from new diseases or other environmental
changes. Further, the population will be partially inbred (Chapter 11), and is likely to
have reduced reproductive ﬁtness as a consequence (Chapter 12). An important
feature of such bottleneck events is the large chance element in the outcome. Some
situations will be relatively harmless if few deleterious mutations are, by chance,
present in the remaining population. In other cases, populations are not so lucky;
deleterious mutations are ﬁxed and they decline to extinction.

Table 8.1

Bottlenecks in endangered species (numbers of founders
breeding in captivity)

Species

Bottleneck size

Mammals
Arabian oryx
Black-footed ferret
European bison
Indian rhinoceros
Père David’s deer
Przewalski’s horse
Red-ruffed lemur
Siberian tiger

10
7
13
17
~5
12 (1 domestic mare)
7
25

Birds
California condor
Chatham Island black robin
Guam rail
Mauritius kestrel
Mauritius pink pigeon
Nene (Hawaiian goose)
Puerto Rican parrot
Whooping crane

14 (3 clans)
5
12
2
6
17
13
14

Reference
1
2
3
3
4
5
5
3
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13

References: 1, Marshall et al. (1999); 2, Russell et al. (1994); 3, Hedrick (1992); 4, Ballou (1989);
5, Hedrick & Miller (1992); 6, Geyer et al. (1993); 7, Ardern & Lambert (1997); 8, Haig et al.
(1994); 9, Groombridge et al. (2000); 10, Wayne et al. (1994); 11, Rave et al. (1994); 12, Brock
& White (1992); 13, Glenn et al. (1999).

IMPACT OF SMALL POPULATION SIZE: CHANCE EFFECTS

The impact of single pair bottlenecks on allele frequencies in experimental populations of fruit ﬂies is shown in Fig. 8.5. Note the loss of
alleles, particularly of rare alleles. Allele frequencies have changed from
those in the parent population. Replicate bottlenecked populations
varied in the allele they lost and in the frequencies of the alleles that
remained. On average, heterozygosity dropped from 0.61 in the base
population to 0.44 in the bottlenecked populations, and the number of
alleles from 12 to 3.75. Note that the cumulative effects of Ne 100 over
57 generations has resulted in a similar loss of genetic diversity. In what
follows we present the theory relating to the effects of single generation
population bottlenecks, while the effects of sustained small population
size are deferred until Chapter 10.

Population bottlenecks result in
loss of alleles (especially rare
ones), reduced genetic diversity
and random changes in allele
frequencies

Fig. 8.5 Effect of single pair
population bottlenecks on
experimental populations of fruit
ﬂies (England 1997). The
distribution of allele frequencies at
a microsatellite locus is shown in
the large outbred base population,
in four replicate populations
subjected to a bottleneck of one
pair of ﬂies, and in four populations
maintained at Ne 100 for 57
generations. Alleles are lost,
especially rare ones, and allele
frequencies distorted in the
bottlenecked populations.

The impact of a bottleneck on heterozygosity is simplest to derive for
a single pair bottleneck (Table 8.2). From that we can generalize to larger
sized bottlenecks. Following a single pair bottleneck heterozygosity is
reduced from 2pq to 1.5pq, a decline of 25%. In general, the proportion
of initial heterozygosity retained after a single generation bottleneck is
H1 / H0 1 (1/2N)

(8.2)

where H1 is the heterozygosity immediately after the bottleneck, and H0
that before. Upon rearrangement we obtain an expression for the
change in heterozygosity between the two generations ( H):
H H1 H0 – (1/2N) H0

(8.3)

A proportion 1/(2N) of the original heterozygosity is lost. Thus, single
generation bottlenecks have to be severe before they have a substantial
impact on heterozygosity. A bottleneck of N25 only reduces heterozygosity by 2%, while a bottleneck of 100 reduces it by only 0.5%. Loss of
genetic diversity arises predominantly from sustained reductions in
population size, rather than single generation bottlenecks (Chapter 10).
The impact of a bottleneck on allelic diversity is often greater,
although correlated. Overall, the number of alleles (A) retained following a single generation bottleneck is

185

186

EVOLUTION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Table 8.2 Effect on heterozygosity of a single pair, single generation
bottleneck. The heterozygosities given are the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
He following the single pair bottleneck. The base population has two alleles A1
and A2 at frequencies p and q, respectively (and a heterozygosity of 2pq)
Possible alleles
in samples
Frequency Heterozygosity
of two individuals (f )
(He)
fHe
p4
4p3q
6p2q2
4pq3
q4
1

4 A1
3 A1 : 1 A2
2 A1 : 2 A2
1 A1 : 3 A2
4 A2
Total

0
0.375
0.5
0.375
0

0
1.5 p3q
3 p2q2
1.5 pq3
0
1.5 pq (p2 2pqq2)
1.5 pq

Mean heterozygosity in bottlenecked populations H1 1.5 pq
Consequently, H1 / H0 1.5pq / 2pq0.75 [1(1 / 2N)].
Thus, a single pair bottleneck, on average, reduces heterozygosity by
25% of the initial value.

No. of
alleles

A n 

兺 (1 p )
i1

Fig. 8.6 Effects of population
bottlenecks on evolutionary
potential in fruit ﬂies (Frankham et
al. 1999). Populations were
subjected to a single pair
bottleneck for one generation.
These populations, their base
population and highly inbred
(homozygous) populations from
the same stock were all increased
to the same population size, placed
in cages and subjected to a regime
of increasing concentrations of
NaCl until extinction. Extinction
concentrations for the three
treatments are plotted. Evolutionary
potential was signiﬁcantly reduced in
the bottlenecked populations and they
were more variable than the base
population.

i

2N

(8.4)

where n is the number of alleles before the bottleneck and pi is the frequency of the ith allele. The sigma term is the number of alleles lost.
Loss of heterozygosity and allelic diversity in the bottlenecked fruit
ﬂy populations (Fig. 8.5) are close to those expected from the theory
above. For example, the heterozygosity was predicted to fall from 0.61 to
0.61 (1  1⁄4) 0.45 in the bottlenecked populations. The observed
change was to 0.44. In the Mauritius kestrel, heterozygosity declined
57% from 0.23 to 0.10 as a result of single pair bottleneck (Box 8.1). This
was greater than expected from a single pair bottleneck. However, the
population suffered several generations of bottlenecks. Additional
genetic diversity would have been lost during the six generations it
spent at sizes of less than 50.
Many threatened wildlife populations show evidence of loss of
genetic diversity due to population size bottlenecks (Chapter 3). For
example, polymorphism is signiﬁcantly reduced in artiodactyls (swine,
hippopotamus, ruminants, deer and bison) that have suffered known
bottlenecks (Hartl & Pucek 1994). In contrast, the Indian rhinoceros in
Chitwan, Nepal has gone through a recent bottleneck of 60–80 individuals but retains a high level of genetic diversity (9.9% heterozygosity for
allozymes; Dinerstein & McCracken 1990). Such a bottleneck is too large
to generate any detectable reduction in heterozygosity within a few generations (see Problem 8.5).

MEASURING POPULATION SIZE

Effect of population bottlenecks on quantitative
genetic diversity
For quantitative characters showing only additive genetic variation, the
expected loss of quantitative genetic variation due to a bottleneck is
also a 1/(2N) proportional reduction in variation. This expectation has
been veriﬁed in several selection experiments in fruit ﬂies (Frankham
1980). The situation is more complex for characters exhibiting nonadditive genetic variation, as bottlenecks can actually increase additive
genetic variation due to increased homozygosity for rare recessive
alleles (Robertson 1952). Increases in additive genetic variation in bottlenecked population for characters exhibiting non-additive variation
have been reported by Bryant et al. (1986) and by Lopez-Fanjul &
Villaverde (1989), but their relevance to evolutionary potential is questionable as the mean values for the characters dropped due to the
inbreeding involved. A direct test of the impact of population bottlenecks on evolutionary potential in fruit ﬂies found clear reductions due
to the bottleneck (Fig. 8.6). The bottlenecked populations also showed a
greater variance in evolutionary potential among populations than did
the outbred controls (see also Whitlock & Fowler 1999).

Population size bottlenecks
reduce evolutionary potential

Inbreeding
In small populations, matings among relatives (inbreeding) is inevitable. With time, every individual becomes related so that no matings
between unrelated individuals are possible. This is illustrated in the
Mexican wolf pedigree (Fig. 8.7). Every individual beyond the third generation has parents that are related, i.e. they are all inbred. This is not a
result of deliberate mating of relatives, it is simply a consequence of the
small number of founders and the small population size. Inbreeding
also becomes inevitable in larger populations, but it takes longer. For
example, a population of size 100 over 57 generations becomes, on
average, as inbred as the progeny of a brother–sister mating (Chapter 10).
Inbreeding is of profound importance in conservation biology as it
leads to reductions in heterozygosity, to reduced reproduction and survival (inbreeding depression) and to increased risk of extinction
(Chapter 2, 11 and 12).

Measuring population size
Natural populations have many different structures and breeding
systems that have different genetic consequences. For example, some
populations of small mammals ﬂuctuate wildly in size. Further, species
vary in mating system (e.g. monogamy, harems), and from approximately random mating to selﬁng and asexual reproduction. The same

Inbreeding is unavoidable in small
populations and leads to
reductions in reproduction and
survival

187

188

EVOLUTION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Fig. 8.7 Inbreeding is unavoidable in small populations. Pedigree for the Certiﬁed
population of Mexican wolves (from Hedrick, Miller, Giffen & Wayne, © 1997 Zoo Biology,
vol. 16, 47–69, reprinted by permission of Wiley–Liss, Inc., a subsidiary of John Wiley and
Sons, Inc.). Square – males, circles – females, diamonds – unknown sex. Within a few
generations parents of all individuals share common ancestors, i.e. progeny are inbred.

number of individuals may result in very different genetically effective
population sizes, depending on population structure and breeding
system. Consequently, we must deﬁne what we mean by population size
in conservation genetics. We do this by comparing real populations to
an idealized population we deﬁne below.

The idealized population
The idealized population, to which
all other populations are
compared, is a closed random
mating population with discrete
generations, constant population
size, equal sex-ratio and Poisson
variation in family sizes

We deﬁne population size in terms of the equivalent size of a standardized population, the idealized population (Fig. 8.8). We begin by assuming a large (essentially inﬁnite) random mating base population, from
which we take a sample of size N adults to form the ideal population. The
idealized population is maintained as a random mating, closed population in succeeding generations. Alleles may be lost by chance, and allele
frequencies may vary due to sampling variation. The simplifying conditions applying to the idealized population are:
• There is no migration
• Generations are distinct and do not overlap

MEASURING POPULATION SIZE

Fig. 8.8 Idealized population. From the very large base population a sample of N adults
is taken and this population is maintained as a random mating, closed population with
constant number of parents in each generation.

• The number of breeding individuals is the same in all generations
• All individuals are potential breeders
• All individuals are hermaphrodites (both sexes in each individual)
• Union of gametes is random, including the possibility of selﬁng
• There is no selection at any life cycle stage
• Mutation is ignored
• Number of offspring per adult averages 1, and has a variance of 1.
Within the population, breeding individuals contribute gametes
equally to a pool from which zygotes are formed. Survival of zygotes is
random, so that the contributions of families to the next generation are
not equal. The mean number of offspring per adult is 1. These conditions result in a variance in family size of 1, so that family sizes may be
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. This distribution of family sizes is described by the terms
of the Poisson distribution.
The theoretical characteristics of the idealized population are well
deﬁned because of these assumptions, and a large body of theory has
been derived for idealized populations. Consequently, by equating real
populations to the idealized population, this theory can be utilized to
make practical predictions.

Effective population size (Ne)
We can standardize the deﬁnition of population size by describing a
population in terms of its effective population size (Ne). The effective
size of a population is the size of an idealized population that would
lose genetic diversity (or become inbred) at the same rate as the actual
population. For example, if a real population loses genetic diversity at

The effective population size is the
number of individuals that would
give rise to the calculated
inbreeding coefﬁcient, loss of
heterozygosity or variance in allele
frequency if they behaved in the
manner of an idealized population

189

190

EVOLUTION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

The genetic consequences in small
populations depend on the
effective population size rather
than on the number of individuals
in the population

the same rate as an ideal population of 100, then we say the real population has an effective size of 100, even if it contains 1000 individuals.
Thus, the Ne of a population is a measure of its genetic behaviour, relative to that of an ideal population.
It follows that the genetic consequences of small population size
depend on the effective population size, rather than on the absolute
number of individuals. In practice, the effective size of a population is
usually less than the number of breeding adults. Real populations
deviate in structure from the assumptions of the idealized population
by having unequal sex-ratios, high variation in family sizes, variable
numbers in successive generations, and in having overlapping generations. Details of how to calculate Ne are given in Chapter 10. For the time
being, we shall simply recognize that it is the effective size, and not the
actual number of individuals (N), that should be used in most equations
(e.g. 8.2–8.4).

Selection in small populations
Selection is less effective in small
than large populations

Small populations show less
response to directional selection
for quantitative characters than
larger populations

Large populations show greater adaptive evolutionary capabilities than
small, endangered populations. Pest insect species numbering in the
millions have successfully evolved to combat a wide range of assaults
(e.g. insecticides) that humans use to combat them. Conversely, many
small island populations have been driven to extinction by the impacts
of introduced predators, competitors and diseases.
Selection operating on body colour in the red ﬂour beetle was more
effective in large than in small populations (Fig. 8.2). There was a consistent increase in frequency of the wild-type allele in all the large (N100)
populations. However, the effect of selection in the small populations
(N10) was much more variable in outcome. Despite selection against
the black allele, one population even became homozygous for this deleterious allele. This provides a critical insight for conservation genetics;
selection is less effective in small than in large populations.
Small populations lose genetic diversity each generation so selection response should reduce compared to large populations. From a
model of this process, Robertson (1960) predicted that the total amount
of selection response (the limit) to directional selection would depend
on the product of effective population size and the selection differential.
These predictions have been veriﬁed for several different quantitative characters in a range of species including fruit ﬂies, mice, chickens and maize (Frankham & Weber 2000). Response to selection for
bristle number in fruit ﬂies, over 50 generations, was greatest in populations with 40 pairs of parents per generation, intermediate in
those with 20 pairs of parents, and least in those with 10 pairs of
parents (Fig. 8.9).
The evolutionary potential of endangered species is seriously compromised, compared to non-endangered species, as they have less initial

MUTATION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Fig. 8.9 Response to directional selection for increased abdominal bristle number (a
quantitative character) over 50 generations in populations of fruit ﬂies maintained at
different sizes (10, 20 and 40 pairs of parents) and selected at different intensities (10%,
40% and unselected controls) (after Jones et al. 1968). Lines marked C are unselected
controls of different sizes. All populations were derived from the same outbred base
population. Treatment means are plotted. Selection response was greater in larger than in
smaller populations and in the more intensely selected treatment within each population size.

genetic diversity (Chapter 3) and they lose genetic diversity at a greater
rate in each generation. We elaborate on this issue in Chapter 14.
An important implication of the lower efﬁciency of selection in
small than in large populations is that deleterious alleles are less likely
to be removed by natural selection and may even become ﬁxed. This can
lead directly to reduction in reproductive ﬁtness and increased extinction risk (Chapters 12 and 14).

Deleterious alleles are more likely
to be ﬁxed in small than large
populations

Mutation in small populations
The occurrence of a particular new mutation at a locus in a ﬁnite population will be a rare event, unlikely to be repeated in a long time. In a
population of size N, a new mutation will have a frequency of 1/(2N), and
will be rare unless the population is very small. If the mutation is
neutral (i.e. functions as well as, but no better than, the pre-existing
allele) then its ultimate probability of ﬁxation due to genetic drift will

Most new mutations in small
populations are lost by chance

191

192

EVOLUTION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

be its initial frequency 1/(2N). Its ultimate probability of loss will be 1
1/(2N). Consequently, the most likely fate of a new mutation in a ﬁnite
population will be loss of the allele, unless the population is very small.
For a neutral mutation to reach ﬁxation it must rise in frequency
from 1/(2N) to 1 purely by chance events. The average time for this to
occur is approximately 4N generations.

Mutation–selection equilibrium in small
populations
Equilibrium frequencies for
deleterious alleles are, on average,
lower in small populations than in
large populations

Fig. 8.10 Equilibrium frequencies
for recessive lethal alleles in
populations of different sizes. A
mutation rate of 105 is assumed.
The solid line is for a completely
recessive lethal, and the dashed line
for a partially recessive lethal allele
that reduces reproductive ﬁtness
by 2.5% in heterozygotes (after
Crow & Kimura 1970).

Mutation–selection balance maintains deleterious mutations in populations at low frequencies at many loci (Chapter 7). However, the equilibrium frequencies for deleterious alleles are, on average, lower in small
populations than in large populations (Fig. 8.10). In smaller populations, the frequency of homozygotes is higher, leading selection against
recessives to be more efﬁcient than in larger populations. The expected
equilibrium frequencies for a recessive lethal allele with a mutation
rate of 105 is 3 103 in a very large population (Table 7.4), but less than
104 in populations of size 10. The relationship with population size is
weaker for partially recessive lethals. For example, a partially recessive
lethal, with a 2.5% decrement in heterozygote ﬁtness, has an equilibrium frequency of 4104 in a very large population, and about 104 in
a population with an effective size of 10.
While the average frequency of deleterious alleles is reduced in
small populations, the variance in frequencies will be high. Many loci
will have no deleterious alleles, but some will have relatively high frequencies by chance. We saw this in the case of chondrodystrophy in
California condors, where the lethal allele has a frequency of about 17%
(Chapter 4). Such a deleterious allele is expected to have a mutation–
selection equilibrium frequency of about 0.3% (Chapter 7). Other endangered species have been found to have elevated frequencies of alleles
causing genetic diseases (Ryder 1988). Founding events have led to elevated frequencies of alleles causing a range of genetic diseases in
various human populations (Diamond & Rotter 1987).

COMPUTER SIMULATION

Computer simulation
Due to the stochastic nature of genetic drift, the impacts of selection on
allele frequencies in small populations are difﬁcult to model algebraically. Consequently, computer simulations are often used to study the
impacts of chance and selection (Box 8.3). For example, the ﬂour beetle
experiment described in Fig. 8.2 has been simulated (Fig. 8.11).
Selection on allele frequencies were simulated for replicate populations with two different population sizes (N  10 and 100) for an additive locus with a selection coefﬁcient of 0.1. Note the similarity of the
results with the experimental result. Replicates diverged in frequencies more in smaller than larger populations, variation in frequencies
from generation to generation were greater in smaller than in larger
populations, and selection has a more predictable effect in larger than
in smaller populations.

Computer simulation is used to
investigate problems that are
difﬁcult to solve mathematically,
such as the impact of selection or
mutation in small populations

Fig. 8.11 Computer simulation
illustrating the operation of
selection in replicate populations
with sizes of N 10 and N100.
Selection is for an additive model
with s0.1. These simulations
were conducted using a random
number generator in spreadsheet
software.

Box 8.3 Complex models and computer simulation
The joint impacts of chance with selection, migration, or mutation rapidly become
complicated to investigate using algebraic models. These are investigated either by
using relatively complex mathematics, such as diffusion equations, or by building
stochastic computer models. Computer models that include chance are called
Monte Carlo simulations, after the famous casinos in that principality. Monte Carlo
simulations yield a distribution of outcomes, rather than a single outcome, as shown
in Fig. 8.11.
Computer simulations are used in several different ways in conservation
genetics. They may be used to:
• verify the results of mathematical models
• provide numerical solutions for expressions produced by stochastic mathematical
models
• check the validity of approximate mathematical solutions to problems

193

194

EVOLUTION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

• suggest a solution to a problem that may subsequently be solved mathematically
• investigate problems that are too complex to solve with mathematical models.
In the latter context, computer simulation provides links between simple tractable
mathematical models (with many simplifying assumptions) and experiments with real
living organisms in all their complexity. Computer simulations can include a reasonable level of reality and complexity. For example Lacy (1987) used computer simulations to evaluate the likely effects of drift, selection, migration and population
subdivision on small populations of endangered species. For complex pedigrees, the
probabilities that alleles are lost, or retained, over time are typically determined using
‘gene drop’ computer simulations (MacCluer et al. 1986). Further, Ballou & Lacy
(1995) used computer simulation to evaluate the effects on retention of genetic
diversity and inbreeding of alternative genetic management schemes proposed for
endangered species. Their simulations followed many replicates over several generations for a single locus, based on starting populations with different pedigrees. There
were still simplifying assumptions as they used only one locus, and thus ignored
linkage, linkage disequilibrium, mutation and selection. Their work led to a new procedure (minimizing kinship) being instituted for genetic management of captive population (Chapter 17). Their computer results were subsequently veriﬁed in
experiments with fruit ﬂies.
More complex computer models are used to assess extinction risk due to all
important threatening processes – a procedure called population viability analysis
(Chapter 20). The results in Fig. 2.2 were based on such analyses.

Summary
1. Populations of conservation concern are small or declining.
2. Mutation, migration, selection and chance determine the evolution of both small and large populations.
3. Evolution in small populations involves a greater impact of
chance, and more inbreeding, than in large populations
4. Chance effects (genetic drift) arise from random sampling of
gametes.
5. Genetic drift results in random ﬂuctuations in allele frequencies, diversiﬁcation among replicate populations, ﬁxation and loss of
genetic diversity.
6. The genetic consequences of small populations depend upon the
effective population size, rather than on the actual number of individuals .
7. Selection is less effective in small than in large populations.
8. The equilibrium frequencies for deleterious alleles due to mutation–selection balance are generally lower in small than in large populations.
FURTHER READING

Crow & Kimura (1970) Introduction to Population Genetics Theory. Relatively
advanced treatment of the theory relating to evolution in small populations.
Falconer & Mackay (1996) Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. Chapter 3 provides
a very clear introduction to the topics in this chapter.

PRACTICAL EXERCISE

Frankel & Soulé (1981) Conservation and Evolution. Classic book covering much of
the material on the evolution in small populations in a conservation
context.
Hartl & Clark (1997) Principles of Population Genetics. Topics in this chapter are
covered in this widely used textbook.
Lacy (1987) An evaluation of the likely impacts of drift, selection, migration
and population subdivision on small populations of endangered species,
done using computer simulation.
PROBLEMS

8.1 Probability of chance loss of an allele: If a heterozygous Brown’s
banksia plant with genotype A1A2 has three offspring by selﬁng, what
is the probability that allele A1 is absent in the offspring?
8.2 Probability of chance loss of an allele: If two Siberian tiger
parents with genotypes A1A2 and A1A3 have four offspring, what is the
probability that allele A1 is absent in the offspring? That A2 is absent in
the offspring? That A3 is absent in the offspring?
8.3 Probability of chance loss of an allele: If a Guam rail population
has two alleles A1 and A2 at frequencies of 0.9 : 0.1, respectively, (a) what
is the probability that A2 is lost in the subsequent generation if 12 offspring are produced? (b) What is the probability that A2 is lost in the subsequent generation if 100 offspring are produced? Compare (a) and (b).
8.4 Probability of retaining alleles under random sampling: How
many offspring would be needed to be 95% certain that both alleles
were sampled from the ﬁrst individual in the top line of the golden
lion tamarin pedigree in Fig. 8.1?
8.5 Loss of genetic diversity: What proportion of the initial heterozygosity is lost due to a single generation bottleneck in (a) a single
plant of Pritchardia munroi, an endemic Hawaiian palm? (b) The
Chatham Island black robin reduced to ﬁve individuals? (c) Whooping
crane reduced to 14 individuals? (d) Indian rhinoceros population in
Chitwan, Nepal reduced to about 70 individuals? (e) Southern blueﬁn
tuna reduced to 300 000 individuals?
8.6 Loss of allelic diversity: What is the probability that an allele
with an initial frequency of q is lost following a single-generation
bottleneck when (a) q0.1 in one plant of Castalleja ulinogosa? (b)
q0.1 in two Mauritius kestrel? (c) q 0.1 in 50 northern hairy-nosed
wombats? (d) q0.05 in 25 Siberian tigers?
PR ACTIC AL EXERCISE: COMPUTER SIMUL ATIONS

The following computer simulation exercises are designed to assist
readers to understand aspects of the evolution in small populations.
They can be completed using a package such as POPGEN.
1. Genetic drift and diversiﬁcation: Compare the proportion of populations (a) still polymorphic, (b) going to ﬁxation (q 1) and (c) losing
the A2 allele (q 0) in populations of different sizes (10 vs. 50) over 100
generations, beginning at frequencies of q 0.5 and q 0.1.
These require 50–100 replicates and can be done individually, or compiled as the sum of replicates from all the students in a class.

195

196

EVOLUTION IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Simulation

Fixed q 1

Polymorphic

Lost q0

q0 0.5 N50
q0 0.5 N10
q0 0.1 N50
q0 0.1 N10
How do the results differ with different starting frequencies?
2. Adaptive evolution with strong selection: Industrial melanism in
peppered moths (favoured dominant allele). Industrial melanism
increased in frequency from an allele frequency q0.005 (allele 2 of
POPGEN) in 1848 to about 0.90 in 1900 (52 generations). The relative ﬁtnesses are approximately as follows:

Relative ﬁtnesses

Typical
tt

Melanic
Mt

Melanic
MM

0.7

1

1

Simulate this case for 100 generations with N50 and record the
results in the table below.
Simulation

Fixed q 1

Polymorphic

Lost q 0

q0 0.005 N50
In what proportion of cases was the deleterious allele ﬁxed?
Compare these results with the deterministic case from Chapter 6.
3. Adaptive evolution with weak selection: For a partially dominant
locus with following ﬁtnesses (akin to an allozyme locus or a MHC
allele), simulate changes in allele frequencies over 2000 generations
with N50 and N10, beginning with q0.1.
A1 A 1
0.99

A1A2
0.992

A2A2
1.0

Record your results in the table below
Simulation

Fixed q 1

Polymorphic

Lost q 0

q0 0.1 N50
q0 0.1 N10
In what proportion of cases was the deleterious allele ﬁxed?
Compare these results with the deterministic case by running the
same ﬁtnesses and starting frequencies.

Chapter 9

Maintenance of genetic
diversity
Levels of genetic diversity result from the joint impacts of mutation
and migration adding variation, chance and directional selection
removing it, and balancing selection impeding its loss. The balance
between these factors depends strongly on population size and
differs across characters

Malaria and genetic diversity in humans. (a) Distribution of falciparum malaria and the
frequencies of alleles that confer resistance to the disease, (b) sickle cell anaemia,
(c) thalassaemia and (d) G6pd deﬁciency (after Allison 1961 and Strickberger 1985).

Terms:
Associative overdominance,
balancing selection,
effectively neutral,
frequency-dependent selection,
heterozygote advantage,
inversions,
intron,
neutral mutation,
non-synonymous substitutions,
overdominance,
pseudogene,
synonymous substitutions,
transient polymorphisms,
trans-species polymorphism

198

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

Conservation of genetic diversity
Maintenance of genetic diversity is
a major objective in conservation
programs, as genetic diversity
represents evolutionary potential

Genetic diversity arises from
mutation, or is introduced by
migration, and is lost by genetic
drift in small populations and by
directional selection. Balancing
selection generally impedes the
loss of genetic diversity

There are two main explanations
for maintenance of genetic
diversity, neutral mutations
undergoing random genetic drift,
and balancing selection

Conservation biologists need to understand how genetic diversity is
maintained through natural processes if conservation programs are to
be designed for its maintenance in managed populations of endangered
species. So far, we have considered the impacts of mutation, migration,
selection and chance on genetic diversity, and have largely treated them
as independent factors. Here we consider in detail how these factors
interact to produce the different levels of genetic diversity observed in
diverse species. If selection removes deleterious alleles and ﬁxes favourable alleles, while genetic drift removes alleles, why do we observe so
much genetic diversity? Why do small populations, including endangered species, generally have lower genetic diversity than large nonendangered species? Maintenance of extensive genetic diversity in
natural populations is one of the most important, largely unresolved,
questions of evolutionary genetics (Prout 2000).
These questions lead us to consider the nature, extent and relevance
of balancing selection, which actively maintains variation within populations, and to contrast this with random processes.
Populations vary in their levels of genetic diversity (Chapter 3). Most
large, widespread species have high levels of genetic diversity.
Conversely, smaller populations, island populations and endangered
species often display much lower levels. These differences are a direct
result of the interacting processes of selection, genetic drift, mutation
and migration operating within particular breeding systems. The level
of diversity therefore depends on which process predominates and this
varies for different characters.
We now consider the mechanisms that can maintain genetic diversity, and consider their likely roles for different characters, namely
untranslated DNA, translated DNA, protein polymorphism, quantitative characters, chromosomal inversions and visual polymorphisms.
Before considering the contributions of balancing selection and
neutral mutation/random genetic drift to maintenance of genetic
diversity, we need to consider the selective values associated with different classes of mutations.

Fate of different classes of mutations
Most of the genetic diversity
observed in populations is likely to
represent neutral alleles and
alleles subject to balancing
selection
The majority of newly arisen
mutations are deleterious.
Deleterious mutations are
removed by selection but
continue to be added by mutation

The major classes of mutations are:
• deleterious mutations,
• beneﬁcial mutations,
• neutral mutations, and
• mutations whose effects are favoured in some circumstances, but
not in others (Chapter 7).
The fate of each of these is considered below.
While we do not know the precise proportions of the four types of
mutations, there is no doubt that those with effects on the phenotype
are overwhelmingly deleterious. Deleterious mutations are continually

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN LARGE POPULATIONS

removed by selection. The balance between mutation and selection generally keeps deleterious alleles at very low frequencies (Chapter 7).
A (very) small proportion of mutations is beneﬁcial. These increase
in frequency until they reach ﬁxation, provided they are not lost by
chance when rare in the early generations. Loci with such alleles will be
observed as polymorphic during the phase when the alleles are rising in
frequency prior to reaching ﬁxation. During this phase they are referred
to as transient polymorphisms. Loci with such mutations will rarely be
observed as polymorphic as they represent a rare class of mutations and
the alleles are ﬁxed relatively rapidly.
A proportion of mutations is neutral, i.e. they have the same impact
on reproductive ﬁtness as pre-existing alleles. Many mutations in
untranslated DNA (regions between loci, and introns) and DNA base
substitutions that do not result in amino acid changes (synonymous
substitutions) are expected to fall into this category. These drifting
alleles also create transient polymorphisms. The fate of neutral mutations is determined by genetic drift alone so they do not enter into our
discussion of the maintenance of genetic diversity for reproductive
ﬁtness. Their fate depends entirely on population size.
The fourth class of mutations is favoured by selection in some
circumstances, and selected against in others. This is termed balancing
selection. These alleles are maintained in the population at relatively
intermediate frequencies, resulting in polymorphisms.
There are different forms of balancing selection. Some alleles are
advantageous in heterozygotes and disadvantageous in homozygotes
(heterozygote advantage or overdominance), while others are advantageous when rare, and disadvantageous when common (subject to frequency-dependent selection). Finally, some of these mutations have
selective values that are advantageous in some environments and disadvantageous in others conditions, e.g. one season versus another, one
environmental niche versus another, or in captive versus native habitats. Such alleles display genotypeenvironment interactions (Chapter
5).
Since both deleterious and favourable mutations are lost or rapidly
go to ﬁxation, the polymorphisms observed in natural populations are
primarily a result of alleles that are neutral plus those subject to balancing selection.

Maintenance of genetic diversity in large
populations
The balance of forces maintaining genetic diversity differs between
large and small populations. Selection has major impacts in large populations. However, its impacts are reduced in small populations, where
genetic drift has an increasingly important role.
We begin discussion of the maintenance of genetic diversity in large
populations by considering the fate of neutral mutations under genetic
drift, then consider the extent of selection on different loci and characters, discuss balancing selection and conclude with maintenance of

Beneﬁcial mutations are ﬁxed by
natural selection

Many mutations outside functional
regions and some within them are
neutral

Mutations subject to any form of
balancing selection are actively
retained in large populations

The relative importance in
maintenance of genetic diversity
of balancing selection versus
neutral alleles undergoing random
genetic drift depends on the
relationship between selection
and population size. Selection is
more effective in larger
populations, while drift is most
important in small populations

199

200

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

genetic diversity for ﬁtness characters. Maintenance of genetic diversity
in small populations (i.e. those of conservation concern) is treated in the
latter part of the chapter so that we can compare and contrast it with
the situation for large populations.

Neutral mutations under random genetic drift
A proportion of the genetic
diversity in natural populations is
due to neutral mutations whose
fate is determined by random
genetic drift

The fate of neutral mutations is determined by random sampling in
ﬁnite populations (genetic drift). Most neutral mutations are lost
within a few generations of origin (because they start at such low frequencies). However, new mutations continue to be produced. A small
proportion rise in frequency just by chance, and some (a proportion
1/2N) go to ﬁxation (Fig. 9.1). The ﬂux of these alleles is such that, at any
one time, some loci are likely to be polymorphic. The late Motoo Kimura
from Japan was a major proponent of the view that DNA and protein
polymorphisms were predominantly neutral and that levels of genetic
diversity for such loci were primarily due to neutral alleles undergoing
genetic drift (Kimura 1983). This is referred to as the neutral theory of
molecular evolution.

Fig. 9.1 Neutral
mutation/random genetic drift
(after Crow & Kimura 1970). The
ﬁgure illustrates the ﬂux of neutral
mutations over a very large
number of generations in a very
large population. Most mutants are
lost within a few generations (thin
lines). Occasional mutants increase
in frequency. Some of these
increase to eventual ﬁxation (heavy
lines), while others are lost (dotted
lines). At any point in time there are
polymorphic loci (transient
polymorphisms).

The neutral theory predicts a
constant rate of molecular
evolution, regardless of population
size

Kimura and his co-workers marshalled several lines of evidence in
support of the neutral theory (Kimura 1983). We shall consider some of
these below.
The neutral theory predicts that the rate of amino acid substitution
in proteins, and of base substitutions in DNA, will occur at constant
rates for particular proteins or sequences of DNA. The derivation of this
relationship is as follows. The number of neutral mutations per generation in a population of size Ne is 2Neu, where u is the neutral mutation
rate. However, the probability of ﬁxing a neutral mutation is its initial
frequency, 1/2Ne (Chapter 8). Consequently, the rate of substitution at a
steady state is the product of these two values 2Neu 1/2Ne u. Thus, the
rate of substitution of amino acids, or of DNA bases, is expected to be

NEUTRAL MUTATIONS UNDER RANDOM GENETIC DRIFT

constant in different sized populations and to equal the neutral mutation rate. This derivation leads to constancy per generation. However,
Kimura has argued that the rate should be constant per year, as the
number of germ line generations is approximately constant per year,
regardless of generation length. Whether the rate of molecular evolution should be constant per year or per generation remains a matter of
controversy.
The evidence favours an approximate constancy in rates of amino
acid substitution in proteins (Fig. 9.2; Kimura 1983, but see Gillespie
1991).
Fig. 9.2 Rate of nucleotide
substitutions versus
palaeontological time (after Hartl &
Clark 1997). The rate is
approximately constant as
predicted by the neutral theory,
but differs among proteins.
Different rates are expected for
proteins with different degrees of
functional constraint, as they have
different neutral mutation rates.

in

lob

og
em

Ha

Regions of the genome that have little function are expected to have
higher neutral mutation rates than regions coding for essential functions, such as the active site of enzymes, or folding sites in proteins.
Consequently, the neutral theory predicts higher polymorphism for
non-translated sections of the genome such as introns or regions
between loci (excluding regulatory sequences) than for coding
sequences that are transcribed and translated. Evidence supports this
prediction (Hartl & Clark 1997). Polymorphism in non-translated DNA
(synonymous mutations at the third position of codons, introns and
pseudogenes – non-functional loci) is higher than in regions of DNA with
obvious function, as predicted by the neutral theory. Further, levels of
protein polymorphism are related to the size of proteins, as predicted by
the neutral theory (Ward et al. 1992). Larger proteins would be expected
to have higher average neutral mutation rates than smaller ones.
Under the neutral theory, drift, rather than selection, determines
the number of alleles and the heterozygosity. The balance between
mutation adding alleles and drift removing them determines levels of
genetic diversity. Since alleles drift to ﬁxation more rapidly in small
than in large populations, neutral theory predicts that the expected
heterozygosity (He), and effective number of alleles (ne) will be higher in
larger than in smaller populations:
He 4Neu / (4Neu 1)

(9.1)

ne 4Neu 1

(9.2)

The neutral theory predicts higher
levels of polymorphism for regions
of the genome subject to fewer
functional constraints

The neutral theory predicts that
there will be a positive relationship
between genetic diversity and
population size

201

202

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

Fig. 9.3 Predicted relationship
between heterozygosity and
population size according to the
neutral theory, and experimentally
determined relationship (after Nei
1987). The curve is the predicted
relationships with a mutation rate
of 107, and dots are observed
data points. Observed
heterozygosities are much lower than
those predicted by the neutral theory.

where Ne is the effective population size (deﬁned in Chapter 8), and u the
neutral mutation rate. Thus, genetic diversity is expected to be related
to effective population size (Fig. 9.3).
The neutral mutation rate is lower than the overall mutation rate as
it excludes deleterious and favourable mutations. A typical rate for
protein loci is 109 per amino acid position per year, but it varies widely
for different proteins according to the functional constraints on the
molecule (Kimura 1983). For a protein composed of 100 amino acids this
translates into a mutation rate of 107 per year for the whole locus, compared to typical single locus total mutation rates of 105 per generation.
Example 9.1 illustrates the use of equation 9.1 to predict heterozygosities and effective numbers of alleles for different sized populations.
The equilibrium heterozygosity is 0.8 for a population of 10 million, but
only 4 105 for a population with an effective size of 100.
While there is strong evidence for a relationship between genetic
diversity and population size both across species and within species
(Frankham 1996), the shape of the relationship is not of the form predicted by the neutral theory (Fig. 9.3). Equally, the observed relationship
does not conform to that predicted by balancing selection, but a model
of near neutral mutations, as described below, can account it for.

Example 9.1 Predicted heterozygosities and effective number of
alleles in different sized populations according to the
neutral theory
Let us consider two populations, one with an effective size of 100 and
the other of 10 million, and a neutral mutation rate of 107 for a locus.
Heterozygosity for the smaller population is predicted to be
Hsmall 4Neu / (4Neu 1)
(4 100 107) / (4 100 107 1)4 105

SELECTION INTENSITIES VARY AMONG CHARACTERS

while that for the larger populations is
Hlarge (4 107 107) / (4107 107 1)0.8
The effective number of alleles in the smaller population will be
ne

small

4Neu 1 4100107 1 1.00004

while that in the larger population is expected to be
ne

large

4 107 107 1 5

Consequently, a stable population of 10 million is expected to have
much greater heterozygosity and allelic diversity than a population
of 100.

There are good reasons to reject a purely neutral theory of molecular
evolution (see Kreitman & Akashi 1995; Hey 1999). For example, the relationship between genetic diversity and population size is not as predicted (Fig. 9.3). The near neutral theory, where both strictly neutral and
mildly deleterious alleles are included, is more plausible (Ohta 1992,
1996). The near neutral theory considers that most new mutations are
deleterious, and most mutations with very small effects are likely to be
very slightly deleterious. Such mutations are selected against in large
populations, but behave as if neutral in small populations. Thus there is
a ﬂux of mutations entering populations and being lost, or ﬁxed, as for
the neutral theory. However, only a small proportion is neutral and
most are very mildly deleterious mutants. Most mildly deleterious
alleles are removed from large population by selection, but they are
effectively neutral in small populations.
However, neither neutral or near neutral theories apply to all loci.
There is clear evidence for balancing selection on some protein polymorphisms (Powers et al. 1991), on the MHC, on self-incompatibility loci,
and on essentially all inversion and visual polymorphisms. The neutral
theory clearly does not apply to genetic diversity for reproductive
ﬁtness, a major conservation focus. The magnitude of selection varies
widely with the character being observed.

A purely neutral theory does not
adequately explain molecular
evolution, or genetic diversity, and
it does not apply to ﬁtness
characters

Selection intensities vary among characters
The range of selective values for different characters is illustrated in
Fig. 9.4. The great majority of mutations in untranslated DNA are
believed to be neutral, or nearly so. Most mutations resulting in amino
acid substitutions are deleterious and removed by natural selection.
For those changes in amino acid sequence that persist as protein polymorphisms, some may be neutral, and some subject to balancing selection (Brookﬁeld & Sharp 1994; Kreitman & Akashi 1995). A very small

The selective force on different
characters varies, being very weak
or absent for untranslated DNA,
weak for most translated DNA
and protein polymorphisms,
modest for gene clusters, and
strong for visual polymorphisms
and reproductive ﬁtness

203

204

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

Fig. 9.4 Intensities of selection
on different characters.

Untranslated DNA
Most microsatellites
DNA fingerprints
Self-incompatibility

proportion of amino acid substitutions is advantageous. Even where
there is evidence for selection on protein polymorphisms, the selective
forces are usually weak (see Kimura 1983; Gillespie 1991; Hey 1999).
For some loci, or clusters of loci, there is clear evidence of selection.
This is particularly true for groups of loci found in single selective units
(mtDNA, inversions, and clusters of loci in linkage disequilibrium such
as the MHC). Alleles involved in determining self-incompatibility in
plants are clearly subject to frequency-dependent selection (rare advantage). There is clear evidence for natural selection operating on visual
polymorphisms (e.g. for banded vs. non-banded, and yellow vs. brown
snail shells, polymorphic mimics and speckled vs. melanic colouration
in moths), and often the forces of selection are strong. Reproductive
ﬁtness is the focus of selective forces acting on individuals, so it too is
subject to relatively strong selection.

Balancing selection
Balancing selection generally
impedes the loss of genetic
diversity

The three main forms of balancing natural selection, i.e. heterozygote
advantage, frequency-dependent selection, and selection of varying
direction in time and space, are considered below. Each of these actively
maintains genetic diversity through natural selection.

Heterozygote advantage (overdominance)
Heterozygote advantage results in
an equilibrium that actively retains
polymorphism

Heterozygote advantage or overdominance arises where heterozygotes
have higher ﬁtness than either homozygote (see Fig. 6.5). A classic
example is sickle cell anaemia in humans living in areas where malaria
is endemic (Box 9.1). Heterozygotes show increased resistance to
malaria, while homozygous normal individuals suffer elevated mortality from malaria, and those homozygous for the sickle allele suffer very
high mortality from anaemia.

Box 9.1 Overdominant selection and balanced
polymorphism for sickle cell anaemia in humans
Sickle cell anaemia is due to an abnormal allele of haemoglobin (S) that results in low
survival of SS homozygotes due to severe anaemia. However, the S allele provides
protection against malarial infection in heterozygotes. Balancing selection was ﬁrst

SELECTION INTENSITIES VARY AMONG CHARACTERS

inferred from correlations between the distribution of the sickle cell allele and malaria
across Africa, the Mediterranean and Asia (see chapter frontispiece).

Blood cells of the AA, AS and SS genotypes under oxygen starvation.

Allison (1956) veriﬁed that selection was favouring heterozygotes in malarial areas
of Africa. He determined the frequencies of the three genotypes among infants and
adults, and estimated the relative ﬁtnesses of the three genotypes as shown below
(after Falconer & Mackay 1996). The population is in Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
at birth, but selection leads to an excess of heterozygotes in adults (Problem 9.1).
Genotype

Number of infants
Number of adults
Frequency in infants
Frequency in adults
Relative survival
(adult frequency/
infant frequency)
Fitness relative to AS

AA

AS

SS

189
400
0.659
0.612
0.929

89
249
0.310
0.381
1.228

9
5
0.031
0.008
0.242

Frequency (S)

0.186
0.198

0.929/1.228 1.228/1.228 0.242/1.228
0.757
1
0.197
Selection coefﬁcient s1 10.76
s2 10.20
0.24
0.80
Thus, there is strong selection favouring heterozygotes. The frequency of the S allele
is similar in infants and adults, as expected for a population in equilibrium.

For a locus subject to overdominant selection, a stable equilibrium is
reached. This depends only on the selection coefﬁcients against the two
homozygotes. For a locus with two alleles, the equilibrium is obtained
by equating the expression for q from Table 6.2 to zero, as follows:
q

pq (s1p  s2q)
0
(1  s1p2  s2q2 )

this occurs when the bracketed portion of the numerator is zero, so
s1ps2q
and after rearrangement and substitution of p1q, the expression
for the equilibrium frequency of the S allele is:

The equilibrium frequency with
heterozygote advantage depends
only on the relative values of the
selection coefﬁcients against the
two homozygous genotypes

205

206

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

q̂ 

s1
(s1  s2 )

(9.3)

Thus, the equilibrium frequency depends only on the relative values of
the selection coefﬁcients. For example, when s1 s2, the equilibrium frequency is 0.5. In Example 9.2, this equation is used to predict the equilibrium frequency for sickle cell anaemia, based on mortality data. The
predicted equilibrium of 0.23 for the S allele is close to that observed in
malarial areas of Africa.
This is a stable equilibrium. Populations begun at the equilibrium
frequency remain at that frequency, while those with frequencies above
or below the equilibrium move towards it (Example 9.3).

Example 9.2 Predicted equilibrium frequency for sickle cell anaemia,
a case of heterozygote advantage
The selection coefﬁcients against the normal and sickle cell homozygotes are approximately 0.24 and 0.80, as shown in Box 9.1. The predicted equilibrium is obtained as follows:
q̂

s1
0.24 / (0.24 0.80) 0.23
(s1  s2 )

Consequently, the predicted equilibrium frequencies are 0.23 for the
sickle cell allele and 10.230.77 for the normal haemoglobin
allele. These are close to observed frequencies.

Example 9.3 Stable equilibrium with heterozygote advantage
We can test whether the equilibrium for sickle cell anaemia in malarial areas is stable by determining what happens to q when the frequency is perturbed to values above and below the equilibrium. If the
equilibrium is stable, then selection moves frequencies back towards
the equilibrium. For example, if we perturb the frequency for S from
0.23 (equilibrium), to values of 0.5 and 0.1, q will be  for q 0.5, and
for q 0.1. (If q was for q 0.5 and  for q0.1, the equilibrium
would be unstable.)
The values of q when the frequency of the S allele is 0.5, 0.23 and
0.1 are determined below (s1 0.24 and s2 0.80; Box 9.1).
For q 0.5, p0.5
q

pq (s1p  s2q)
0.5 0.5 (0.240.5  0.80.5)

0.095
(1  s1p2  s2q2 )
(1  0.240.52  0.8 0.52 )

For q 0.23, p0.77
q

0.770.23 (0.240.77  0.8 0.23)
pq (s1p  s2q)

0
2
2
(1  s1p  s2q )
(1  0.240.772  0.80.232 )

SELECTION INTENSITIES VARY AMONG CHARACTERS

For q 0.1, p0.9
q

0.9 0.1 (0.24 0.9  0.80.1)
pq (s1p  s2q)

0.015
(1  s1p2  s2q2 )
(1  0.24 0.92  0.8 0.12 )

The perturbed frequencies move towards the equilibrium, while a
population at the equilibrium frequency remains there. Thus, the
equilibrium is stable.

Other polymorphisms that are probably associated with heterozygote
advantage for resistance to malaria include thalassaemia, and the sexlinked glucose–6-phosphate dehydrogenase deﬁciency (Ruwende et al.
1995) (see chapter frontispiece).
Tests based on DNA sequence data indicate that some protein polymorphisms are inﬂuenced by balancing selection (perhaps overdominance), including the alcohol dehydrogenase locus in fruit ﬂies (Fig. 3.2;
Kreitman 1983). In addition, the warfarin resistance polymorphism in
rats shows overdominance, as do most visual polymorphisms. However,
several lines of evidence indicate that only a small proportion of loci
exhibit overdominance (Kimura 1983; Falconer & Mackay 1996).
Convincing evidence for it has been found for few loci. Further, haploid
organisms have similar (or higher) levels of allozyme diversity to diploids, but do not have heterozygotes.

Frequency-dependent selection
Frequency-dependent selection occurs when an allele or genotype is
favoured when at one frequency, but disadvantaged when at another
frequency. When alleles are favoured when rare, but selected against
when common, a balanced polymorphism results (Hedrick 2000).
Frequency-dependent selection may arise under a range of realistic
circumstances. For example, if genotypes have slightly different
resource use, one genotype may be favoured when rare, as its resource
is abundant, but disadvantaged when common as its resource is overexploited. Genotypes that differ in disease resistance may be subject to
frequency-dependent selection, as pathogens adapt to infect the most
common genotype, leaving rare genotypes least affected (Lively &
Dybdahl 2000).
The MHC has a major role in ﬁghting disease in vertebrates. There
is strong evidence that balancing selection is retaining the high levels
of genetic diversity at the MHC in humans and other vertebrates (Box
9.2). However it is not clear whether this selection is through heterozygote advantage, or frequency dependence, although the latter is likely
to be partly involved. Clearly, maintenance of genetic diversity at the
MHC is important to species’ survival and of concern in conservation
biology.

A balanced polymorphism results
if an allele is favoured when rare,
but disadvantaged when common

207

208

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

Predation will often yield frequency-dependent selection on prey
species displaying visual polymorphism. Birds form searching images
based on common prey phenotypes, such that rarer phenotypes have
greater survival. However, when the previously rare types become most
plentiful, they become the basis for searching images (Clarke 1969). In
spite of these examples, frequency-dependent selection seems to be
maintaining genetic diversity at only a small proportion of loci
(Falconer & Mackay 1996).

Box 9.2 Balancing selection on the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) (after Hedrick
& Kim 2000)
The human MHC (called the HLA) contains over 100 loci covering a region of nearly
4 million bases of DNA. Loci fall into three main groups termed class I, II and III. Within
each there are closely related loci that have arisen by gene duplication.

These are the major loci involved in ﬁghting disease, combating cancer and controlling transplant acceptance/rejection (see Hughes & Yeager 1998; Hedrick & Kim
2000).
MHC loci exhibit the highest polymorphism of all known functional loci in vertebrates. For example, humans have 67, 149 and 35 alleles at the class I HLA-A, HLAB and HLA-C loci, and 69, 29 and 179 at the class II DPB, DQB and DRB loci,
respectively (Hedrick & Kim 2000).
There are several lines of evidence that variation at MHC loci is maintained by
balancing selection:
1. There are excesses of non-synonymous substitutions (causing amino acid
changes) over synonymous substitutions in the functionally important peptide
binding regions (PBR) of six human HLA loci, as illustrated for HLA-A, HLA-B and
HLA-C below (after Hughes & Yeager 1998). This contrasts with other loci (and the
non-PBR regions of these loci) where there is a strong excess of synonymous over
non-synonymous substitutions.
2. Allele frequencies at MHC loci are more even than expected for neutral
alleles.
3. Polymorphisms are very ancient and extend beyond species boundaries
(trans-species polymorphism). For example, at both the HLA-A and HLA-B

SELECTION INTENSITIES VARY AMONG CHARACTERS

loci, each chimpanzee (C) allele is more closely related to a human (H) allele than
to other chimpanzee alleles, as illustrated by the gene tree below (after Nei &
Hughes 1991).
4. Excesses of heterozygotes at MHC loci have been reported in South
American Indian populations, mice and pheasants, but not in bighorn sheep (Black &
Hedrick 1997; Hedrick & Kim 2000).
5. There is linkage disequilibrium among loci in MHC (see Box 4.2) that may be
due to selection.
6. Several examples of direct associations between MHC genotypes and resistance to pathogens have been reported. For example, heterozygosity at HLA-A,
HLA-B and HLA-C is associated with longer survival in humans infected with HIV.
Further, particular MHC alleles are associated with resistance/susceptibility to HIV,
malaria, hepatitis B and C, tuberculosis, leprosy and venereal diseases in humans, to
gut worms in sheep, to Theileria parva and mastitis in cattle and to Marek’s disease
(tumor caused by a virus) in chickens (Chan et al. 1979; Nicholas 1987; Mejdell et al.
1994; Taracha et al. 1995; Singh et al. 1997; Stear et al. 1997; Carrington et al. 1999).
Heterozygote advantage for particular MHC loci has been demonstrated in humans
for responses to hepatitis B and HIV infections (Thurz et al. 1997; Carrington et al.
1999).
Other selective forces may also operate on the MHC. Spontaneous abortion
rates are higher for couples who share MHC alleles than for those who do not
(Hedrick & Kim 2000). Further, mice, and probably humans, avoid mating with indi-

209

210

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

viduals sharing their MHC alleles, so it may have a role in inbreeding avoidance (Potts
et al. 1994).
In spite of the strong evidence for balancing selection on the MHC, the selection
coefﬁcients are often small, being 4.2%, 1.9%, 1.5%, 0.85%, 0.28%, 0.26% and 0.07%
for different loci (Satta et al. 1994). Conversely, in some cases, very strong selection
has been reported (Black & Hedrick 1997). These differences may relate to how
recently and frequently populations were subject to serious disease epidemics. The
relative importance of the various forms of balancing selection operating on the
MHC remains unclear.

The clearest case of frequency-dependent selection occurs at self-incompatibility (SI) loci in plants (Box 9.3). These along with MHC loci are
among the most highly polymorphic loci known (Charlesworth &
Awadalla 1998). Self-incompatibility systems have important implications in conservation biology as loss of S alleles in small populations
leads to reduced reproductive ﬁtness (Chapter 10).

Box 9.3 Maintenance of self-incompatibility alleles in
plants by frequency-dependent selection (after
Wright 1969; Richman & Kohn 1996; Richards
1997; Charlesworth & Awadalla 1998)
Self-incompatibility (Chapter 2) has evolved independently several times as it is based
on different functional loci in different plant groups. We will describe multi-allelic
gametophytic self-incompatibility due to a single locus. This is found in
Scrophulariaceae, Onagraceae, Papaveraceae, Solanaceae, Rosaceae and several
other ﬂowering plant families.
Gametophytic self-incompatibility has the following characteristics:
• The compatibility of matings is controlled by S alleles at a single locus
• Populations contain many S alleles (about 66 in poppies and 400 in evening primroses and clovers)
• Matings between plants carrying the same SI genotypes are incompatible
(S1S2 S1S2)
• Matings between plants sharing one SI allele are 50% compatible (S1S2 S1S3)
• Matings between plants with different SI genotypes are compatible (S1S2 S3S4)
• Self-incompatibility polymorphisms are very ancient; sequence variants have been
maintained since before related species speciated (see Klein et al. 1998)
• Frequency-dependent selection maintains the polymorphism for selfincompatibility alleles.
An example of the operation of this system is given below for a three allele system
(after Hedrick 2000). If an allele is rare, it will have a great advantage in pollination
success as pollen containing the rare allele will seldom encounter maternal genotypes
with the same allele. Conversely, if an allele is common it will frequently encounter
maternal genotypes with the same allele and make reduced contributions to the next
generation. The table below gives the relationships between genotype frequencies
in succeeding generations. Since only heterozygotes can form, P12  P13  P23 1.

SELECTION INTENSITIES VARY AMONG CHARACTERS

Offspring
Female parent Pollen Frequency S1S2

S1S3

S2S3

S1S2
S1S3
S2S3

1

1

S3
S2
S1

P12
P13
P23

—
1
⁄2 P13
1
⁄2 P23

⁄2 P12
—
1
⁄2 P23

⁄2 P12
⁄2 P13
—
1

⁄2(1 P12) 1⁄2(1P13) 1⁄2(1P23)

1

The frequencies of the three genotypes in the next generation are
P 12  1⁄2 P13  1⁄2 P23  1⁄2 (1 P12)
P 13  1⁄2 P12  1⁄2 P23  1⁄2 (1 P13)
P 23  1⁄2 P12  1⁄2 P13  1⁄2 (1 P23)
The change in genotypic frequency for S1S2 is
P12 P 12 P12  1⁄2 (1 P12)P12
 1⁄2 (1 3P12)
The equilibrium genotype frequency is obtained by setting P12 0, yielding
P̂12 1/3
The equilibrium frequencies for P13 and P23 are also 1/3, so the equilibrium frequencies for the S1, S2 and S3 alleles are all 1/3. This equilibrium is reached rapidly as the
selection is strong. When there are n alleles, the equilibrium frequency of each allele
is 1/n.
The frequency dependence of the ﬁtness of pollen genotypes can be illustrated
using an example. If the three female parents have equal frequencies, but S1, S2 and
S3 pollen have unequal frequencies of 1/2, 1/3 and 1/6 (above, at, and below equilibrium, respectively), then all alleles will have a frequency of 1/3 in the next generation.
Consequently, pollen alleles with frequencies above the equilibrium have relative ﬁtnesses of less than 1, alleles with frequencies less than the equilibrium have relative
ﬁtnesses of greater than 1 and alleles at the equilibrium frequency have ﬁtnesses of
1, i.e. the ﬁtnesses are dependent on allele frequencies.

Selection in different directions in heterogeneous
environments
Selection may change over seasons. For example, selection that varied
with seasons was described for an inversion polymorphism in fruit ﬂies
in California (Fig. 9.5). The CH inversion is favoured in June and the ST
in March and October. Such selection may lead to a stable polymorphism (Haldane & Jayakar 1963).
Selection may differ among habitats within the range of a species,
such that one allele is favoured in one environment and selected against
in another. If there is migration between habitats, then polymorphism
may result. Gene ﬂow will usually be related to the distance among the
populations, resulting in a cline (Chapter 7). Box 9.4 details a cline in

Selection that differs across
seasons may lead to retention of
genetic diversity

When there is differential
selection in different habitats and
migration among them, a
polymorphism may result

211

212

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

Fig. 9.5 Changes with season in
the frequency of chromosomal
inversions (ST and CH) segregating
in fruit ﬂies at Pînon Flats,
California (Dobzhansky et al.
1977). This polymorphism showed a
similar pattern in different years,
conﬁrming that it is a stable
polymorphism.

glaucousness (leaf waxiness) with elevation in several species of eucalypt
tress in Tasmania, Australia. A balance between migration and selection
maintains this polymorphism. Selection for frost tolerance favours glaucous individuals at higher elevation, but selection due to insect defoliation acts against them at lower elevation. Pollen ﬂow across sites
reintroduces alleles that are selected against. Clines due to migration–selection balance have been found for heavy metal tolerance in
colonial bent grass plants between old heavy metal mine waste sites and
nearby pastures in Wales (Chapter 7), for industrial melanism in peppered moths across gradients from polluted to unpolluted areas (Bishop
& Cook 1975) and for alleles at several allozyme loci (Powers et al. 1991).
Clines in morphological characters are relatively common, some being
so pervasive that they are referred to as ecogeographic rules (Chapter 7).
Conditions for maintenance of genetic diversity by mechanisms
involving spatial or temporal variation in selection are considered to be
rather restricted (Prout 2000).

Box 9.4 Clines in leaf glaucousness in several species of
eucalypt trees in Tasmania, Australia due to
differential selection at high and low altitudes and
pollen ﬂow (Barber 1955; Barber & Jackson 1957;
Thomas & Barber 1974)
Some eucalypt trees have leaves with a distinct waxy (glaucous) layer on them. At
least eight species of eucalypts (gum trees) in Tasmania have parallel clines of glaucousness with higher frequencies of waxy leaves at higher, frosty, altitudes. Further,
some species show similar clines in different locations. Glaucous leaves have greater
survival in heavy frosts. At lower elevations, glaucous plants suffer greater defoliation
through insect attacks. Selective differences have been demonstrated by showing
that frequencies differ between seeds and adult plants (see lower ﬁgure). Pollen ﬂow
between populations results in mixing of alleles from different elevations, while selection operating between seed and adult stages of the life cycle re-establishes differences among elevations.

SELECTION INTENSITIES VARY AMONG CHARACTERS

Parallel clines in glaucousness up
mountains in Tasmania, Australia in
different species of eucalypt trees
(after Barber & Jackson 1957).

Changes in frequencies of glaucous
plants and seedlings with altitude in
the urn gum. Difference in glaucous
frequencies between seeds and
adult plants demonstrate the
operation of selection (after
Barber 1955).

Reproductive ﬁtness
Genetic diversity for loci affecting reproductive ﬁtness can be maintained by
• mutation-selection equilibrium,
• balancing selection, or
• either of the above interacting with genetic drift.
Neutral mutations do not, by deﬁnition, contribute to genetic variation
for ﬁtness.
Half, or more, of the genetic diversity for ﬁtness characters is due to
mutation–selection balance (Falconer & Mackay 1996; Charlesworth &
Hughes 2000). The remainder is maintained by balancing selection,
with selection in heterogeneous environments the most probable
mechanism (Charlesworth 1998). Neither overdominance nor frequency-dependent selection are considered to be important means for
maintaining quantitative genetic diversity for ﬁtness (Falconer &
Mackay 1996; Charlesworth & Hughes 2000).

Mutation–selection balance is
widely acknowledged as an
important factor maintaining
genetic diversity for reproductive
ﬁtness, accounting for one half, or
more, of the genetic diversity

213

214

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

Maintenance of genetic diversity in small
populations
Genetic drift has a larger impact,
and balancing selection is less
effective, in smaller populations, so
genetic diversity will generally be
lower in small than in large
populations

Genetic diversity is often lower in small populations than in large populations (Chapter 3). In large populations genetic diversity is maintained through slow drift of neutral alleles, by mutation–selection
balance and by balancing selection. The situation differs in small populations. Five crucial points emerge:
• Drift ﬁxes alleles more rapidly in smaller populations
• Loci subject to weak selection in large populations approach effective neutrality in small populations
• Mutation–selection equilibria are lower in small than in large populations
• The effect of ﬁnite population size on balanced polymorphisms
depends on the equilibrium frequency; the ﬁxation of intermediate
frequency alleles is retarded, but balancing selection accelerates ﬁxation of low frequency alleles
• Balancing selection can retard loss of genetic diversity, but it does
not prevent it in small populations.
The consequence of these effects is that genetic diversity in small populations is lower for both neutral alleles and those subject to balancing
selection.

Selection and drift in small populations
Genetic drift has a major impact in
small populations even for loci
that are subject to balancing
selection

The balance between selection and drift depends on the population size
and the intensity of the selection. When both factors are operating,
selection predominates in very large populations, while drift predominates in small populations. For example, in Fig. 8.2 the small populations (N10) showed a wide variation in behaviour, with one
population going to ﬁxation for the deleterious allele, and six for the
favoured allele, with ﬁve remaining polymorphic. Conversely in the
large populations (N100), all replicates showed similar increases in
the frequency of the wild-type allele, with no populations reaching ﬁxation after 20 generations.

Drift may negate the inﬂuence of selection
An allele is considered to be
effectively neutral if its selection
coefﬁcient is less than about
1/(2Ne)

In small populations, alleles which have effects on ﬁtness may behave as
if they are not subject to selection, and drift randomly in frequency
from one generation to the next (Wright 1931). Thus, weakly selected
alleles in small populations, plus strictly neutral alleles, are referred to
as effectively neutral (or selectively neutral).
The conditions for effective neutrality depend on the relationship
between the selection coefﬁcient and the effective population size (Fig.

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Fig. 9.6 Distributions of allele frequencies in different sized populations subject to
different strengths of directional selection (after Dobzhansky et al. 1977, based on
Wright). The proportions of populations with different allele frequencies are shown for
populations that have reached a steady state. The distributions with weak selection are similar
to those for no selection (s0), until the selection coefﬁcient equals or exceeds approximately
1/(2Ne).

9.6). The distributions of allele frequencies for weakly selected loci are
very similar to those for neutrality (s 0) until s 1/2N. Consequently,
Kimura (1983) deﬁned an effectively neutral allele as one where
s

1
2Ne

(9.4)

For example, a selection coefﬁcient of 5%, which would be considered a
very strong deterministic force in a large population, becomes effectively zero in a population of effective size10. Further examples of
population sizes required for alleles to be effectively neutral are given
in Example 9.4. These indicate that most allozyme loci will be effectively
neutral in populations with effective sizes of less than 300. MHC alleles
may often behave as if neutral in populations with effective sizes of 50
of less. These effective population sizes may correspond to actual sizes
of perhaps 10 times larger (Chapter 10). Thus, for most populations of
conservation concern, allozyme and DNA polymorphisms will behave
as if they are neutral, or very nearly so.

Example 9.4 In what sized populations are alleles effectively neutral?
Selection coefﬁcients are often on the order of 0.15% or less on allozymes (Kreitman 1996), and often less than 1% on MHC variants. At
what population sizes are these effectively neutral? Allozymes will be
effectively neutral when s 1/(2Ne), thus

215

216

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

0.0015 

1
2Ne

i.e. when
Ne 

1
333
2 0.0015

Thus, allozyme alleles will be effectively neutral in populations with
effective sizes of about 300 or less. This typically corresponds to an
actual population size of up to 3000 adults (Chapter 10).
Consequently, allozymes will be effectively neutral in most threatened species.
A MHC allele with a 1% selection coefﬁcient will be effectively
neutral when
0.01 

1
2Ne

i.e. when
Ne 

1
50
2 0.01

Thus, an allele with a selection coefﬁcient of 1% will be effectively
neutral in a population with an Ne of less than 50. This typically corresponds to an actual population size of up to 500 adults, so such alleles
will be effectively neutral in many endangered species.

While Equation 9.4 suggests that there is a threshold population size
below which effective neutrality occurs, the effectiveness of selection
declines in a more-or-less continuous fashion as effective population
size is reduced (Fig. 9.7). The effectiveness of selection is less sensitive to
reductions in population size for alleles with large, as opposed to those
with small, selection coefﬁcients. An allele with a selection coefﬁcient

Fig. 9.7 Selection is less effective
in small than in large populations.
Plot of the effectiveness of
selection against Ne for alleles with
different selection coefﬁcients (s).
An allele with an effectiveness of 1
has the same probability of ﬁxation
as that in an inﬁnite population.
Effectiveness is deﬁned as (Pﬁxation 
p) / (1 p), where p is the initial
frequency of the allele and Pﬁxation is
the probability of ﬁxation for the
allele in populations of particular
sizes.

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

of 10% is selected as effectively as in an inﬁnite population size until Ne
drops below 50. Below this the effectiveness of selection drops rapidly as
Ne reduces and the allele becomes effectively neutral. An allele with a
selection coefﬁcient of 1% is not selected with complete efﬁciency even
at a population size of 300, and its selective effectiveness drops incrementally as the population size declines.

Balancing selection and drift in small populations
Balancing selection may slow the loss of genetic diversity in small populations, but it cannot normally prevent it, i.e. even strongly selected
balanced polymorphisms for the MHC, inversions, self-incompatibility
alleles and visual polymorphisms are not immune from the effects of
genetic drift. For example, MHC diversity is subject to genetic drift, as
it is correlated with allozyme diversity across species, and with DNA
ﬁngerprint diversity across different sized populations of pocket
gophers (Fig. 9.8). Related evidence has been reported for the Australian
bush rat (Seddon & Baverstock 1999). Inversions are subject to genetic
drift (Montgomery et al. 2000). Further, there is evidence that visual
polymorphisms in snail shells are affected by genetic drift in small populations (Lamotte 1959).

Fig. 9.8 Loss of genetic diversity due to drift at MHC loci. Correlation of MHC
diversity and allozyme or DNA ﬁngerprint diversity across species and populations,
indicating that the MHC loses diversity due to genetic drift (Zegers 2000). (a) Plot of
MHC diversity (MAPD) against allozyme diversity for a range of different species. (b) Plot
of MHC diversity (DQa locus) against DNA ﬁngerprint diversity for different populations
of pocket gophers. These correlations are expected with genetic drift, but not with selection.
Genetic drift affects all neutral (and effectively neutral) loci in the same way. Conversely, selection
affects different loci in different ways.

Loss of alleles at self-incompatibility loci has also been documented
in several small plant populations (Les et al. 1991; Demauro 1993; Young
et al. 2000). Theoretical models predict that there will be a close relationship between number of SI alleles and effective population size (Fig. 9.9).
To understand the loss of genetic diversity for loci under balancing
selection, we now consider the impacts of heterozygote advantage selection in small populations.

Even strongly selected balanced
polymorphisms for the MHC,
inversions, self-incompatibility
alleles and visual polymorphisms
lose genetic diversity due to
genetic drift in small populations

217

218

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

Fig. 9.9 Smaller plant
populations are expected to have
fewer self-incompatibility alleles
than larger populations. Predicted
number of S alleles in populations
with different effective sizes (Ne)
for various mutation rates (u)
(after Richman & Kohn 1996). The
model involves drift, mutation and
self-incompatibility selection.

Heterozygote advantage impedes
ﬁxation for alleles with equilibrium
frequencies in the range 0.2–0.8,
but accelerates ﬁxation for alleles
outside this range when
compared to neutral alleles

Weakly selected loci in small
populations become effectively
neutral, so that drift is a major
concern in maintaining genetic
diversity in species of
conservation concern

A critical point about balanced polymorphisms in small populations is that maintenance of genetic diversity by overdominant selection depends on the equilibrium frequency (Fig. 9.10). Robertson (1962)
demonstrated that heterozygote advantage impedes ﬁxation for alleles
with equilibrium frequencies in the 0.2–0.8 range. Conversely, for
alleles with equilibrium frequencies outside this range, overdominance actually increases the rate of ﬁxation, compared to neutral alleles.
This counter-intuitive result occurs because alleles that drift to more
intermediate frequencies are moved back towards their more extreme
equilibrium frequencies by selection, thus making them more prone to
loss by drift. In other words, selection ‘discourages’ these rarer alleles
from drifting to higher frequencies. Many alleles at polymorphic DNA
and allozyme loci fall into this frequency range. This equilibrium frequency effect probably applies to all forms of balancing selection.
Even for alleles with equilibria of 0.2–0.8, there are effects of genetic
drift unless selection coefﬁcients are large and population sizes very
large. For example, there is a relationship between genetic diversity and
population size up to an effective population size of 1000 (perhaps
N10 000) for alleles with selection coefﬁcients s1 s2 0.04 (Robertson
1962). DNA sequence polymorphisms, allozymes and even MHC diversity are likely to fall within this range of selective values in threatened
populations.
The conservation implications of the above are clear and extremely
important.
Evolutionary processes are changed when a species declines from a
large size to become small and endangered. For example, the impact of
natural selection on both American and European bison has been substantially reduced since their numbers have been depleted by overexploitation. Similar processes are occurring in African elephants and
rhinoceroses as their population sizes are reduced, and they exist in
small, isolated fragments. The impact of natural selection is reduced for
any population that has decreased in size. We see the worrying implication that small populations are less able to evolve to cope with environmental changes, such as new diseases, even if they have the same
amounts of genetic diversity initially.

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Fig. 9.10 Reduction (retardation) in ﬁxation probability in ﬁnite populations, compared
to that for a neutral locus, for loci exhibiting overdominant selection with different
equilibrium frequencies (after Robertson 1962). When the retardation factor exceeds
1.0, selected loci show greater retention of genetic diversity than neutral loci, but when it
is less than 1.0 they show accelerated ﬁxation compared to neutral loci. The numbers on
the curves represent different values of the product of selection coefﬁcients and effective
population size [Ne(s1 s2)]. Overdominant selection retards ﬁxation in the range 0.2–0.8, but
accelerates it outside this range of equilibrium frequencies.

Associative overdominance
In small populations, a further interaction between balancing selection
and drift arises. Linkage disequilibrium develops over generations in
small populations, as chromosomal types are lost by chance (Fig. 9.11).
As essentially all chromosomes contain at least one deleterious allele,
chromosomal homozygotes are homozygous for one or more deleterious alleles. However, different chromosomes contain deleterious recessive alleles at different loci, so chromosomal heterozygotes are
heterozygous for deleterious alleles. Consequently, chromosomal
homozygotes are deleterious, while heterozygotes have higher reproductive ﬁtness (Fig. 9.11). When this occurs, the fate of an allele is determined by the loci around it. The neutral locus (A) in the ﬁgure is
apparently exhibiting overdominance, as it is non-randomly associated
with the deleterious alleles m2 and m6. This apparent overdominance
due to linkage disequilibrium is termed associative overdominance.
Linkage disequilibrium only develops gradually over several generations after population size has been reduced. It does not impede the
initial loss of genetic diversity (e.g. there has been ﬁxation at loci m1, m3,
m4, and m5 in Fig. 9.11).
The selective forces involved here are likely to be much stronger than
those experienced by most single loci, i.e. the major selective force in
small populations will usually be associative overdominance.
Associative overdominance slows loss of genetic diversity in small
populations. Allozyme diversity was lost at only about 80% of the rate

In small populations, linkage
disequilibrium develops over
generations. This results in blocks
of loci containing different
deleterious alleles, showing
heterozygous advantage
(associative overdominance)

Associative overdominance slows
the subsequent loss of genetic
diversity, but does not prevent it

219

220

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

Fig. 9.11 Development of
associative overdominance in small
populations. The gene pool for a
large population is shown with an
array of chromosomes that exhibit
linkage equilibrium between
deleterious alleles (m) and a
neutral marker locus (A). In a small
population, genetic drift over
generations leads to the loss of all
except two chromosomal
haplotypes, leading to linkage
disequilibrium (recombination is
insufﬁcient to prevent this in small
populations). The resulting
genotypes exhibit overdominance,
as each chromosomal homozygote
is homozygous for a different
recessive deleterious allele (m2 or
m6), while the chromosomal
heterozygotes are heterozygous
for both deleterious alleles.
Consequently, neutral alleles (A1
vs. A2) on the chromosomes
behave as if they have heterozygote
advantage (associative
overdominance).

expected for neutral loci in fruit ﬂy populations of size N2 (Rumball et
al. 1994). Similarly, linkage disequilibrium eventually developed and
slowed ﬁxation, even in fruit ﬂy populations with effective sizes of
about 50 (Latter et al. 1995). Computer simulations with many loci indicate that linkage disequilibrium, coupled with either deleterious
alleles, or loci showing overdominance, slows ﬁxation at linked neutral
loci, but does not prevent eventual ﬁxation (Latter 1998).

Genetic diversity for reproductive ﬁtness in small
populations
Genetic diversity for reproductive
ﬁtness will be lost through genetic
drift in small populations, but rates
of loss may be less than for neutral
loci

The magnitudes of selective forces acting on individual polymorphic
loci affecting ﬁtness are unknown, as the number of polymorphic loci
contributing to the observed variation in ﬁtness is unknown. However,
selective forces on most loci are presumed to be small, as many loci are
involved. If selection is weak, then genetic drift in small populations
will reduce genetic diversity at these loci.
Loci contributing to genetic variation for ﬁtness traits through
mutation–selection balance will carry deleterious alleles at very low frequencies. Rare alleles are very sensitive to genetic drift, and variation
will be readily lost in small populations. Even lethal alleles are not
immune to the effects of genetic drift, as we saw in the previous chapter.
Since lethals represent the most strongly selected alleles, most alleles
affecting ﬁtness will be even more affected by genetic drift.

FURTHER READING

Components of genetic variation for ﬁtness, maintained by balancing selection, will be less sensitive to population size reduction than
neutral variation. However, they too will not be immune to the effects
of genetic drift.
There can be no doubt that genetic variation for reproductive ﬁtness
is lower in small than in large populations. Evolutionary potential has
been shown to be reduced in bottlenecked laboratory populations and
to be related to size in populations maintained for 50 generations at different sizes (Chapter 10, Frankham et al. 1999).

Summary
1. Genetic diversity is of major concern in conservation biology as
populations require the capacity to evolve with environmental
changes.
2. Genetic diversity arises by mutation and is lost through directional selection and genetic drift.
3. Balancing selection impedes loss of genetic diversity. This may
take the form of heterozygote advantage, frequency-dependent selection, or selection of varying direction over space or time.
4. The relative contributions of selection versus drift in determining levels of genetic diversity depend on the population size and the
character being considered.
5. Drift effects predominate in small populations, while selection is
most effective in large populations.
6. Selection is more important for visual polymorphisms and reproductive ﬁtness than for untranslated DNA, with protein polymorphisms intermediate. Drift has the opposite pattern of importance.
7. Genetic variation for reproductive ﬁtness seems to be maintained by mutation–selection balance for half, or more, of its variation, and by some form of balancing selection for the remainder.
8. Population size is a major determinant of genetic diversity for all
loci and characters in small populations and species of conservation
concern.
FURTHER READING

Gillespie, J. (1991) The Causes of Molecular Evolution. An exposition on the topic
that takes a very strong selectionist view.
Hughes & Yeager (1998) A review of mechanisms maintaining genetic diversity
at MHC loci in vertebrates.
Kimura (1983) The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution. A ﬁne exposition of the
neutral theory for maintenance of genetic diversity.
Kreitman & Akashi (1995) A review of the evidence for selection on molecular
variation.
Richman & Kohn (1996) An excellent review of the evolutionary biology of selfincompatibility.
Singh & Krimbas (2000) Evolutionary Genetics. A recent collection of excellent
advanced reviews, several relating to topics in this chapter. See especially
chapters by Schaeffer & Aguade, Hedrick & Kim, Prout, and Charlesworth &
Hughes.

221

222

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

PROBLEMS

9.1. Genetic diversity under neutrality: What are the predicted
equilibrium heterozygosities and effective number of alleles under
neutrality for a locus with a neutral mutation rate of 107 in a population with an effective size of 20?
9.2 Excess heterozygosity due to selection: Do the genotype frequencies at the haemoglobin locus for adults differ from
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium expectations for the data in Box 9.1? Do
the infant genotype frequencies differ from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium expectations?
9.3 Heterozygote advantage: If relative ﬁtnesses are 0.99, 1 and 0.97
for genotypes A1A1, A1A2 and A2A2, respectively, what are equilibrium
frequencies for the two alleles?
9.4 Heterozygote advantage: The locus that confers resistance to
the anti-coagulant poison warfarin in wild rats shows heterozygote
advantage; resistant homozygotes survive the poison, but many die
from vitamin K deﬁciency, heterozygotes are resistant to poison and
do not suffer from vitamin K deﬁciency, while susceptible homozygotes have higher mortality due to the poison. What is the equilibrium
frequency for the warfarin resistant R allele in rats, given the following survival rates of the three genotypes (modiﬁed from Greaves et al.
1977)? (Assume that the only selection is for survival.)
RR

RS

SS

0.3

0.8

0.56

9.5 Heterozygote advantage: If the relative ﬁtnesses of the three
genotypes A1A1, A1A2 and A2A2 at a locus are 0.7, 1 and 0.9, what will be
the ﬁnal state of populations beginning with a frequency of A1 of (a)
0.1? (b) 0.3? (c) 0.9?
9.6 Equilibrium frequency with heterozygote advantage: Derive the
expression for the equilibrium frequency due to selection favouring
heterozygotes at a locus. Assume that the starting frequencies for
alleles A1 and A2 are p and q.
Genotypes
A1A1

A1A2

A2A2

Total

Frequencies at fertilization
1
1 s2
Relative ﬁtnesses
1s1
After selection
Adjust so total is 1
New frequency of A1 p1 
p
At equilibrium p
9.7 Self-incompatibility: For the system described in Box 9.3, determine the relative ﬁtness of each S allele in pollen in a population with
equal frequencies of three genotypes in females, but frequencies of S1,
S2 and S3 alleles of 1/6, 1/3 and 1/2 in pollen.

PRACTICAL EXERCISES

9.8 Self-incompatibility: What will the relative ﬁtness of a new S4
allele be in pollen in the case described in Box 9.3, if the three female
genotypes have equal frequencies and alleles S1, S2, S3 and S4 have frequencies of 0.33, 0.33, 0.33 and 0.01, respectively, in pollen?
9.9 Selective neutrality: At what population size is an allele with a
selection coefﬁcient of 2% effectively neutral?
PR ACTIC AL EXERCISES: COMPUTER SIMUL ATIONS

Maintenance of genetic diversity due to heterozygote advantage Use POPGEN
or a similar software package to simulate aspects of the maintenance of
genetic diversity in large vs. small populations.
1. Strong selection Simulate the allele frequency trajectories for sickle
cell anaemia, beginning at different allele frequencies, using the following relative ﬁtnesses observed by Allison in 1956:
AA

AS

SS

0.76

1

0.20

Commence runs with S allele frequency 0.1 and run for 100 generations
with (a) an inﬁnite population (deterministic option in POPGEN) (b) N
100 and (c) N10, doing 20 replicates of each of the latter. Compare the
outcomes at the three population sizes.
2. Weak selection: equilibrium q 0.5 Simulate the allele frequency
changes for the following model of heterozygote advantage with weak
selection:
A1A1

A1A2

A2A2

0.99

1

0.99

Commence runs with q 0.5 and run for 100 generations (a) an inﬁnite
population (deterministic option in POPGEN) (b) N100 and (c) N10.
Run 50 replicates of the latter two cases. Repeat the runs for same population sizes with neutrality (relative ﬁtnesses of all genotypes of 1).
Compare the proportion of populations polymorphic at generation 100
for the neutral cases with those for balancing selection and across population sizes. Does balancing selection slow ﬁxation, or speed it up?
3. Weak selection: equilibrium q 0.1 Simulate the allele frequency
changes for the following model of heterozygote advantage with weak
selection:
A1A1

A1A2

A2A2

0.99

1

0.999

Commence runs with q0.1 and run for 100 generations with (a) an inﬁnite population (deterministic option in POPGEN) (b) N100 and (c)

223

224

MAINTENANCE OF GENETIC DIVERSITY

N10. Run 50 replicates. Repeat the runs for the same population sizes
with neutrality. Compare the proportion of populations polymorphic at
generation 100 for the neutral cases with those for balancing selection,
and across population sizes. Does balancing selection slow ﬁxation, or
speed it up?

Section II
Effects of population size
reduction

Threatened species have small, or declining populations. Once small,
they suffer loss of genetic diversity, inbreeding (with consequent reduction in reproductive ﬁtness) and accumulation of deleterious mutations. All these factors increase the risk of extinction. Consequently,
Section II considers these factors in detail, as they represent the major
genetic issues in conservation biology, and provide the essential background material for the genetic management of threatened species in
Section III.

Factors reducing population size
Humans are reducing the size and distribution of wild populations
through clearing and fragmentation of habitat, over-exploitation, pollution and the impact of introduced species. Of these, habitat loss is
having the greatest impact. Species are becoming extinct before they
are described, and unknown numbers of invertebrate and plant species
will be exterminated.

Loss of genetic diversity
Loss of genetic diversity in small populations reduces the ability to
evolve in response to ever-present environmental change. There are four
threats to genetic diversity:
• Extinction of populations or species
• Extinction of alleles due to sampling in small populations
• Inbreeding reducing heterozygosity (redistributing genetic diversity
among homozygous individuals and populations)

226

EFFECTS OF POPULATION SIZE REDUCTION

• Selection reducing genetic diversity by favouring one allele at the
expense of others, leading to ﬁxation.
Overwhelmingly the major threat to genetic diversity is extinction of
alleles in ﬁnite populations by genetic drift. The adverse genetic effects
of population size reduction, loss of genetic diversity, inbreeding, and
accumulation of deleterious mutations all depend on the effective population size, rather than the census size. The effective population size is
reduced by unequal sex-ratios, high variation in family sizes, and by
ﬂuctuations in population sizes. Chapter 10 deals with the effects of
small population size on genetic diversity and the factors that inﬂuence
effective population size.

Inbreeding
Inbreeding is an inevitable consequence of small population size.
Eventually all individuals become related, so that matings amongst relatives cannot be avoided. Chapter 11 describes how inbreeding is measured, and its rate of increases in ﬁnite populations. Inbreeding exposes
deleterious mutations and reduces reproductive ﬁtness and so
increases extinction risk. Chapter 12 documents the extent of inbreeding depression and discusses its genetic basis.

Population fragmentation
Habitat fragmentation reduces population sizes and increases isolation
of population fragments. Completely isolated population fragments
suffer elevated rates of inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity, and consequently have elevated extinction risks, compared to single populations of the same total size. The impacts of population fragmentation
depend critically on population structure and gene ﬂow. Chapter 13
deals with the genetic consequences of population fragmentation and
with the means for measuring population differentiation and inferring
gene ﬂow.

Genetically viable populations
The section concludes with Chapter 14, ‘Genetically viable populations’. This is concerned with the questions: How large do populations
need to be to avoid inbreeding depression? To avoid loss of evolutionary
potential? To avoid accumulation of deleterious mutations? These sizes
are compared with actual population sizes for endangered species and
size targets for de-listing species. Current goals for genetic management
of captive populations represent a compromise that recognizes that
there will be modest genetic deterioration over time.

Chapter 10

Loss of genetic diversity in small
populations
Sustained restrictions in population size are the main reason for loss
of genetic diversity. Losses in closed populations depend on the
effective population size (Ne) and on the number of generations. Ne is
usually much less than the number of adults in a population

Terms:
Effective population size (Ne ),
harmonic mean,
idealized population

Low genetic diversity in the
critically endangered northern
hairy-nosed wombat, compared to
its nearest relative, the southern
hairy-nosed wombat (after Smith &
Wayne 1996).

228

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Changes in genetic diversity over time
The current genetic status of a
population derives from
cumulative effects over many
previous generations. Predictions
of future changes must also
encompass many generations

In Section I, we examined the origin, extent and fate of genetic variation
for both single locus and quantitative traits. In particular, we explored
the evolutionary forces which inﬂuence genetic diversity and contrasted their importance in small versus large populations. Our major
conclusions are:
• Genetic diversity provides the raw material for evolutionary adaptive change
• Mutation is the ultimate source of all genetic variation
• Mutation, and migration from conspeciﬁc populations or closely
related species, are the only mechanisms for restoring lost diversity.
As mutation rates are always very low, this factor is inconsequential
for genetically depauperate endangered species
• Genetic diversity can be estimated by a variety of laboratory techniques and expressed by the related parameters of percentage of loci
exhibiting polymorphism, allelic diversity or average heterozygosity.
Heterozgosity is the most useful parameter as it can be compared
across species for single locus variation and is directly correlated
with additive genetic variance for quantitative traits
• Some adaptive genetic variation is maintained within populations
by balancing selection
• The inﬂuence of the deterministic forces of natural selection is
directly related to population size. The fate of alleles in most small
populations of endangered species is predominated by random
factors
• Inbreeding, with consequent loss of ﬁtness, becomes inevitable in
small populations
• Effective population size (Ne), as opposed to the observed census size,
determines loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding.
For simplicity, we have primarily considered single generation changes
due to deterministic and random factors. However, the current genetic
status of a population is a consequence of cumulative effects over many
previous generations. Equally, our predictions of future changes, in
both managed and un-managed populations, must extend over many
generations.
At ﬁrst it may seem that loss of genetic diversity is only of concern in
long-term evolutionary adaptation. However, there are immediate
short-term implications of loss of genetic diversity as well. In self-incompatible plants there is a direct relationship between loss of genetic
diversity at self-incompatibility loci and reduction in reproductive
ﬁtness that we explore below. Further, loss of genetic diversity is intimately related to the average increase in inbreeding in outbreeding populations. Increased inbreeding will lead to reductions in average
reproductive ﬁtness for populations, i.e. concerns about loss of genetic
diversity in conservation biology are actually concerns about both loss
of evolutionary potential and short-term loss of ﬁtness due to inbreeding depression.

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY AND REDUCED FITNESS

Relationship between loss of genetic diversity
and reduced ﬁtness
The self-incompatibility in many plant species is genetically controlled by one or more multi-allelic self-incompatibility (SI) loci (Box
9.3). Computer simulations show that these S alleles are lost in small
populations and that this can lead to extinctions (Byers & Meagher
1999). This arises because the proportion of the pollen that can successfully fertilize increases with the number of S alleles (Fig. 10.1). If
there is a shortage of pollen, or pollen of all types is not dispersed to
all plants, this leads to reduced ﬁtness in populations with reduced
numbers of S alleles. In very small populations, all reproduction may
cease, leading to effective extinction even when a handful of plants
remains.
Losses of S alleles in small self-incompatible plant populations and
consequent reductions in population ﬁtness have been documented
in three species (Les et al. 1991; Demauro 1993; Young et al. 2000); the
case of the endangered grassland daisy is described in Box 10.1. All
threatened self-incompatible plant species are susceptible to similar
problems.

Loss of alleles at selfincompatibility loci in small plant
populations reduces population
reproductive ﬁtness

Fig. 10.1 Predicted relationship
between maximum proportion of
pollen that can succeed in
fertilizing and number of S alleles in
plants with gametophytic selfincompatibility.

Box 10.1 Relationship between loss of S allele diversity
and reproductive ﬁtness in the endangered selfincompatible grassland daisy (Young et al. 2000;
Young personal communication)
Direct evidence of loss of S alleles and reduced reproductive ﬁtness has been found
in small populations of the endangered grassland daisy in eastern Australia. S allelic
diversity (and allozyme diversity) declined with population size in ﬁve population
fragments of the daisy with sizes from 5 to 70000 plants. Number of seeds per plant
was related to log N. This relationship between seeds/plant and population size was
not due to a shortage of pollinators in small populations as there were about 50

229

230

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

pollen per stigma and only a single ovule to fertilize. Use of pollen from other populations increased seed set in small populations, conﬁrming that the small number of
S alleles in small populations caused the reduced seed set.

Loss of genetic diversity in small
populations is related to
inbreeding, so it is often related to
reduced reproductive ﬁtness

Within most large random mating populations there is little relationship between heterozygosity of individuals and their reproductive
ﬁtness, as such relationships depend upon occurrence of heterozygote
advantage or frequency-dependent selection. These are rare, except for
MHC and for SI loci (Carrington et al. 1999). When relationships are
observed between individual heterozygosity and ﬁtness they generally
seem to be due to inbreeding (see Hedrick & Savolainen 1996; David
1998).
However, small populations of naturally outbreeding species suffer
both losses of genetic diversity and inbreeding over time. Since inbreeding reduces reproductive ﬁtness (Chapters 2, 11 and 12), loss of genetic
diversity from small populations is expected to be associated with
reductions in reproductive ﬁtness. A recent meta-analysis of 34 data sets
has conﬁrmed that such a relationship exists; the average correlation
between population ﬁtness and heterozygosity was 0.43 (Reed &
Frankham, 2001). Disease resistance/tolerance has also been shown to
be related to genetic diversity in a range of animal and plant species (see
Chapter 2).
Below, we ﬁrst consider the impact on genetic diversity of small population size, sustained over many generations. Second, we consider
means for measuring effective population size, especially by evaluating
the impacts of unequal sex-ratio, variable family sizes and ﬂuctuations
in population size over generations on Ne. Details of the impacts of population size restriction on inbreeding are deferred until Chapters 11
and 12.

EFFECTS OF SUSTAINED POPULATION SIZE RESTRICTIONS ON GENETIC DIVERSITY

Effects of sustained population size restrictions
on genetic diversity
There are ﬁve mechanisms by which genetic diversity is lost:
• Extinction of species and populations
• Fixation of favourable alleles by selection
• Selective removal of deleterious alleles
• Random loss of alleles by inter-generational sampling in small populations
• Inbreeding (such as selﬁng) within populations reducing heterozygosity.
The ﬁrst two are relatively infrequent events, while the drift and
inbreeding are common events related to population size.
In Chapter 8 we saw that loss of genetic diversity resulted from
drastic reductions in population size (bottlenecks) over one or a few
generations. However, equally serious loss of variation can accumulate with modest population restriction. A population of effective
size 100 (a size typical for vulnerable species – see below) loses 25% of
its heterozygosity over 57 generations, the same loss as a single generation bottleneck of one pair (Fig. 8.6). Since severe bottlenecks are
relatively uncommon, while more modest population size restrictions are a regular feature of threatened species, the major signiﬁcance of small population size to genetic diversity is not usually
single generation bottlenecks, but the insidious loss of genetic diversity over many generations. For example, the Illinois population of
the greater prairie chicken dwindled from several million to fewer
than 50 individuals over a 130-year period. This led to reduced genetic
diversity (Box 10.2).
Below we develop the theory to predict the sustained impacts of
many generations of small population size.

Box 10.2 Loss of genetic diversity due to population size
reduction in the greater prairie chicken (Bouzat
et al. 1998)
The greater prairie chicken is a North American grassland/prairie species with
limited dispersal. During the last century many populations have become increasingly
affected by loss of natural habitats through human activities. Populations in Illinois
were estimated to be in the millions in the 1860s, but subsequently declined to
25 000 birds in 1933, 2000 in 1972, 76 in 1990 and to fewer than 50 in 1993. In contrast, extant populations in Kansas, Minnesota and Nebraska remained comparatively
large (4000 to more than 100000 birds).
Data were obtained for six microsatellite loci, with pre–1960 Illinois samples being
obtained from museum specimens. The current Illinois population has fewer alleles
per locus than that in the current populations from Kansas, Minnesota and Nebraska.

Genetic diversity is lost primarily
due to sustained restrictions in
effective population size

231

232

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Further, it has lost alleles since 1960; all the alleles shown in bold below for the
pre-1960 samples are now absent from the Illinois population.

Loss of heterozygosity is a process
of continuous decay that is more
rapid in smaller than larger
populations

In each generation, a proportion 1/(2Ne) of neutral genetic diversity is
lost, as we saw in Chapter 8. Such effects occur in every generation and
losses accumulate with time. We dealt with loss of genetic diversity due
to the impact of a single reduction in population size in Chapter 8.
If population size is constant in each generation, we can extend
Equation 8.2 to obtain an expression for the effects of sustained population size restriction in heterozygosity, as follows:
H1 [1 1 / (2Ne)] H0
and
H2 [1 1 / (2Ne)] H1
so by substituting the initial expression for H1 in the second equation
H2 [1 1 / (2Ne)]2 H0
By extension, the predicted heterozygosity at generation t becomes
Ht [1 1 / (2Ne)]t H0
This is usually expressed as the predicted heterozygosity as a proportion
of the initial heterozygosity:
Ht / H0 [1 1 / (2Ne)]t ⬃ et/2Ne

(10.1)

Predicted declines in heterozygosity with time in different sized populations are shown in Fig. 10.2. The important points of this relationship
are:
• Loss of genetic diversity depends on the effective population size,
rather than the census size
• Heterozygosity is lost at a greater rate in small than large populations
• Loss depends on generations, not years
• Loss of heterozygosity continues with generations, in an exponential decay process

EFFECTS OF SUSTAINED POPULATION SIZE RESTRICTIONS ON GENETIC DIVERSITY

Fig. 10.2 Predicted decline in
heterozygosity over time in
different sized populations (after
Foose 1986).

• Half of the initial heterozygosity is lost in 1.4 Ne generations.
We elaborate on some of these points below.
Example 10.1 demonstrates that populations with effective size 500
will lose only about 5% of their initial heterozygosity over 50 generations, while populations with Ne 25 loses 64% of their initial heterozygosity.
The shorter the generation length, the more rapid in absolute time
will be the loss. Consequently, similar sized populations of black-footed
ferrets with generation lengths of two years will lose genetic diversity
more rapidly than elephants with generation lengths of 26 years.
This theory leads us to expect lowered genetic diversity in endangered species, and in small populations generally. This is the case
(Chapter 3).

Example 10.1 Expected loss of heterozygosity due to sustained
population size reduction
The expected proportion of heterozygosity retained over 50 generations in a population of effective size 500 from Equation 10.1 is
Ht / H0 [1 1 / (2Ne)]t [1 1 / (2500)] 50 (999/1000)50 0.951
i.e. this large population will lose only about 5% of its initial heterozygosity in 50 generations.
For a population with Ne 25, the proportion of initial heterozygosity retained at generation 50 is expected to be
Ht / H0 [1 1 / (2Ne)]t [1 1 / (225)] 50 (49/50)50 0.364
Consequently, this small population will lose 64% of its initial heterozygosity in 50 generations.

233

234

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

In small populations
heterozygosity for allozyme loci is
lost approximately as predicted by
simple neutral theory

Does this theory agree with loss of genetic diversity in real populations?
We have assumed that alleles are neutral and that they are unlinked –
assumptions that may not apply in practice. Allozyme variation is
indeed lost approximately as described by Equation 10.1 (Fig. 10.3).
Equation 10.1 predicts the expected (i.e. average) fate of heterozygosity, but the behaviour of individual loci will be highly variable because of
the stochastic properties involved, especially in small populations. Note
that the variation among replicate populations is greater for smaller
populations than for larger populations (Fig. 10.3). Heterozygosity estimates derived from the average of several loci will yield results closer to
predictions than those based on a single locus. The extent of the variation among replicate populations is addressed in Chapter 13.

Fig. 10.3 Comparisons of observed and predicted heterozygosities after 49
generations in populations of different size. Heterozygosity for allozyme loci at
generation 49, as a proportion of initial heterozygosity (H49/H0), in populations of fruit
ﬂies with different sizes (Ne) plotted against (1 1/2Ne)49 (after Montgomery et al. 2000).
Numbers at the top are effective population sizes. The line on the ﬁgure indicates the
neutral prediction. The observed relationship does not differ signiﬁcantly from expectations.

Small populations lose genetic
variation for reproductive ﬁtness

When populations ﬂuctuate in size
over generations, loss of genetic
diversity is most strongly
inﬂuenced by the minimum size

As genetic variation for reproductive ﬁtness is subject to strong
natural selection, the equations for neutral loci do not apply to it. Is this
component of genetic diversity also lost in small populations? As there
are many loci involved, and many deleterious alleles are very rare, it is
most probable that the alleles involved are affected by genetic drift, and
that evolutionary potential is compromised in small populations
(Chapter 9). An experimental test with fruit ﬂies showed that the ability
of populations to evolve in the face of a changing environment (evolutionary potential) is related to population size (Fig. 10.4).
So far in our development of the theory, we have only considered
populations with constant sizes. However, most real populations ﬂuctuate in size from generation to generation. Familiar examples are ‘plague
species’, such as locusts and domestic mice. Such ﬂuctuations have profound inﬂuences on heterozygosity (equation below), on effective population size (see below) and on inbreeding (Chapter 11).

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN POPULATION SIZE AND GENETIC DIVERSITY IN WILD POPULATIONS

Ht / H0 

t

 [1 1 / (2N

ei

i1

)]

(10.2)

Reductions in heterozygosity are most strongly dependent on the
generation with the smallest effective population size. For example, a
population with effective sizes of 10, 100, 1000 and 10 000 over four generations loses 5.5% of its heterozygosity (Example 10.2). Almost all of the
loss (5%) is due to the generation with Ne 10.

Fig. 10.4 Relationship between
population size and evolutionary
potential in fruit ﬂies (Frankham,
Lowe, Woodworth, Montgomery
& Briscoe, unpublished data).
Populations founded from the
same source population were
maintained at different effective
sizes for 50 generations. Equal
numbers were used to establish
large cage populations that were
forced to evolve in response to
increasing concentrations of NaCl.
The concentrations of NaCl at
extinction are plotted against
[11/(2Ne)]50. Extinction
concentrations, on average, increase
with population size.

Example 10.2 Loss of heterozygosity with ﬂuctuating population
sizes
The expected proportion of heterozygosity retained in a population
with effective sizes of 10, 100, 1000 and 10 000 over four generations is
determined using Equation 10.2, as follows:
Ht / H0 

t

 [1 1 / (2N

ei

)]

[1 (1 / 20)] [1(1 / 200)] [1 (1 / 2000)] [1 (1 / 20000)]
0.95 0.995 0.9995 0.99995 0.945
Consequently, the population loses 5.5% of its heterozygosity over the
four generations, the great majority (5%) being due to the population
size of 10.

Relationship between population size and
genetic diversity in wild populations
Based on Equations 10.1 and 10.2, correlations between population size
and genetic diversity in wild populations are expected. This depends
upon two assumptions. First, that most genetic diversity is neutral in
small populations, or at most weakly selected and subject to genetic

There is overwhelming evidence
that levels of genetic diversity are
related to population size, both
across species and among
populations within species

235

236

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Fig. 10.5 Relationship between
genetic diversity and population
size among and within species. (a)
He and logarithm of population size
across species (after Frankham
1996), and (b) percent
polymorphism and population size
among populations within the New
Zealand conifer Halocharpus bidwilli
(after Billington 1991).

Endangered species typically have
lower genetic diversity than
related non-endangered species

drift (Chapter 9). Second, that current population sizes reﬂect historic
effective population sizes.
A strong relationship has been found between genetic diversity and
population size across a wide array of species (Fig. 10.5a), with population size explaining around one-half of the variation in heterozygosity
among species.
Correlations of genetic diversity with population size were positive
in 22 of 23 studies within species of plants and animals (Frankham
1996). An example of one large study is given in Fig. 10.5b. Further, geographic range, a factor likely to reﬂect population size, is the major
factor explaining levels of genetic diversity within plant species
(Hamrick & Godt 1989). While the data above relate mainly to allozyme
diversity, mtDNA also shows a signiﬁcant relationship with population
size across species.
Not all studies show signiﬁcant relationships between population
size and genetic diversity. This is due to three causes. First, many studies
are so small that they lack the statistical power required to detect signiﬁcant relationships. For example, one study with a correlation of 0.75
was not signiﬁcant as it was based on only four populations! Meta-analyses, which overcome lack of statistical power, reveal clear associations
(Frankham 1996). Second, current population size does not always
reﬂect historic effective population size. Third, the relationship is
‘noisy’ (Fig. 10.3). Many loci need to be evaluated to obtain a representative picture for the whole genome. Alternatively, many replicate populations are required to obtain an adequate representative average. In
spite of these complications, there is overwhelming evidence for associations between population size and genetic diversity, both within and
across species (Frankham 1996).
Endangered species, by deﬁnition, have small or declining population sizes, and are therefore expected to have lower genetic diversity
than non-endangered species (with larger population sizes). This has
been found (Chapter 3). For example, the critically endangered northern hairy-nosed wombat from Australia, with a population size of only
75, has less genetic diversity than its non-endangered relative, the
southern hairy-nosed wombat (Box 10.3). The magnitude of the difference in genetic diversity between endangered and non-endangered
species is substantial. On average, endangered species have only about
60% the microsatellite heterozygosity of related non-endangered
species and around half the number of alleles (see Table 3.5).

RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN POPULATION SIZE AND GENETIC DIVERSITY IN WILD POPULATIONS

Box 10.3 Low genetic diversity in the critically
endangered northern hairy-nosed wombat
(Taylor et al. 1994; Beheregaray et al. 2000)
The northern hairy-nosed wombat exists as a single population of approximately 75
individuals in Epping Forest, central Queensland, Australia (see chapter frontispiece
for locations). This population has had a low population size for a considerable period
of time. Based on 28 microsatellite loci, the population had lower levels of genetic
diversity than its nearest relative, the southern hairy-nosed wombat, that exists in
larger numbers further south in the continent.

Species

A

He

Northern
Southern

2.1
5.9

0.32
0.71

Loss of genetic diversity for haploid, sex-linked and
polyploid loci
Species differ in the number of chromosomal sets they contain, from
haploid (n), through diploid (2n), to polyploid (triploid – 3n, tetraploid –
4n, etc.). Many plant and a few animal species are polyploid, while bacteria are usually haploid. Since loss of genetic diversity is a sampling
process, the rate of loss depends on the number of gene copies per individual (Bever & Felber 1994). While this is two in the diploids considered
above, it is one in haploids, one in males and two in females for sexlinked loci (and haplo-diploid species) and four in tetraploids, etc.
Further, chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes are typically maternally transmitted. Equations for loss of genetic diversity for a range of
non-diploid loci are compared with that for diploids in Table 10.1.

Table 10.1

Rates of loss of expected heterozygosity (He) per generation in
populations of the same size for neutral loci that are haploid, sex-linked,
diploid, or tetraploid, or in mtDNA or chloroplast DNA. Ne is effective
population size and Nef is the effective number of females. It is assumed that
only one mtDNA or chloroplast genome per gamete contributes to the next
generation.

Mode of inheritance
Haploid
Sex-linked (or haplo-diploid)
Diploid
Autotetraploid
Allotetraploid
Chloroplast DNA
mtDNA
Source: Wright (1969).

Rate of loss of genetic diversity (He)
1 / Ne
1 / 1.5Ne
1 / 2Ne
1 / 4Ne
1 / 4Ne
1 / Nef
1 / Nef

Loss of genetic diversity due to
genetic drift in populations of the
same size is fastest for mtDNA
and chloroplast DNA loci,
followed in order by haploids, sexlinked loci, diploids and tetraploids

237

238

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

There is an inverse relationship between loss of genetic diversity and
ploidy. Loss is greatest per generation for haploids and least for tetraploids. The most rapid rate of loss is for mtDNA and chloroplast DNA loci
as only females transmit them. Example 10.3 illustrates rates of loss in a
single generation in a population with ﬁve males and ﬁve females.

Example 10.3 Loss of genetic diversity for haploid, sex-linked,
diploid, tetraploid and mtDNA loci in a small
population
We consider rates of loss of genetic diversity in a population composed
of only ﬁve males and ﬁve females. For comparative purposes, genetic
diversity is measured as the Hardy–Weinberg heterozygosity expected
for a random mating diploid (He) . The losses of genetic diversity are:
Haploid loss 1/Ne 1/10 10%
Sex-linked loss1/(1.5Ne) 1/15 0.0676.7%
Diploid loss 1/(2Ne) 1/200.055%
Tetraploid loss 1/(4Ne) 1/400.0252.5%
mtDNA loss 1/Nef 1/5 20%
Thus, the rates of losses of genetic diversity compared to the diploid
case are four times for mtDNA and cpDNA genomes, double for haploids, 33% greater for sex-linked, and half for tetraploids.
Loss of genetic diversity in small
populations is slower in polyploids
than for equivalent sized diploids

There is less concern about reductions in evolutionary potential for
polyploid species than for diploid ones as:
• Polyploids tend to have higher polymorphism and allelic diversity
than diploids
• Polyploids have higher heterozygosity for the same allele frequencies than equivalent diploids (Chapter 4)
• Polyploids lose genetic diversity at slower rates than diploids (Table
10.1)
• Allopolyploids at complete homozygosity may have ﬁxed heterozygosity (see below).
Autotetraploid populations of the endangered grassland daisy have
greater polymorphism and allelic diversity than related diploid populations (Brown & Young 2000). This seems to apply to a variety of
tetraploids. However, some recently formed polyploids may have
gone through bottlenecks at foundation that reduced their genetic
diversity.
As predicted from Table 10.1, the relationship between population
size and genetic diversity appears to be weaker in tetraploids than diploids in a range of threatened plant species (Maki et al. 1996; Prober et al.
1998; Brown & Young 2000; Buza et al. 2000).
Allopolyploids may have duplicate loci ﬁxed for different alleles

EFFECTIVE POPULATION SIZE

even when completely inbred, such that they display ﬁxed heterozygosity. Allotetraploids at complete ﬁxation have the same expected heterozygosity as a random mating diploid (Example 10.4).

Example 10.4 Comparing loss of heterozygosity in allotetraploids
and diploids
If we consider two loci each with two alleles A1 and A2 at initial frequencies of p and q, then the heterozygosity is 2pq for a diploid and
2pq (2pq) for a tetraploid with duplicated loci (Chapter 4). At complete ﬁxation, due to inbreeding (F 1) or long-term ﬁnite population
size, all loci will be homozygous. In the diploid species, genotype frequencies across many replicate populations will be:

At ﬁxation

A1A1

A1A2

A2A2

p

0

q

Heterozygosity
0

In an allotetraploid, the situation is the same at each of the duplicated loci, but the two duplicated loci may be ﬁxed for the same or for
different alleles, as follows:
Locus 1
A1A1
A1A2
A2A2
Locus 2

A1A1
A 1A2
A2 A2

Resulting in genotypes
with frequencies

p2
0
pq

0
0
0

pq
0
q2

A1A1A1A1
p2

A1A1A2A2
2pq

A2A2A2A2
q2

Thus, the allotetraploid will have a heterozygosity of 2pq at complete
ﬁxation, (the same as the diploid prior to inbreeding), while the
diploid will have no heterozygosity. If the two contributing genomes
in an allotetraploid have different allele frequencies, then the
increased heterozygosity of allotetraploids over diploids will be even
higher than in this example.

Effective population size
In this chapter we express population size as the genetically effective
population size (Ne), rather than the actual numbers of individuals in
the population (N, the census size) (Wright 1931). All of the adverse
genetic consequences of small populations depend on the effective population size. Further, most of the theoretical predictions in conservation genetics are couched in terms of effective population size. Thus, it
is fundamentally important to have a clear understanding of the
concept of effective population size and how it differs from census size.

The effective size of a population
is usually less than the number of
breeding adults as real populations
deviate in structure from the
assumptions of the idealized
population in sex-ratio,
distribution of family sizes,
constancy of numbers in
successive generations, and in
having overlapping, rather than
discrete generations

239

240

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

We deﬁned effective population size in Chapter 8 as the number of individuals that would give rise to the calculated loss of heterozygosity, inbreeding or
variance in allele frequencies if they behaved in the manner of an idealized population. What factors cause the effective size to differ from the number of
adults in the population? Fundamentally any characteristic of a real
population that deviates from the characteristics of an ideal population
(Chapter 8) will cause the census size to be different from Ne. The
primary factors are unequal sex-ratio, high variance in family sizes and
ﬂuctuating population sizes over generations. In general, these factors
deviate such that Ne N.
By how much do effective population sizes differ from census sizes?
Are the differences large enough to be important? What factor(s) have
most impact? Below we review evidence on Ne/N ratios and conclude
that they are usually much less than 1. Later we consider in turn the
factors inﬂuencing Ne and examine their impacts. This leads us to the
means for measuring Ne in real populations.

Ne/N ratios
Estimates of effective population
size that encompass all relevant
factors average only 11% of
census sizes

The census population size (N) is usually the only information available
for most threatened species. However, it is the effective population size
that determines loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding. Consequently,
it is critical to know the ratio of effective to census population size
(Ne/N), so that effective size can be inferred.
Values of Ne/N that include all relevant factors (comprehensive estimates) average only 11%, based on a meta-analysis (Fig. 10.6). Thus, longterm effective population sizes are substantially lower than census
sizes. For example, the threatened winter run of chinook salmon in the
Sacramento River of California has about 2000 adults, but its effective
size was estimated to be only 85 (Ne/N0.04), much lower than previously recognized (Bartley et al. 1992). Genetic concerns are much more
immediate with an effective size of 85 than with 2000.

Fig. 10.6 Distribution of effective/actual population size (Ne/N) ratios. The estimates
include the effects of ﬂuctuations in population size, variance in family sizes, and unequal
sex-ratios, and thus reﬂect long-term effective population sizes (after Frankham 1995c).
The mean of estimates (arrow) is only 11%.

MEASURING EFFECTIVE POPULATION SIZE

The sobering implication is that long-term effective population sizes
are, on average, about 1/10 of actual sizes. Endangered species with 250
adults have effective sizes of about 25, and will lose half of their current
heterozygosity for neutral loci in 34 generations. By this time, the population will become inbred to the point where inbreeding will increase
their extinction risks (Chapter 11 and 12). Threatened populations with
N1000 will have Ne of about 100 and lose half of their heterozygosity
in 138 generations.
The most important factor reducing the Ne/N ratio is ﬂuctuation in
population size, followed by variation in family size, with variation in
sex-ratio having a smaller effect (Frankham 1995c). Overlapping versus
non-overlapping generations has no signiﬁcant effect, nor do life
history attributes. There were no clear or consistent differences in the
ratio between major taxonomic groups, but such differences may well
emerge with more data.

Fluctuations in population size
have greatest impact on reducing
Ne, followed by variation in family
sizes

Measuring effective population size
Since Ne N we need to measure the impacts on the effective population size of unequal sex-ratio, variation in family size, ﬂuctuations in
population size over generations, and overlapping generations. These
impacts are described below, with derivations and further details given
in Crow & Kimura (1970).

Effective population size can be
estimated from demographic data
on sex-ratio, variance in family
sizes and ﬂuctuations in
population size over generations

Unequal sex-ratio
In many wild populations the numbers of breeding females and males
are not equal. Many mammals have harems (polygamy) where one male
mates with many females, while many other males make no genetic
contribution to the next generation. This occurs in an extreme form in
elephant seals where a single male may have a hundred or more females
in his harem. In a few species, the situation is reversed (polyandry). The
equation accounting for the effects of unequal sex-ratio is
Ne 4 Nef Nem / (Nef Nem) (approx.)

(10.3)

where Nef is the effective number of breeding females and Nem the effective number of breeding male parents. This is the single generation
effective population size due to this factor alone; all other characteristics are assumed to be as in an idealized population.
As the sex-ratio deviates from 1:1 in either direction, the Ne/N ratio
declines (Fig. 10.7). For example, an elephant seal harem with one male
and 100 females has an effective size of only 4 (Example 10.5). However,
it is the lifetime sex-ratio over a generation that matters. In practice,
harem masters often have limited tenure so that the average sex-ratio
over a complete generation is usually much less skewed than that occurring during a single breeding season. While harems average about 40

Unequal sex-ratios reduce the
effective size of the population
towards the number of the sex
with fewer breeding individuals

241

242

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Fig. 10.7 Effects of unequal sex-ratios on the Ne/N ratio. As the sex-ratio deviates from
1:1 in either direction the Ne/N ratio declines.

females in any one breeding season in elephant seals (Jewell 1976),
genetic data indicate that the sex-ratio over a generation is only about 5
females: 1 male in southern elephant seals (Slade et al. 1998). The predicted effects of unequal sex-ratio on loss of genetic diversity and
inbreeding have been veriﬁed in experiments using fruit ﬂies (Briton et
al. 1994).

Example 10.5 Reduction in effective size due to unequal sex-ratio
in elephant seals (illustration from Austin & Short
1984)

If a harem has one male and 100 females, the effective size is
Ne 4 Nef Nem / (Nef Nem) 4100 1 / (1001)3.96
Thus the effective size of the harem is 3.96, approximately 4% of theactual size of 101.

MEASURING EFFECTIVE POPULATION SIZE

Sex-ratios may be distorted by the mating system (as above), by sex determining mechanisms that result in more of one sex than the other, by
small population size (stochastic variation), or even by human actions.
For example, poaching of Asian elephants had a large impact on sexratio in a southern Indian population. The sex-ratio in adults was 605
females : 6 males (Sukumar et al. 1998). This resulted in an effective size
of only 24 (Problem 10.5), yielding a Ne/N ratio of 0.04. Global warming
may be distorting sex-ratios in turtles, crocodilians and other reptiles
where sex is determined by incubation temperature.
Overall, unequal sex-ratios have modest effects in reducing effective
population sizes below actual sizes, resulting in an average reduction of
36% (Frankham 1995c).

Variation in family size
Family sizes (lifetime production of offspring per individual) in wild
populations typically show greater variation than the expected
(Poisson) for the idealized population. In a stable population of a randomly breeding monogamous species, the mean family size (k) is 2 (an
average of one male and one female to replace each parent) and the
variance (Vk) is 2. Note that the variance equals the mean for a Poisson
distribution, so Vk/k 1 for a population with an idealized structure.
With this distribution the proportions of families with 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and
5 offspring are 0.135, 0.271, 0.271, 0.180, 0.090 and 0.036, respectively.
In non-monogamous species, we treat the two sexes separately (see
below).
Table 10.2 illustrates variances in family sizes for a range of threatened species. All have Vk/k ratios in excess of the value of 1 assumed for
the idealized population, with most values being much greater than 1.
High variation in family sizes in wildlife is partly due to individuals that
contribute no offspring to the next generation. Similar but less extreme
effects arise from very large and very small families.
The effect of variation in family sizes in a population otherwise
having the structure of an idealized population is
Ne (4N2) / (Vk 2)

(10.4)

This is the single generation effective population size due to family size
alone. In the idealized population, Vk 2, so that Ne ⬃N.
This equation indicates that the higher the variance in family size,
the lower the effective population size. For example, in Darwin’s cactus
ﬁnch high variance in family size (6.74), compared to the Poisson expectation (2) reduces the effective population size to 46% of the number of
breeding pairs (Example 10.6). Over a range of species, variation in
family sizes reduced effective population sizes to an average of 54% of
census sizes (Frankham 1995c).

When variation in family size
exceeds that of the Poisson
distribution, effective population
size is less than the number of
adults

243

244

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Table 10.2

Variance in lifetime reproductive success (VK) and mean family size (k) for a range of species, many
threatened. When the ratio Vk/k is greater than 1, variance is greater than for the Poisson distribution and effective
size will be less than census size.

Species
Mammals
Asiatic lion
Eastern barred bandicoot
Golden lion tamarin
Golden-headed lion tamarin
Grevy’s zebra
Przewalski’s horse
Scimitar-horned oryx
Sumatran tiger
Birds
Darwin’s cactus ﬁnch
Darwin’s large cactus ﬁnch
Darwin’s medium ground ﬁnch
Pink pigeon
Red-crowned crane

Captive(c)
or wild (w)

Sex

Vk

k

Vk/k

Reference
1

c
c
w
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c

m
f
f m
m
f
m
f
m
f
m
f
m
f
m
f

31.10
34.00
11.6
12.10
13.5
7.27
5.74
34.00
1.20
23.44
9.92
127.90
10.44
22.50
16.61

1.64
1.67
1.0
1.7
1.6
1.07
1.05
1.90
1.14
1.18
1.27
1.48
1.24
2.46
2.09

19.0
20.4
11.6
7.1
8.4
6.8
5.5
17.9
1.1
19.9
7.8
86.4
8.4
9.1
7.9

1

w
w
w
c
c
c
c

f m
f m
fm
m
f
m
f

6.74
0.53
7.12
31.24
5.74
9.10
4.80

1.8
0.3
1.6
1.54
1.05
1.76
1.64

3.7
1.8
4.5
20.3
5.5
5.2
2.9

5
6
5
1
1
1
1

2
3
1

1
1
4

References: 1, Dobson et al. (1992); 2, Sherwin & Brown (1990); 3, Ballou & Foose (1996); 4, Ballou & Seidensticker (1987); 5, Grant &
Grant (1992); 6, Grant & Grant (1989).

Example 10.6 Reduction in effective population size through high
variance in family size in Darwin’s cactus ﬁnch
The variance in family sizes for Darwin’s cactus ﬁnch is 6.74, compared to the value of 2 assumed for an idealized population (Table
10.2). Equation 10.4 can be rearranged to give
Ne / N⬃4 / (Vk 2)
If we insert the observed value into this equation, we obtain
Ne / N⬃4 / (6.74 2)0.46
Thus, high variation in family size in Darwin’s cactus ﬁnch reduces
effective population size to only 46% that of the observed number of
potential breeders.

MEASURING EFFECTIVE POPULATION SIZE

If populations vary in size, the equation describing the inﬂuence of variation in family size on effective size becomes:
Ne (Nk 1) / [k 1 (Vk / k)]

(10.5)

where N is the number of adults in the previous generations and k is the
mean family size (this is again a single generation Ne). All other factors
are assumed to conform with those of an idealized population. Note
that when k 2, this equation reduces to Equation 10.4.
This effect is illustrated for a captive Asiatic lion population
(Example 10.7). Variation in family sizes results in a 92% reduction in
effective size compared to the actual size.

Example 10.7 Reduction in effective population size in Asiatic lions
due to high variation in family sizes
Asiatic lions in captivity have an average family size of 1.65 and a variance in family size of 32.65 (Table 10.2). We rearrange Equation 10.3
to give an expression for Ne/N, by dividing both sides of the equation
by N:
Ne/N(Nk 1) / N [k 1(Vk / k)]⬃k / [k 1 (Vk / k)]
Substituting the observed values into this equation gives
Ne/N⬃k / [k 1(Vk / k)]1.65 / [1.65 1 (32.65 / 1.65)] 0.081
Thus, variation in family size reduces the effective size of the Asiatic
lion population to 8% of the number of adults.
If family sizes are equalized, Vk 0. By substitution of this into
Equation 10.4 we obtain Ne ⬃2N. In other words, the effective size of a
population can be approximately twice as high as the number of
parents if all individuals contribute equally to the next generation. It
can be understood by recalling that the idealized population assumes
that there is variance in family size (Vk 1 for each sex), i.e. by chance
some individuals do not reproduce and do not pass alleles they possess
to the next generation. Further, other families vary in size at random,
and make unequal contributions to the next generation. When all families contribute alleles equally to the next generation, there is minimal
distortion in allele frequencies and the proportion of the genetic diversity passed on is maximized. Equalization of family sizes (EFS) also
allows inbreeding to be minimized (Chapter 11).
This observation is of critical importance to captive breeding management. Equalization of family sizes potentially allows limited captive
breeding spaces for endangered species to be effectively doubled. The
beneﬁts of equalizing family sizes in minimizing loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding have been veriﬁed in experiments with fruit ﬂies
(Box 10.4). EFS forms part of the recommended management regime for
captive populations of endangered species (Chapter 17).

Equalization of family sizes (EFS)
leads to an approximate doubling
of the effective population size,
compared to the actual size of the
population

245

246

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Box 10.4 An experimental evaluation of the effects of
variable versus equal family sizes on loss of
genetic diversity, inbreeding, and reproductive
ﬁtness, using fruit ﬂies (Borlase et al. 1993)

Levels of inbreeding in the EFS and
VFS treatments.

From a large population of fruit ﬂies, 20 replicate populations were founded, 10 being
managed with equal family sizes (EFS), and 10 with variable family sizes (VFS). The
experiment was run for 10 generations. Four female and four male parents were
used in each generation (N 8). Variances in family sizes were manipulated to be 0
for EFS, while normal variances were allowed for VFS (expected to be 2). Thus, the
effective population sizes for the two treatments were expected to be 16 for EFS and
8 for VFS, based on Equation 10.4. Consequently, the EFS treatment was expected
to lose less genetic diversity, have lower inbreeding and experience less reduction in
reproductive ﬁtness than the VFS treatment.
Each of these predictions was veriﬁed, as shown for allozyme heterozygosity
(below left), inbreeding levels (in margin), and reproductive ﬁtness (below right).
Quantitative genetic variation was also higher in EFS than in VFS treatments
(Frankham 2000a).

Distribution of average allozyme
heterozygosities for the founding
lines at generation 0, and for the EFS
and VFS lines at generation 10.

Distribution of reproductive
ﬁtnesses at generation 11 in the
EFS and VFS populations, and in the
outbred base population.

MEASURING EFFECTIVE POPULATION SIZE

Fluctuations in population size
Wild populations vary in numbers as a consequence of variation in food
availability, climatic conditions, disease epidemics, catastrophes, predation, etc. For example, lynx and snowshoe hare populations ﬂuctuate
in size, the hare showing about a 30-fold difference between high and
low years and the lynx about an 80-fold difference (Fig. 10.8). Small
mammals often show severe ﬂuctuations in population size, and large
mammals exhibit similar variation to small mammals when both are
measured on a per-generation basis (Sinclair 1996). Young (1994) has
shown that declines of size of 70%–90% are not uncommon for large
mammals in Africa.
The effective size in a ﬂuctuating population is not the average, but
the harmonic mean of the effective population sizes over t generations:
Ne t / 兺(1/Ne )
i

(approx.)

(10.6)

where Ne is the effective size in the ith generation. This is the long-term,
i
overall effective population size.
Thelong-termeffectivesizeisclosesttothesizeofthegenerationwith
the smallest single generation Ne. For example, the northern elephant
seal was reduced to 20–30 individuals, but has since recovered to over
100000. Its effective population size over this time is about 60 (Example
10.8). This is far closer to the minimum population size than to the mean
or the maximum. This relationship can best be explained by noting that
an allele lost in a generation of low population size is not regained when
the population size rises. Similarly, the inbreeding effects of small population size are not reduced when the population increases in size.
The order of the population sizes is irrelevant to the ﬁnal outcome.
It does not matter whether the order of population size is 10000, 1000,
100, 10, or 1000, 10, 10 000, 100, etc. all suffer the same loss of heterozygosity and inbreeding. Ne computed using Equation 10.6 can be used
in Equation 10.1, to obtain the equivalent answer to use of Equation 10.2.

Fig. 10.8 Fluctuations in population size in lynx and snowshoe hares, based on pelt
records of the Hudson Bay Company (after Hedrick 1983).

Fluctuations in population size,
over generations, reduce Ne
below the average number of
adults

247

248

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

The predicted effects of ﬂuctuations in population size on loss of
genetic diversity, inbreeding and reproductive ﬁtness have been veriﬁed
in experiments with fruit ﬂies (Woodworth et al. 1994). As indicated
above, ﬂuctuations in population size are the most important factor
reducing Ne, on average reducing it by 65% (Frankham 1995c).

Example 10.8 Reduction in Ne due to ﬂuctuations in popular size
The northern elephant seal was reduced to 20–30 individuals by
hunting. It has since recovered to over 100000. For simplicity we
assume that the population declined from 100000 to 20 and recovered to 100000 over three generations and that these were the effective sizes for each of the generations. The effective size of the
population is
Ne t/[(1/Ne ) (1/Ne ) (1/Ne )]
1
2
3
3/[(1/100000) (1/20)(1/100 000)]
Ne 60
The effective size of 60 is much closer to the minimum size than the
mean size (66 673), being only 0.09% of the mean size over the three
generations.

Exclusion of matings between close relatives
Self-fertilization is not possible in dioecious species, and many species
avoid incestuous matings between close relatives. However, these deviations from the assumptions of the idealized population do not have
major impacts on loss of genetic diversity, or on the overall rate of
inbreeding, as the probability of selﬁng or sib-mating is very low in
random mating populations unless they are very small. The effects of
these exclusions on the single generation effective size (for populations
otherwise behaving as idealized populations) are given below:
Self-fertilization excluded:
Ne N 1⁄2

(approx.)

(10.7)

Sib-mating also excluded:
Ne N2

(approx.)

(10.8)

Exclusion of matings between close relatives cannot prevent loss of
genetic diversity and inbreeding (Chapter 11). In a small population,
every individual soon becomes related to every potential mate.

Inbred populations
Inbreeding reduces effective population size (Li 1976):
Ne N / (1 F )

(10.9)

MEASURING EFFECTIVE POPULATION SIZE

In the special case of a completely inbred population (F 1), the effective
population size is half the actual size and the population consists of a
number of different homozygous genotypes. The rare North American
Paciﬁc yew tree illustrates the use of Equation 10.9. The yew has an
inbreeding coefﬁcient of 0.47 (El-Kassaby & Yanchuk 1994). Thus, Ne /N
1 / (10.47)0.68, i.e. inbreeding reduces its effective size by 32%.

Overlapping generations
Most natural populations have overlapping, rather than the discrete
generations assumed for idealized populations. The effects on Ne of
overlapping generations are not clearly in one direction. However, overlapping generations are more likely to reduce Ne. Equations exist to evaluate its effects (Lande & Barrowclough 1987), but they are rarely used in
practical situations. Relatively complex computer models are more frequently used (Allendorf et al. 1991).

Combinations of factors
Ultimately we wish to determine the effective population size resulting
from the combined impact of all factors. Example 10.9 illustrates the
determination of the combined impacts of variance in family sizes plus
unequal sex-ratios for golden lion tamarins. When more factors are
taken into account, the net impact of all factors on loss of genetic diversity or inbreeding can be determined (sometimes using computer
models) and the overall effective population size estimated as described
below.

Example 10.9 Computing Ne in captive golden lion tamarins due to
the combined impacts of variance in family sizes and
unequal sex-ratios (after Ballou & Foose 1996)
The numbers of female and male golden lion tamarins and the mean
(k) and variance (Vk) of the numbers of offspring they contributed to
the next generation are:

Adult numbers
k
Vk

Females

Males

275
1.6
13.5

269
1.7
12.1

The effective size in females (Nef) due to variation in family sizes, using
Equation 10.5, is
Nef (Nf k 1) / [k 1(Vk / k)]
(2751.61) / [1.61 (13.5 / 1.6)]48.6

Overlapping generations do not
have a consistent directional effect
on Ne

249

250

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

The effective size in males (Nem) due to variation in family sizes is
Nem (Nmk 1) / [k 1(Vk / k)]
(2691.71) / [1.71 (12.1 / 1.7)]58.4
The overall Ne is obtained by taking into account the unequal sexratio, as follows:
Ne 4Nef Nem / (Nef Nem) (448.658.4) / (48.658.4)
106.1
Thus, the effective size of the golden lion tamarin population is 106,
while its actual size is 544, giving a Ne/N ratio of 0.2.

Inbreeding and variance effective sizes
Different effective population sizes
are required to predict inbreeding
and loss of genetic diversity. Often
these are very similar, but may
differ, when there are large
changes in population size over
time

So far we have discussed effective population size as though it was a
single parameter. However, there are three, the inbreeding, eigenvalue
and variance effective sizes (Templeton & Read 1994). Strictly, the effective size determining loss of genetic diversity is the eigenvalue effective
size. The inbreeding effective size determines the rate of inbreeding,
and the variance effective size, as the name implies, determines diversiﬁcation among replicate populations. Often the three effective sizes
have very similar values, but, in some circumstances, they can be quite
different, especially when there are major changes in population size
over time. Readers are referred to Crow & Kimura (1970) and Templeton
& Read (1994) for details of this somewhat complex issue.

Estimating Ne
A variety of methods are used in practical situations to estimate Ne,
including:
Demographic methods
These are based on Equations 10.3–10.9 above. They require extensive
demographic data that often are not available.
Genetic methods
A variety of genetic methods have been devised that are often more practical. These methods are based on equations relating Ne and:
• loss of heterozygosity over generations (Equation 10.1)
• changes in allele frequencies over time due to genetic drift (Chapter
13)
• rate of decay in linkage disequilibrium among loci (Hill 1981). This
has been used in chinook salmon and other ﬁsh (Bartley et al. 1992)
• rate of increase in pedigree inbreeding coefﬁcient (Equation 11.3)
• loss of allelic diversity (Saccheri et al. 1999).

SUMMARY

Example 10.10 illustrates the estimation of Ne from loss of genetic diversity over time in the endangered northern hairy-nosed wombat. The effective size was approximately 7, compared to the actual size of about 75.
For more detail, readers are referred to Caballero (1994) for a
review of demographic estimation procedures and to Neigel (1996)
and Schwartz et al. (1998) for reviews of genetic methods of estimating
Ne.

Example 10.10 Estimation of Ne from loss of genetic diversity over
time in the critically endangered northern hairynosed wombat (Taylor et al. 1994)
The northern hairy-nosed wombat declined over the last 120 years
from more than 1000 individuals to 25 in 1981 and had recovered to
about 70 individuals by the early 1990s. It has retained about 41% of
its heterozygosity over this period. The generation length is approximately 10 years. The loss of genetic diversity has therefore occurred
over about 120/10 12 generations.
We can estimate the long-term effective population size for this
species using Equation 10.1, as follows:
Ht / H0 0.41 ⬃et/2Ne e12/2Ne
Taking loge, we obtain
ln (0.41) 12/2 Ne
and by rearranging
Ne 12/[2 ln (0.41)] 6.7
Thus, the effective population size of the endangered northern hairynosed wombat over the last 120 years has been about 7.

Summary
1. Reductions in population size result in loss of genetic diversity,
inbreeding and consequently increased extinction risk.
2. Genetic diversity decays over generations in small closed populations at a rate dependent on the effective population size.
3. The effective population size (Ne) is the number of individuals
that would give rise to the observed loss of heterozygosity, or to the calculated inbreeding coefﬁcient, if they behaved in the manner of the
idealized population.
4. Ne is typically much less than adult population sizes; long-term
Ne values average about 10% of the census sizes.
5. The effective population size is reduced by unequal sex-ratios,
high variance in family size and especially by ﬂuctuations in population size across generations.

251

252

LOSS OF GENETIC DIVERSITY IN SMALL POPULATIONS

6. Effective population sizes are measured either using a series of
demographic equations that account for the variables in 5, or from
equations for rates of loss of genetic diversity over time, etc.
FURTHER READING

Crow & Kimura (1970) Introduction to Population Genetics Theory. An advanced
treatment of the theory of effective population size, and the prediction of
the effects of small size on genetic diversity.
Falconer & Mackay (1996) Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. Provides a clear
treatment of effective population size and the expected loss in genetic diversity in small populations.
Frankham (1995c) A review and meta-analysis of Ne/N ratios and factors that
affect the ratio.
Frankham (1996) Review and meta-analysis of evidence on the relationship
between population size and genetic diversity.
Hedrick (1992) Conservation orientated review of the issues in this chapter.
Lande & Barrowclough (1987) Conservation orientated review of the issues in
this chapter.
Wright (1969) Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, vol. 2. A scholarly review of
effective population size from the person who deﬁned the concept.
PROBLEMS

10.1 Loss of heterozygosity in small populations: (a) What proportion of its initial genetic diversity will be retained after 100 years in
the Javan rhinoceros that has a population size of 60 and a generation
length of about 20 years? (b) What proportion of the initial heterozygosity will be retained if the effective population size is only 10?
10.2 Loss of heterozygosity: Use Equation 10.1 to determine the
time taken for a population of size Ne to lose (a) 50% of its initial
heterozygosity (set Ht /H0 0.5et /2Ne, then take ln of both sides of the
equation and rearrange), and (b) 95% of its initial heterozygosity.
10.3 Loss of heterozygosity with a ﬂuctuating population size:
Compare the loss of heterozygosity in a population that ﬂuctuates 100,
10, 100, 200 with one that ﬂuctuates 200, 100, 100, 10.
10.4 Heterozygosity in tetraploids and diploids: What will be the
heterozygosities in an allotetraploid and its diploid ancestors at complete ﬁxation for a locus with two alleles at initial frequencies of 0.1
and 0.9?
10.5 Effective population size: What is the effective size of the
Asian elephant population in Periyar, southern India where poaching
has resulted in an adult sex-ratio of 6 males to 605 females? What
would the effective size be with a ‘normal’ adult elephant sex-ratio of
1 : 3 (202 males: 605 females)?
10.6 Effective population size: What is the effective population size
in a population of red-crowned cranes with four families that contribute 0, 1, 2 and 5 offspring to the next generation?
10.7 Effective population size: What is the effective population size
in a population of British ﬁeld crickets if its size ﬂuctuates as follows:
10, 100, 1000, 250?

PRACTICAL EXERCISES

10.8 Effective population size: What is the ratio of effective to
census size in the endangered Brown’s banksia from Western Australia
due to inbreeding? It has an inbreeding coefﬁcient of about 18%
(Sampson et al. 1994).
10.9 Effective population size: If the adult population of Sumatran
tigers consists of 60 males and 80 females, use the data in Table 10.2 to
determine its Ne due to the combined effects of variance in family sizes
and unequal sex-ratio.
10.10 Estimating Ne from loss of genetic diversity: Rearrange equation 10.1 and use it to estimate the effective population size for the
Mauritius kestrel, given that it has lost 57% of its heterozygosity in
about 17 generations (Groombridge et al. 2000).
PR ACTIC AL EXERCISES: COMPUTER SIMUL ATIONS

Use POPGEN or an equivalent computer simulation package to complete the following:
1. Using initial frequencies of pq 0.5, run 50 replicate simulations with population sizes of 10, 50 and 100 each for 50 generations.
Compare them for proportion of the populations ﬁxed at generation
50 (p0, or p1) and average heterozygosities at generation 50.
2. Using initial frequencies of p0.9, q 0.1, run 50 replicate simulations with population sizes of 10, 50 and 100 each for 50 generations.
Compare these results with those for practical exercise 10.1 for proportion of the populations ﬁxed (p0, or p1) at generation 50 and
average heterozygosities at generation 50.

253

Chapter 11

Inbreeding
Terms:
Allozygous,
autozygous,
backcross,
common ancestor,
full-sib mating,
identity by descent,
inbreeding,
inbreeding coefﬁcient,
inbreeding depression,
panmictic,
pedigree,
purging

Inbreeding is the mating of individuals related by ancestry. It is
measured as the probability that two alleles at a locus are identical
by descent (F). Inbreeding increases homozygosity and exposes rare
deleterious alleles

씹

씸

씸

Father–daughter mating resulting
in a white tiger (India).

WHAT IS INBREEDING?

What is inbreeding?
When the parents of an individual share one or more common ancestors (i.e. are related), the individual is inbred. A case of inbreeding, a
father–daughter mating in tigers, is illustrated on the chapter frontispiece. Inbred matings include self-fertilization, mating of brother with
sister, father with daughter, mother with son, cousins, etc.
Inbreeding is unavoidable in small populations as all individuals
become related by descent over time. For example, Box 11.1 shows the
early generations of the pedigree for the endangered Przewalski’s horse
population. As this population is presumed to derive from only 12
remaining individuals plus one domestic mare (a closely related
species), complete avoidance of inbreeding is impossible.

Box 11.1 Inbreeding in the endangered Przewalski’s horse
The Przewalski’s horse (Mongolian wild horse) became extinct in the wild, primarily
through hunting and competition from domestic animals (Ehrlich & Ehrlich 1981). It
existed only in captivity for many years, but it is being reintroduced into its natural
range in Mongolia. The population is presumed to derive from only 12 individuals plus
one domestic mare. The early pedigree is shown below with their studbook numbers
(after Thomas 1995). Circles represent females, squares males and diamonds individuals who have not yet reproduced. Diamonds may represent several sibs. The 13
founders (individuals without connections to ancestors) are labelled; most are near
the top of the ﬁgure, except for 231, in the middle. DOM is the domestic mare.
There are many inbred individuals in this pedigree. For example, in the top lefthand side, male 11 produced a daughter with female 12 and a son with DOM; these

Inbreeding is the mating of
individuals related by ancestry

255

256

INBREEDING

half-siblings mated to produce an inbred son and an inbred daughter. Analyses indicated that inbreeding was associated with deleterious changes in number of offspring
per mare and longevity (Frankel & Soulé 1981). Genetic management initially minimized the genetic contribution of the domestic mare, and since 1970 has also tried
to minimize inbreeding.
The increase in numbers and in average inbreeding in the captive Przewalski’s
horse population is shown below (after Volf 1999).

Recent molecular genetic analyses indicate that there are errors in this pedigree and
that more than one domestic horse has contributed (Chapter 19).

Conservation concerns with inbreeding
Inbreeding results in a decline in
reproductive ﬁtness (inbreeding
depression)

The inbreeding coefﬁcient of an
individual (F ) is the probability that
it carries alleles at a locus that are
identical by descent

Inbreeding reduces reproductive ﬁtness in essentially all well-studied
populations of outbreeding animals and plants. For example, Ralls &
Ballou (1983) found higher mortality in inbred progeny than in outbred
progeny in 41 of 44 mammal populations (Fig. 11.1). In the pygmy hippopotamus, inbred offspring had 55% juvenile mortality, while outbred
offspring had 25% mortality. On average, progeny of brother–sister (fullsib) matings resulted in a 33% reduction in juvenile survival. Full details
of inbreeding depression and its causes are deferred until the next
chapter. In this chapter we deﬁne methods for measuring inbreeding
and describe the genetic impacts of inbreeding on genotype frequencies.
Why is inbreeding so detrimental in small and endangered populations? To understand this, we must ﬁrst consider the measurement of
inbreeding, and then determine the genetic impacts of inbreeding on
genotype frequencies.

Inbreeding coefﬁcient (F)
The consequence of matings between relatives is that offspring have
an increased probability of inheriting alleles that are recent copies of
the same DNA sequence. These recent copies of the same allele are

INBREEDING COEFFICIENT (F)

Fig. 11.1 Inbreeding depression for juvenile survival in 44 captive mammal populations
(Ralls & Ballou 1983). Juvenile mortality in outbred individuals is plotted against that in
inbred individuals from the same populations. The line represents equal survival of inbred
and outbred individuals. Most populations fall below the line, indicating that inbreeding is
deleterious (inbreeding depression).

referred to as identical by descent, or autozygous. For example, in Fig.
11.2 A1A1 or A2A2 offspring resulting from self-fertilization have inherited two alleles which are identical by descent. The two identical copies
of an allele do not need to come from an individual in the previous
generation, but may come from a common ancestor in a more remote
generation. For example, in Fig. 11.2 an offspring resulting from a
brother–sister mating may inherit two copies of allele A1 from its
grandparent. The grandparents are said to be common ancestors,
meaning that they are ancestors of both the mother and the father of
the individual.
The inbreeding coefﬁcient (F) is used to measure inbreeding. The
inbreeding coefﬁcient of an individual is the probability that both
alleles at a locus are identical by descent. As F is a probability, it ranges
from 0 to 1, the former being outbreds and the latter completely inbred.
Identity by descent is related to, but distinct from homozygosity.
Individuals carrying two alleles identical by descent are, of course,
homozygous. However, not all homozygotes carry alleles that are identical by descent, i.e. homozygotes include both autozygous and allozygous types (where the two alleles do not originate from a recent
common ancestor). For example, referring back to Fig. 3.3, an individual
carrying Adh copies 7 and 8 would be homozygous for Adh-F. However,
these alleles differ in DNA sequence at nine bases, and are not recent
copies of the same allele, i.e. they are allozygous. Conversely, an individual carrying two copies of Adh 7 that were inherited from a recent
common ancestor of both its parents would be autozygous, i.e. the two
alleles would be identical by descent.

257

258

INBREEDING

FX =Pr(X=A1A1)+Pr(X =A2A2)
FX = 1⁄4 + 1⁄4 = 1⁄2

FX = P(X = A1A1 or A2A2 or A3A3 or A4A4)
FX = 1⁄16 + 1⁄16 + 1⁄16 + 1⁄16 = 1⁄4

Fig. 11.2 Inbreeding coefﬁcients for individuals resulting from self-fertilization and fullsib mating.

The inbreeding coefﬁcient of an individual resulting from selffertilization (selﬁng) is 1⁄2 and that for an individual resulting from
brother–sister (full-sib) mating is 1⁄4 (Fig. 11.2). To calculate inbreeding
coefﬁcients from ﬁrst principles, each non-inbred ancestor is labelled as
having unique alleles (A1A2, A3A4, etc.) (Fig. 11.2). The probability that an
individual inherits two alleles identical by descent (A1A1, or A2A2, etc.) is
computed from the paths of inheritance, assuming normal Mendelian
segregation. For example, with selﬁng the inbreeding coefﬁcient is the
probability that offspring X inherits either two A1 alleles by descent, or
two A2 alleles. Individual X has 1⁄2 chance of inheriting A1 in the ovule and
1
⁄2 chance of inheriting it through the pollen. Consequently, the probability that X inherits two identical A1 alleles is 1⁄2  1⁄2  1⁄4. Similarly the chance
that X inherits two A2 alleles is also 1⁄2  1⁄2  1⁄4. The inbreeding coefﬁcient
is then the probability of inheriting either A1A1 or A2A2  1⁄4  1⁄4  1⁄2.
The inbreeding coefﬁcient, as described above, measures the probability of alleles at a locus being identical by descent within an individual. Inbreeding coefﬁcients can also refer to the level of inbreeding
averaged across all individuals within a population (Box 2.1).
What are the genetic consequences of inbreeding? We next establish
that inbreeding increases the frequency of homozygotes, and so
exposes deleterious recessives. We then consider levels of inbreeding in
small populations, for individuals with different pedigrees, and for
regular systems of inbreeding (selﬁng, full-sib mating, etc.).

Genetic consequences of inbreeding
Inbreeding increases levels of
homozygosity and exposes
deleterious recessive alleles

Inbreeding increases the probability that an individual is homozygous
at a locus. Since naturally outbreeding populations contain deleterious
alleles (mostly partially recessive) at low frequencies in mutation–selection balance (Chapter 7), inbreeding increases the risks of exposing
them as homozygotes. We saw in Fig. 4.2 that selﬁng increases the level
of homozygosity. Other forms of inbreeding also increase homozygosity, but more slowly. Quantitative expressions for the magnitude of
these effects are given below.

GENETIC CONSEQUENCES OF INBREEDING

Table 11.1

Genotype frequencies under random mating compared to those in populations with inbreeding
coefﬁcients (F) of 1 and F.

Genotypes
Population

F

/

 /m

m/m

(a) Random mating
(N∝)
(b) Fully inbred
(c) Partially inbred

0

p2

2pq

q2

1
F

p
p2 (1 F)Fp
p2 Fpq

0
2pq (1F)F0
2pq (1F )

q
q2 (1F)Fq
q2 Fpq

To determine the genetic consequences of inbreeding, we begin
with a random mating population with two allelesand m at a locus
with frequencies of p and q. Table 11.1 shows the derivation of the effects
of inbreeding on genotype frequencies. Table 11.1a gives the
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium genotype frequencies expected under
random mating, and Table 11.1b shows a fully inbred population (F 1),
where all uniting gametes are identical by descent, so only homozygotes are produced. These occur in proportion to the allele frequencies, namely p of/and q of m/m.
A partially inbred population (inbreeding coefﬁcientF ) consists of
genotypes generated in two ways:
(a) those due to random union of gametes: proportion 1F
(b) those due to union of gametes identical by descent: proportion F.
The overall genotype frequencies are the sum of these two components.
Thus, the frequency of heterozygotes is 2pq (1 F) from (a) and 0F from
(b), totalling 2pq (1 F). The frequency of m/m homozygotes is q2 (1F) 
Fq q2 Fpq upon rearrangement. Similarly, the frequency of/
homozygotes is p2 Fpq.
Inbreeding decreases heterozygosity and increases homozygosity
(Table 11.1). The ratio of heterozygosity in an inbred population
(HI  2pq (1  F)) relative to that in a random breeding population
(Ho  2pq) is:
HI/Ho 2pq (1 F ) / 2pq 1F
Thus, reduction in heterozygosity due to inbreeding is directly related
to the inbreeding coefﬁcient F. We can estimate the level of inbreeding
by comparing observed heterozygosity with that expected under
random mating.
F 1 (HI / Ho)

(11.1)

There is a deﬁciency of heterozygotes at the lemma colour locus in wild
oats, a species that is largely self-pollinating (Table 11.2). We can estimate from Equation 11.1 that the population has an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 1(0.071/0.486) 0.85. We will see later that measuring

Inbreeding reduces the frequency
of heterozygotes in proportion to
the inbreeding coefﬁcient

259

260

INBREEDING

Table 11.2 Deﬁciency of heterozygotes at the locus controlling black
versus grey lemma colour in wild oats, a species that often self-fertilizes
(Hedrick 2000 after Jain & Marshall). Observed genotype frequencies and
those expected with random mating (Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium) are
shown
Genotype

Observed
Hardy–Weinberg expectation

Inbreeding does not change allele
frequencies

BB

Bb

bb

0.548
0.340

0.071
0.486

0.381
0.173

changes in heterozygosity over time can also be used to estimate the
level of inbreeding in a population.
While inbreeding changes genotype frequencies, it does not change
allele frequencies. We can illustrate this by calculating allele frequencies from the genotype frequencies in Table 11.1 (Example 11.1). The frequencies of theand m alleles remain at p and q, respectively. When
inbreeding is due to small population size, allele frequencies in individual populations will change due to genetic drift, but the average frequency over a large number of replicate populations will be unchanged.

Example 11.1 Allele frequencies under inbreeding
The frequency of theallele in the inbred population, p1, is obtained
by allele counting, as follows:
⬖ p1 [2 freq (/) freq (/m)] / 2
[2 (p2 Fpq) 2pq(1 F)] / 2 p2 Fpq pqFpq
p2 pqp(q p) p
⬖ p1 p
Thus, there is no change in the frequency of theallele. The frequency of the m allele is also unchanged at q.

Inbreeding exposes rare
deleterious alleles

A major practical consequence of inbreeding is that homozygotes for
deleterious recessives are more frequent than in a random mating population. This is illustrated for chondrodystrophy in California condors
in Table 11.3. Note that the frequency of homozygous dw/dw is more
than doubled in a population with an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 25% and
almost six times as common in a completely inbred population. In
general, the ratio of frequencies of rare recessive homozygotes under
inbreeding versus random mating is
Ratio[q2 Fpq]/q2
1 (Fp/q)
where q is the frequency of the rare allele.

GENETIC CONSEQUENCES OF INBREEDING

Table 11.3 Expected genotype frequencies under inbreeding at the
chondrodystrophy locus in California condors. The deleterious recessive
allele has a frequency of about 17%, and the normal allele a frequency of 83%
(Example 4.5). Genotype frequencies are shown for random mating, complete
inbreeding and full-sib mating (F 0.25) determined using the formulae in
Table 11.1. The ratios of frequencies of dw/dw in inbred to outbred populations
are also given
Genotypes

Random mating
Inbred F 1
Partially inbred F 0.25

/

/dw

dw/dw

Ratio

0.6889
0.83
0.7242

0.2822
0
0.2116

0.0289
0.17
0.0642

5.9
2.2

Thus, the ratio increases with the amount of inbreeding and is greater
for rare than for common alleles.
Lethal allele frequencies are rarely as high as 17%. A more typical frequency for a lethal allele that is partially recessive and in mutation–selection balance would be ⬃ 5104 (Chapter 7). In a population
with an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 25% due to full-sib mating, the ratio of
the lethal homozygote frequency to that with no inbreeding would be
Ratio1 (Fp/q) 1 [0.25(1 5104) / 5104] 501
Thus, the frequency of lethal homozygotes after one generation of fullsib mating would be about 500 times higher than with random mating.
The frequency of lethal homozygotes under random mating with
the above equilibrium frequency (q2) is 25 108, while that following
full-sib mating (q2 Fpq) is 25 108 1.25104. In the inbred population, most of the lethal homozygotes are due to the inbreeding. The
additional frequency of lethal homozygotes at a locus due to inbreeding
is Fpq which is approximately Fq when we are dealing with very rare
alleles (i.e. p ⬃ 1). Consequently, there will be only 0.25 5104 
1.25104 extra homozygotes in the example above. Such effects are
very small at any single locus. However, they occur across all loci in the
genome that are segregating for lethal alleles.
There are about 35000 functional loci in the mammalian genome
and 5000–26 000 can produce lethal mutations in mice (Miklos & Rubin
1996). Consequently, we need to consider the cumulative impacts of at
least 5000 loci. Example 11.2 suggests that about 47% of all zygotes
from full-sib matings will be homozygous for at least one such lethal
allele.
The value of 47% is greater than the 33% reduction in juvenile survival found for full-sib mating in mammals (Ralls & Ballou 1983). However,
many lethals will cause mortality prior to birth and not be recorded as
juvenile mortality. Consequently, a sizeable proportion of zygotes must
be homozygous for lethal alleles when the population is inbred.

261

262

INBREEDING

In addition to the increase in lethal homozygotes, there will be
many other less deleterious alleles, whose homozygosity will reduce
the reproductive ﬁtness of inbred populations. Consequently, increased
homozygosity of deleterious partially recessive alleles provides an
obvious mechanism by which inbreeding reduces reproductive ﬁtness
in naturally outbreeding species (see Chapter 12).

Example 11.2 Overall frequency of individuals homozygous for lethal
alleles in inbred populations
To obtain the frequency of individuals homozygous for one or more
lethal alleles in an inbred population, we need to know the number
of loci, the mutation–selection equilibrium frequency for lethal
alleles, and the average inbreeding coefﬁcient (F). There are around
35 000 loci in mammals, and at least 5000 of them can mutate to
produce lethal alleles in mice. The typical mutation–selection equilibrium frequency for a partially recessive lethal is 5104 (Chapter
7).
To do the computation we need to consider the probability that a
zygote is not homozygous for a lethal at a single locus under random
mating. This is 1q2. We then raise this to the power of the number
of loci likely to be segregating for lethal alleles (5000 in this example).
Thus:
P(not a lethal homozygote) (1 q2)5000
and after substituting for q, we have
P(not a lethal homozygote) [1 (5 104)2]5000 0.99875
Thus, only about 0.125% of zygotes will be homozygous for a lethal in
a random mating population.
The situation for zygotes resulting from full-sib mating is determined in a similar manner. The probability that an individual is not
homozygous for a lethal is 1q2 Fpq at each locus. The probability
that an individual is not homozygous for any lethal due to inbreeding
is:
P(not lethal homozygote) (1 q2 Fpq)5000
For progeny of full-sib matings (F 0.25), this probability is:
P(not lethal homozygote)[1(5104)2 (0.255104)]5000
0.53
Consequently, the probability that an individual is homozygous for
lethal alleles at one or more loci is 10.530.47. We expect 47% of
zygotes from full-sib mating to be homozygous for a lethal allele for a
least one locus in mammals.

INBREEDING IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Inbreeding in small populations
While a minority of plants routinely self-fertilize (Richards 1997),
animals normally do not self. In spite of many opportunities for relatives to mate due to the proximity of siblings, offspring or parents,
inbred matings are generally less than expected from proximity of
potential mates, as many species have evolved inbreeding-avoidance
mechanisms (see later). In species that do not deliberately inbreed, the
majority of inbreeding arises as an inevitable consequence of small population sizes.
In small closed populations all individuals eventually become
related by descent, so inbreeding is unavoidable. This is evident in the
pedigree for Przewalski’s horse (Box 11.1). This can be understood by considering numbers of ancestors. We each have two parents, four grandparents, eight great-grandparents and 2t ancestors t generations in the
past. The number of ancestors rapidly exceeds the historical population
size, so individuals must have common ancestors and be related. For
example, 10 generations back we each have 1024 ancestors. Our parents
each have 512 ancestors, so the minimum population size for them to
have no common ancestors 10 generations ago would be 1024. If the population size was less than this, then our parents must share common
ancestors, and we must be inbred to some degree. Many threatened
species have population sizes less than this (a size below 1000 adults is
sufﬁcient for a population to be included in the IUCN vulnerable category), or have had generations where the size was less than this.
Consequently, individuals are more likely to be inbred in small than
in large populations. In a very large random mating population,
inbreeding is close to zero as there is very little chance of mating with a
relative.

In naturally outbreeding species,
inbreeding arises predominantly
from small population size

Inbreeding is unavoidable in small
closed populations

Theory of inbreeding in small populations
The effects of population size on the level of inbreeding can be determined by considering the probability of identity by descent in the idealized random mating population (Chapter 10). We begin by assuming
that all founding individuals (generation 0) are non-inbred, unrelated,
and carry unique alleles, with their progeny constituting generation 1.
Consider a hermaphroditic marine species that sheds gametes into the
sea; there are N individuals producing equal numbers of gametes that
unite at random, and there are 2N ancestral alleles A1, A2, A3, … A2N in the
gene pool. Each individual in the next generation is formed by sampling
with replacement two alleles at random from this pool. If the ﬁrst allele
sampled is A6, the probability that the second is also A6 (identical by
descent) is 1/2N. For any individual, the probability that they have two
alleles identical by descent is 1/2N. Consequently, the inbreeding coefﬁcient in the ﬁrst generation is 1/2N.

Inbreeding in a random mating
population of size Ne increases at a
rate of 1/(2Ne) per generation

263

264

INBREEDING

Fig. 11.3 Inbreeding due to small population size. The ellipses above and below
represent different genotypes in generations t1 and t, respectively. Taking a random
sample of 2N gametes from the generation t1 gene pool involves a probability of 1/2N
that two identical alleles are sampled and a probability of 11/2N that two distinct alleles
are sampled.

In following generations, there are two ways that identical alleles
can be sampled to create a zygote (Fig. 11.3):
• From the sampling of two copies of the same allele (as above) with
probability 1/2N
• from sampling two alleles that are identical from previous inbreeding. The probability of sampling two different alleles is the remaining proportion, 1 1/2N. However, a proportion F of these alleles is
identical by descent due to the previous inbreeding. Therefore the
inbreeding due to previous inbreeding is Ft 1 [11 / (2N)]
Taken together the probability of creating a zygote in generation t with
both alleles identical by descent (Ft) is the sum of these:
Ft 1 / (2N) [11 / (2N)] Ft 1

The increment in inbreeding per
generation is equal to the loss of
heterozygosity

(11.2)

where Ft –1 is the inbreeding coefﬁcient in generation t 1. Thus inbreeding is made up of two parts, an increment 1/(2N) due to new inbreeding,
plus that attributable to previous inbreeding. Even if there is no new
inbreeding, as may occur if population size increases, the population
does not lose its previous inbreeding.
The increment in inbreeding per generation (the rate of inbreeding)
is:
F 1 / (2N)

(11.3)

INBREEDING IN SMALL POPULATIONS

Recall from Equation 8.2 that loss of heterozygosity in one generation is
also 1 / (2N). Thus, the increment in inbreeding equals the loss of heterozygosity per generation, illustrating the close relationship between
inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity in random mating species.
So far, we have expressed the inbreeding coefﬁcient as a function of
that in the previous generation. However, we often wish to predict the
accumulated inbreeding over several generations. If the population size
is constant over generations, we can obtain the required expression for
Ft by rearranging Equation 11.2:
1 Ft 1 {1 / (2N) [11 / (2N)] Ft1}[1 1 / (2N)] (1 Ft1)
and
1 Ft [1 1 / (2N)]t (1 F0)
When the initial population is not inbred (F0 0), the inbreeding coefﬁcient in any subsequent generation t is:
Ft 1 [1 1 / (2N)]t

(11.4)

Thus, inbreeding accumulates with time in all closed ﬁnite populations, at a rate dependent on their population sizes. Inbreeding
increases more rapidly in small than in large populations (Fig. 11.4).
Example 11.3 illustrates the rapid accumulation of inbreeding in a
small closed population with only four individuals per generation. The
population reaches an average inbreeding coefﬁcient of 74% by generation 10. This is approximately equivalent to the level of inbreeding due
to two generations of selﬁng or six generations of full-sib mating – but
it was achieved in a random mating population. Since captive populations of endangered species within individual zoos are often of this size,
individuals have to be moved between institutions if rapid inbreeding is
to be minimized (Chapter 17).

Fig. 11.4 Increase in inbreeding coefﬁcient F with time in ﬁnite populations of different
sizes (N). Inbreeding increases more rapidly in smaller than in larger populations.

Inbreeding accumulates over time
and does so more rapidly in
smaller than in larger populations

265

266

INBREEDING

Example 11.3 Accumulation of inbreeding in a small closed captive
population
Many captive populations of threatened species in individual zoos are
small, and would accumulate inbreeding rapidly if they were kept
closed, i.e. no individuals exchanged between zoos. If a zoo started a
breeding program with four unrelated individuals, and kept the
breeding population at four parents per generation over many generations, the inbreeding coefﬁcient would increase as follows:
Generation 0

F 0

Generation 1

F 1 (11/2N)1 1(1 1/8) 0.125

Generation 2

F 1 (11/2N)2 1(1 1/8)2 0.234

Generation 3

F 1(11/2N)3 1(1 1/8)3 0.33

Generation 4

F 1(11/2N)4 1(1 1/8)4 0.41

Generation 10 F 1(11/2N)10 1(1 1/8)10 0.74
Thus, the inbreeding coefﬁcient increases rapidly and reaches 74% by
generation 10.

For populations that do not have
idealized structures, Ne is used in
place of N in prediction equations

Inbreeding will usually increase at a more rapid rate than indicated
above, as populations generally have smaller genetically effective sizes
than census sizes (Chapter 10). If the population does not have the structure of an idealized population (and few, if any, will) the increase in F
in any population of constant size can be obtained by substituting Ne for
N in the earlier equations.
If population sizes ﬂuctuate among generations, as occurs in real
populations, the expression for the inbreeding coefﬁcient at generation
t is:
t

 [1 1 /(2N )]

Ft 1 

i1

ei

(11.5)

where Ne is the effective size in the ith generation. Example 11.4 illusi
trates the use of this equation to estimate the minimum inbreeding
level in the northern elephant seal following a bottleneck of 20–30 individuals. Alternatively, the harmonic mean Ne could be used in Equation
11.4 to give the same result.

Example 11.4 Inbreeding in a ﬂuctuating population
The northern elephant seal population declined to 20–30 individuals
and has since recovered to over 100000. If we consider, for simplicity,
that its effective numbers in three successive generations were
100 000, 20 and 100000 then its inbreeding coefﬁcient from Equation
11.5 would be

INBREEDING IN SMALL POPULATIONS

t

 [1 1 / (2N )]

Ft 1 

i1

ei

1 [1 1 / (2100 000)] [1 1 / (220)]
(1 1 / (2100 000)]
1 0.975 0.025
Thus, the northern elephant seal has an inbreeding coefﬁcient of at
least 2.5% as a result of its previous bottleneck, even though its
current population size is over 100 000 individuals. Its actual inbreeding level will be much greater than this as it has a polygamous mating
system and it existed at small population sizes for much more than a
single generation.
An alternative approach is to compute the harmonic mean population size (Chapter 10), and use it in Equation 11.4. The harmonic mean
population size is 60, so the inbreeding coefﬁcient after three generations at this size is
Ft 1 [1 1 / (2Ne)]t 1 [1 1 / (260)]3 0.025
This yields the same inbreeding coefﬁcient as above.

Indirect estimates of population inbreeding
coefﬁcients
In most populations, levels of inbreeding are unknown. However, the
relationship between genotype frequencies and inbreeding coefﬁcients
(Table 11.1) can be used to estimate levels of inbreeding. A deﬁciency of
heterozygotes provides an indication that a population is inbreeding,
rather than mating randomly. The deﬁciency of heterozygotes, compared to Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium expectations, provides an estimate of F.
A second estimate of the average inbreeding coefﬁcient for a population can be obtained from the loss of genetic diversity over time. From
Equations 10.1 and 11.4,
Ht / H0 (1 1/2Ne)t 1 F

(11.6)

The effective inbreeding coefﬁcient Fe can be estimated as
Fe 1 (Ht / H0)

(11.7)

Levels of inbreeding in island populations were inferred using this
approach by comparing allozyme heterozygosities in island and mainland populations (Fig. 2.6; Frankham 1998). Box 11.2 illustrates the estimation of the effective inbreeding coefﬁcient for the endangered Isle
Royale population of gray wolves in North America. The estimate of 55%
indicates that this endangered island population is highly inbred, as its
history would lead us to suspect.

An indirect estimate of inbreeding
coefﬁcients can be obtained from
the ratio of observed to expected
heterozygosity

267

268

INBREEDING

Box 11.2 Inbreeding due to low founder numbers and
small population sizes in the endangered
population of Isle Royale gray wolves (after
Wayne et al. 1991)
Gray wolves became established on Isle Royale in Lake Superior in about 1949,
during an extreme winter when the lake froze. Moose, their main prey, had previously become established on the island. The moose and wolf populations and their
interactions have been studied extensively. The wolf population is presumed to have
been established by a single pair. The wolf population rose to 50 in 1980, but subsequently declined to 14 in 1990. This decline could have been due to reduced availability of prey, to disease, or to deleterious effects of inbreeding, or a combination of
these factors.
The island population must be inbred due to low founder numbers and subsequent small population sizes (2–3 breeding pairs). All individuals have the same rare
mtDNA genotype, consistent with foundation of the population from the progeny
of a single female. DNA ﬁngerprint data indicate that the island wolves are as similar
as sibs in a captive population of wolves. Allozyme heterozygosity, based on 25 loci,
was 3.9% for Isle Royale, compared to 8.7% in wolves from nearby mainland populations. Using Equation 11.7, the effective inbreeding coefﬁcient is
Fe 1(Hisland /Hmainland)1(0.039/0.087) 0.55.
Consequently, this endangered island population is highly inbred. Gray wolves suffer
reductions in reproductive ﬁtness due to inbreeding (Laikre & Ryman 1991). The Isle
Royale population has small litters and poor juvenile survival.

Many polymorphic loci should be used to estimate effective inbreeding
coefﬁcients. This is particularly important if the inbreeding coefﬁcient of an individual is being estimated, as there is wide variation in
homozygosity among loci due to the chance effects involved in
Mendelian segregation. For example, a locus in the progeny of a full-sib
mating (Fig. 11.1) has a 0.25 probability of being identical by descent.
As a corollary, 0.75 of loci in such individuals are not identical by
descent. Thus, the measurement of identity by descent has a mean of
0.25 and a standard error of √(0.75  0.25 / n)  0.43 / √n, where n is the
number of loci sampled. Consequently, many loci are required to
obtain a reliable estimate of the effective inbreeding coefﬁcient for an
individual.
Deviations of genotype frequencies from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium for allozyme or DNA markers are widely used to determine selﬁng
rates in plants (Richards 1997). If a proportion S of the population selfs,
the frequency of heterozygotes is 2pq (1  1⁄2S) following similar logic to
that used in Table 11.1. Consequently, the selﬁng rate will be twice the
deviation of heterozygote frequencies from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium (Chapter 19).

PEDIGREES

Pedigrees
Pedigrees can be used to determine the inbreeding coefﬁcient of an
individual, as we saw above. In this way we can evaluate the effects of
inbreeding on survival or reproduction rates, etc. at the level of individuals. Computation of F from ﬁrst principles becomes impractical when
dealing with complex pedigrees such as that for Przewalski’s horse (Box
11.1). Consequently, simpler alternative methods have been devised for
complex pedigrees.
We begin by considering an example where we can determine the
inbreeding coefﬁcient from ﬁrst principles, and then illustrate how the
method can be simpliﬁed for more complex pedigrees. Figure 11.5 illustrates a pedigree where there is mating between half-sibs. The parents
of individual X are related through their common parent A. They are
not related in any other way, so we only have to consider the transmission of alleles from A through D and E to X. The inbreeding coefﬁcient
of individual X is determined by labelling the alleles in individual A as
A1 and A2, and computing the probability that individual X is either A1A1
or A2A2, i.e. that it has two alleles identical by descent. The probability
that A1 is transmitted from grandparent A to parent D is 1⁄2 based on
normal Mendelian segregation, and that it is then transmitted from D
to X is a further 1⁄2. Similarly, the probability that A1 is passed from A to
parent E is 1⁄2, and from E to X another 1⁄2. Thus, the probability that X is
A1A1 is the product of the probabilities for four paths:

Simple methods exist for
determining inbreeding from
pedigrees

P(X is A1A1) (1⁄2)4 1/16
Similarly, the probability that X is A2A2 is (1⁄2)4 1/16. Thus, the probability that X is either A1A1 or A2A2 is the sum of the above two probabilities:
P(X is A1A1 or A2A2) (1⁄2)4 (1⁄2)4 1/8
The probability of X being homozygous represents the new inbreeding
arising from A as a common ancestor of D and E.
However, if A is already inbred (i.e. A1 and A2 have a probability F of
being identical by descent), an additional amount of homozygosity
occurs. Individuals inheriting A1 from their mother and A2 from their
father may be inheriting identical alleles, as are individuals inheriting
A2 from mother and A1 from father, i.e. they are autozygous. The probability of the former is:
P(X inherits A1 from father and A2 from mother)(1⁄2)4
for the same reason as above. Thus, the probability of either one or the
other of these situations is (1⁄2)4 (1⁄2)4 (1⁄2)3. The probability that A1 is
identical by descent with A2 is A’s inbreeding coefﬁcient FA. Thus, the
probability that X is identically homozygous through previous inbreeding is:
P(X is identically homozygous through past inbreeding)(1⁄2)3 FA

Fig. 11.5 Pedigree with mating
between half-sibs.
P(A1A1)1/16
P(A2A2)1/16
P(A1A2)1/8

269

270

INBREEDING

The overall inbreeding coefﬁcient of X due to both new and previous
inbreeding is:
FX (1⁄2)3 (1⁄2)3 FA (1⁄2)3 (1FA).

The inbreeding coefﬁcient for an
individual can be calculated from
the number of individuals in each
path connecting one parent to the
other through each common
ancestor, and the inbreeding
coefﬁcient of each common
ancestor

Thus, if a common ancestor is already inbred, inbreeding is increased
further down the pedigree.
The inbreeding coefﬁcient can be obtained by counting the individuals in the path from mother to father through the common ancestor
(including both parents), and raising 1⁄2 to this power. For example, there
are three individuals connecting parents of individual X through their
common ancestor A in Fig. 11.5, i.e. through D, A and E. The inbreeding
coefﬁcient of X is (1⁄2)3, if A is not inbred.
In more complex pedigrees, the parents may be related through
more than one common ancestor, or from the same ancestor through
different paths. Each common ancestor, and each path, contributes an
additional probability of the progeny having identity by descent. The
inbreeding coefﬁcient is the sum of the probabilities contributed by
each different path to each common ancestor, as follows:
F 兺 (1⁄2)n (1 Fca)

(11.8)

where n is the number of individuals in the path from one parent to a
common ancestor and back to the other parent, and Fca is the inbreeding coefﬁcient of the particular common ancestor. These contributions
to inbreeding are summed for each different path linking both parents
to each common ancestor.
We apply this method to the simple pedigree in Fig. 11.6 and then to
a more complex case in Fig. 11.7. In Fig. 11.6, the individuals to count
from one parent to the other through the common ancestor (A) are F, D,
B, A, C, E and G, making n 7 steps. Thus FX in Fig. 11.6 is (1⁄2)7 (1FA),
being 1/128 if individual A is not inbred.
Calculation of the inbreeding coefﬁcient for the Dorcas gazelle
shown in Fig. 11.7 is more complex as it involves summing six different
paths, two of them involving inbred common ancestors (Example 11.5).
The inbreeding coefﬁcient is 0.266. The paths through E, the most
recent common ancestor, contribute most of this. Distant ancestors contribute little to the inbreeding coefﬁcient.

Example 11.5 Determining the inbreeding coefﬁcient for Dorcas
gazelle X in the pedigree shown in Fig. 11.7
Fig. 11.6 Pedigree with a more
remote common ancestor. The
dotted lines represent paths to
other ancestors that are not on the
path to the common ancestor A.

To calculate the inbreeding coefﬁcient of individual X, we must identify all the common ancestors of the parents H and I, and all the paths
to them. Individuals A, B and E are common ancestors causing relationships between H and I. The paths of relationship, the number of
individuals in paths joining parents through common ancestors (n),
the inbreeding coefﬁcients of common ancestors, and the contribution of each of the paths to the inbreeding coefﬁcient FX (rounded to
four decimal places) are shown below. A, B and F are all assumed to be

REGULAR SYSTEMS OF INBREEDING

unrelated and non-inbred. Individual E is the result of a parent (B) –
offspring (C) mating and has an inbreeding coefﬁcient of (1⁄2)2 0.25.
The overall inbreeding coefﬁcient of X is 0.2656.

Paths of relationship
(common ancestors are in
bold)

n

F of common
ancestor

HECADGI
HECBDGI
HEBDGI
HEGI
HEI

7
7
6
4
3

0
0
0
1
⁄4
1
⁄4

Contribution to FX
(1⁄2)7
0.0078
(1⁄2)7
0.0078
(1⁄2)6
0.0156
(1⁄2)4 5/4 0.0781
(1⁄2)3 5/4 0.1563
Fx
0.2656

Other procedures and computer programs are available to calculate
inbreeding coefﬁcients for more complex situations on pedigrees
stretching over many generations (Ballou 1983; Lacy et al. 2000)

Breeding systems in nature
There are many circumstances where it would be easier for an individual to mate with relatives. They are nearby and mating with them would
avoid the risks associated with dispersal to ﬁnd unrelated mates (e.g.
predation, competition and starvation). In plants, there is a cost
involved in long-distance pollen dispersal, as more pollen will be
wasted. However, only a small proportion of species practise regular
inbreeding. These usually have life histories that involve large beneﬁts
from mating with relatives, such as in colonizing species.
Most species of animals are thought to avoid inbreeding (Ralls et al.
1986). Many species of birds and mammals have dispersal patterns that
reduce inbreeding. Often only one sex disperses, as in the yellow-bellied
marmot (Koenig et al. 1996). In at least some mammals, individuals
avoid mating with other individuals carrying the same MHC alleles,
promoting outbreeding (Penn & Potts 1999).
Plants have more diverse breeding systems, but perhaps 50% have
self-incompatibility systems that result in avoidance of selﬁng
(Chapters 9 and 10). Further, selﬁng appears to be an unstable evolutionary strategy; it has evolved many times, but its taxonomic distribution
in plants, terrestrial slugs and marine invertebrates suggests that it is
an evolutionary dead end (Frankham 1995a).

Fig. 11.7 Complex pedigree for
male Dorcas gazelle 102796 (X) at
the Smithsonian National
Zoological Park, Washington, DC.

Many species have evolved
mechanisms that result in
avoidance of inbreeding

Regular systems of inbreeding
About 40% of ﬂowering plant species can and do self-fertilize (self) and
20% may do so routinely (Richards 1997). For example, endangered

Some species routinely reproduce
by selﬁng

271

272

INBREEDING

Brown’s banksia from Western Australia exhibits about 30% selffertilization, a high rate for this genus (Sampson et al. 1994).
Consequently, we need to consider the outcomes of repeated deliberate inbreeding over generations. We consider selﬁng, full-sib mating,
and repeated backcrossing. The ﬁrst two are the most extreme forms of
inbreeding possible in self-fertile and naturally non-selﬁng species,
respectively. Repeated backcrossing can be used to recover a sub-species
that has declined to a single individual by crossing to a related subspecies, followed by repeated backcrossing to the remaining individual.
Fig. 11.8 Increase in inbreeding
coefﬁcients arising from repeated
generations of selﬁng, full-sib
mating and backcrossing to a single
individual.

Figure 11.8 illustrates the increase in inbreeding over generations
due to selﬁng, full-sib mating and backcrossing to a parent. The recurrence relations for these cases are given in Table 11.4 (derivations are
given in Falconer & Mackay 1996). The use of the recurrence relationship for a selﬁng plant is shown in Example 11.6 and that for full-sib
mating is given in Example 11.7 using the naked mole rat as an example.
Backcrossing is of practical conservation interest as it can be used to
recover sub-species that have been reduced to a single individual (Fig.
11.9). The survivor A is mated to B (from a different sub-species), and
their offspring C is backcrossed to A, then D is backcrossed to A, etc.
Backcrossing to the original parent increases the genetic representation of the threatened sub-species in the offspring. However, this is done
at the expense of increased inbreeding. For example, the one remaining

Table 11.4

Recurrence relations for regular systems of inbreeding. F is the
inbreeding coefﬁcient and t is the generation

Form of inbreeding

Recurrence relationship

Self-fertilization
Full-sib mating
Repeated backcrossing to
a single individual, A

Ft  1⁄2 (1Ft1)
Ft  1⁄4 (12Ft1 Ft2)
Ft  1⁄4 (1FA 2Ft1)

REGULAR SYSTEMS OF INBREEDING

Example 11.6 Accumulation of inbreeding over generations in a
selﬁng plant species
The rise in inbreeding coefﬁcient for a species with continual selﬁng
can be computed using the recurrence relationship from Table 11.4:
Ft  1⁄2 (1 Ft1)
If the initial population is non inbred, Ft1 0, then
F1  1⁄2 (1 0) 0.5
F2  1⁄2 (1 0.5) 0.75
F3  1⁄2 (1 0.75)0.875
and the population rapidly becomes highly inbred approaching F ⬃ 1
(complete inbreeding).

Example 11.7 Accumulation of inbreeding with repeated full-sib
mating
In a few species, such as the colonial naked mole rat, full-sib inbreeding appears to be a regular part of the mating system (Reeve et al. 1990).
Repeated full-sib mating is also used to generate inbred populations
of animals for experimental purposes. The rise in F can be calculated
using the recurrence relationship in Table 11.4, as follows:
Ft  1⁄4 (1 2Ft1 Ft2)
If we assume no prior inbreeding (Ft1 and Ft2 0), then
F1  1⁄4 (1 0 0)0.25
F2  1⁄4 (1 2 0.25 0)0.375
F3  1⁄4 (1 2 0.375 0.25)0.5
Consequently, the inbreeding coefﬁcient with full-sib mating reaches
a value of 0.5 after three generations, the same value achieved after
one generation of selﬁng. The inbreeding coefﬁcient continues to rise
with continued sib mating until F ⬃1.

female Norfolk Island boobook owl has been crossed to its nearest
related sub-species from New Zealand. If she lives long enough to be
used for four generations of backcrossing to be completed (unlikely, but
useful as an example), her progeny in successive generations will have
the inbreeding coefﬁcients given in Example 11.8. Such a backcrossed
population has an inbreeding coefﬁcient approaching 50% after four
generations of backcrossing.

Fig. 11.9 Pedigree for repeated
backcrossing to the same
individual.

273

274

INBREEDING

Example 11.8 Inbreeding with repeated backcrossing to one
individual
The one remaining female Norfolk Island boobook owl has been
crossed to males from the related New Zealand sub-species. By backcrossing to the female, wildlife managers could generate a population with a gene pool consisting mostly of Norfolk Island boobook
alleles. What effect will this have on the inbreeding coefﬁcients of the
progeny?
Let us ﬁrst assume that the one remaining female owl is not inbred.
The hybrid offspring will have an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 0. The
progeny of the ﬁrst generation backcross of the hybrids to the Norfolk
Island female will have an inbreeding coefﬁcient:
F1 0.25
since Ft1 0
and F2  1⁄4 (1 2F1)  1⁄4 (1 1⁄2) 0.375
F3  1⁄4 (1 2F2)  1⁄4 (1 3⁄4) 0.4375
F4  1⁄4 (1 2F3)  1⁄4 (17/8) 0.46875
Thus, the regenerated boobook owl population would have an
inbreeding coefﬁcient of almost 47% after four generations of backcrossing.
The proportion of the genotype deriving from the Norfolk Island
boobook owl is 50% in the ﬁrst cross and 75%, 87.5%, 93.75% and 96.9%
after 1, 2, 3 and 4 generations of backcrossing, respectively.
If the one remaining female owl was, herself, the offspring of a fullsib mating (FA  1⁄4), the ﬁrst generation hybrid offspring would still
have an F 0, but the following generations have higher inbreeding
coefﬁcients than above.
F1  1⁄4 (1  1⁄4) 0.3125
F2  1⁄4 (1  1⁄4 2F1)  1⁄4 (1 1⁄4 0.625) 0.4688
F3  1⁄4 (1  1⁄4 2F2)  1⁄4 (1 1⁄4 0.9375)0.5469
F4  1⁄4 (1  1⁄4 2F3)  1⁄4 (1 1⁄4 1.09375)0.5859
In this case, the inbreeding coefﬁcient in the ﬁnal generation would
be almost 59%, compared to about 47% if she was non-inbred. In
reality, the one remaining owl is likely to be partially inbred.

Mutation–selection balance with inbreeding
Selﬁng species are expected to
have lower equilibrium
frequencies for deleterious alleles

Since some species routinely self-fertilize and others do so sometimes,
we need to determine the mutation–selection equilibria for inbreeding species. Inbreeding increases the frequency of homozygotes and
increases the opportunity for deleterious alleles to be removed by

MUTATION–SELECTION BALANCE WITH INBREEDING

Table 11.5 Mutation–selection equilibria for deleterious alleles,
comparing selﬁng with random mating. u is the mutation rate, s the selection
coefﬁcient against homozygotes for deleterious alleles, hs the selection
coefﬁcient against heterozygotes and F the inbreeding coefﬁcient
Inbreeding
Complete recessive
Partial recessive
Highly inbred (irrespective
of dominance)

⬃[√(F 2 4u/s)F]/2
⬃u/[s(hF)]
⬃ u/s

Random
mating

√(u/s)
u/hs

Source: Li (1955); Crow & Kimura (1970).

selection. This is referred to as purging. Table 11.5 presents equilibrium
frequencies due to mutation–selection balance under inbreeding.
Equilibrium frequencies for inbreeding species are lower than those
for outbreeding species (Example 11.9). The reduction in frequency of a
lethal allele is most pronounced for a complete recessive and somewhat
less for a partial recessive. With very high levels of inbreeding (such as
continual selﬁng), the equilibrium frequency for all cases (irrespective
of the level of dominance) is approximately u/s . For a lethal allele, this
results in equilibrium frequencies that are only 1/50 that for a partially
recessive lethal, and 1/300 that for a fully recessive lethal, under
random mating. These examples indicate that purging of lethal alleles
greatly reduces their frequencies under inbreeding. However, the situation is rather different for mildly deleterious alleles in small populations. Purging has very little impact on removal of mildly deleterious
alleles under full-sib inbreeding (Hedrick 1994).
Purging occurs in threatened species that suffer inbreeding as a
result of small population sizes, but its impacts appear to be relatively
small (see Chapter 12).

Example 11.9 Comparison of mutation–selection equilibria for a
lethal allele under inbreeding versus random mating
Inbreeding exposes deleterious recessives as homozygotes and
increases the opportunity for selection to remove them. In assessing
the impact of inbreeding on mutation–selection equilibria, we ﬁrst
consider a completely recessive lethal with a mutation rate of 105. In
a random mating population its equilibrium frequency will be
q √(u/s)  √(105 / 1)3103
By contrast, in a population with an equilibrium F of 0.33 (50%
selﬁng), a recessive lethal will have an equilibrium frequency of
q ⬃ [√(F2 4u/s) F] / 2[√(0.332 4 105 / 1)0.33] / 2
3105

275

276

INBREEDING

Thus, the equilibrium frequencies for recessive lethal alleles in a population with an equilibrium inbreeding coefﬁcient of 33% is 1/100
that in a random mating population.
For a partially recessive lethal allele with hs 0.02 (s 1, h 0.02),
the equilibrium in a random mating population is
qu/hs105 / 0.025104
while for a population with an inbreeding coefﬁcient of F 0.33, the
equilibrium frequency is
qu/[s (h F )]105/ [1 (0.020.33)]2.86105
Thus, the frequency of a partially recessive lethal in a population at
equilibrium with F 0.33 is only about 1/17 that in a random mating
population.
For a highly inbred population, for example, one with continual
selﬁng where F approaches 1, the equilibrium frequency is approximately
q ⬃ u/s ⬃ 105
Consequently, inbreeding reduces the equilibrium frequencies to
1/50 that for a partial recessive and to 1/300 that for a complete recessive in random mating populations.

Inbreeding in polyploids
Inbreeding reduces heterozygosity
more slowly in polyploids than in
diploids

Since many plants and some animals are polyploid, we must consider
the impact of inbreeding in them. We restrict consideration to autotetraploids, as this is sufﬁcient to illustrate the principles involved.
Since each locus has four copies in tetraploids, all four must be identically homozygous for a complete recessive to be exposed. Consequently,
we might expect that inbreeding would have a lesser impact in polyploids than in diploids.
The details of segregation in autotetraploids are more complex than
in diploids, as it depends upon the position of a locus relative to the centromere. Gametic output for two situations is given in Table 11.6.
Crossing-over between the centromere and the locus makes it possible
to produce AA gametes from Aaaa parents and aa gametes from AAAa
parents, while these gametes are not possible with random chromosome assortment.
The impact of selﬁng in an autotetraploid is shown in Table 11.7. In
contrast to a diploid, where selﬁng of an Aa heterozygote produces 25%
aa recessive homozygotes, selﬁng of an AAaa autotetraploid produces
only 2.8% aaaa recessive homozygotes with chromosome segregation
and 4.6% aaaa recessive homozygotes with random chromatid segregation. With continual selﬁng of an AAaa individual, heterozygosity
(AAAa AAaa Aaaa) drops from 100% initially to 94.4%, 80.6%, 67.4%
and 56.3% over four generations with random chromosomal segrega-

RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN INBREEDING, HETEROZYGOSITY, GENETIC DIVERSITY AND POPULATION SIZE

Table 11.6 Gametic output for different genotypes in an autotetraploid for
loci close to, and distant from, the centromere (referred to as random
chromosome and random chromatid assortment, respectively)
Gametic output
Distance from centromere
Parent genotype

Close

Distant

AAAa
AAaa
Aaaa

1AA: 1Aa
1AA: 4Aa: 1aa
1Aa: 1aa

15AA: 12Aa: 1aa
3AA: 8Aa: 3aa
1AA: 12Aa: 15aa

Source: After Bever & Felber (1994).

Table 11.7 Phenotypic ratios produced by selﬁng for different genotypes
in an autotetraploid, for loci close to and distant from the centromere. One A
allele is assumed to produce the dominant A phenotype
Phenotype ratios
Distance from centromere
Parent genotype

Close

Distant

AAA
AAAa
AAaa
Aaaa
aaaa

All A
All A
35A: 1a
3A: 1a
All a

All A
783A: 1a
20.8A: 1a
2.5A: 1a
All a

Source: After Allard (1960).

tion (Li 1976). This is a much slower decline in heterozygosity than that
produced by selﬁng in a diploid, where heterozygosity drops from 100%
initially to 50%, 25%, 12.5% and 6.25% over four generations.
Heterozygosity halves each generation with selﬁng in a diploid, but for
an autotetraploid locus close to the centromere it eventually settles
down to a reduction of 1/6 of the current value per generation, and
slightly more than 1/5 for a distant locus (Bever & Felber 1994).
Consequently, inbreeding in tetraploids is anticipated to have a lesser
impact on reproductive ﬁtness than in diploids (Chapter 12).

Relationships between inbreeding,
heterozygosity, genetic diversity and
population size
It is important to recognize that the connections between inbreeding,
small population size and expected heterozygosity are a feature of

The close relationship between
inbreeding and loss of
heterozygosity found in small
random mating populations is
often not found in habitually
inbreeding species

277

278

INBREEDING

random mating populations, but not of populations that naturally
inbreed. In a random mating population of stable size, loss of genetic
diversity equals the inbreeding coefﬁcient. Further, loss of heterozygosity is closely related to loss of allelic diversity and loss of polymorphism.
Conversely, a large plant population that reproduces by selﬁng may
have a high inbreeding coefﬁcient in each individual, a very low heterozygosity, but high overall genetic diversity as alleles are distributed
among, rather than within individuals. Loss of genetic diversity as
measured by polymorphism and allelic diversity is due to sampling
effects, rather than to inbreeding. Thus, inbreeding and loss of genetic
diversity are connected through the effects of ﬁnite population size in
small random mating populations, but their relationship is more
complex in habitually inbreeding species.

Summary
1. Inbreeding is the mating of individuals that are related by
descent.
2. Inbreeding is of conservation concern as it reduces reproductive
ﬁtness in inbred populations and increases the risk of extinction.
3. Inbreeding is measured using the inbreeding coefﬁcient (F ), the
probability that an individual has two alleles at a locus that are identical by descent.
4. Inbreeding reduces heterozygosity and exposes deleterious recessive alleles.
5. Inbreeding is an inevitable consequence of small population
size.
6. Mutation–selection equilibria under inbreeding for partially
recessive alleles of large effect are lower than under random mating,
but may show little difference for alleles of small effect.
7. Inbreeding increases homozygosity more slowly in polyploids
than in diploids and so is expected to have less impact in them.
FURTHER READING

Charlesworth & Charlesworth (1987) An excellent scholarly review of both the
theory and empirical issues relating to the impact of inbreeding.
Crow & Kimura (1970) Introduction to Population Genetics Theory. Fairly advanced
treatment of inbreeding theory.
Falconer & Mackay (1996) Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. Provides a clear
treatment of inbreeding.
Malecot (1969) The Mathematics of Heredity. The classic work that deﬁned
inbreeding in probability terms.
Ralls & Ballou (1983) Highly inﬂuential study describing deleterious effects of
inbreeding on captive wildlife.
Richards (1997) Plant Breeding Systems. Provides a comprehensive overview of
plant breeding systems and their consequences.
Wright (1969) Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, vol. 2. A scholarly review of
inbreeding theory by the person who developed much of it.

PROBLEMS

PROBLEMS

11.1 Inbreeding coefﬁcients: What is the inbreeding coefﬁcient for
the white tiger on the front of this chapter that resulted from a
father–daughter mating?
11.2 Inbreeding in small populations: What is the average inbreeding coefﬁcient for the Isle Royale gray wolf with an effective population size of 5 for 10 generations?
11.3 Inbreeding in ﬂuctuating populations: Compute the inbreeding coefﬁcient for a population of Mauritius kestrels that ﬂuctuates in
size as follows: 2, 100, 2, 100.
11.4 Genotype frequencies with inbreeding: Determine the genotype frequencies for the chondrodystrophy locus in California condors
for progeny that would result if they could self (see Table 11.3).
11.5 Inbreeding and homozygosity: By what factor is the frequency
of deleterious recessive homozygotes increased in children of (a) fullsib mating and (b) ﬁrst-cousin mating, compared to random mating
when the allele has a frequency of 1%?
11.6 Recurrent inbreeding: What is the inbreeding coefﬁcient for
the ﬁrst ﬁve generations using repeated full-sib mating in the naked
mole rat?
11.7 Inbreeding and heterozygosity: What will be the frequency of
heterozygotes at the Mdh–2 locus with alleles F and S at frequencies of
0.4 and 0.6 in a population of Paciﬁc yew with an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 0.47 (El-Kassaby & Yanchuk 1994)?
11.8 Effective inbreeding coefﬁcient: The microsatellite heterozygosity in the black bears on the Island of Newfoundland is 36%,
while that in the population on the Canadian mainland is 79.2%
(Paetkau & Strobeck 1994). What is the effective inbreeding coefﬁcient
for the Newfoundland population, relative to the mainland population?
11.9 Pedigree inbreeding: Determine the inbreeding coefﬁcient of
individual X in the pedigree in the margin above (the results of a
double ﬁrst-cousin mating).
11.10 Pedigree inbreeding: What is the inbreeding coefﬁcient for
individual X in the pedigree shown (after Hedrick 1983)?
11.11 Pedigree inbreeding: What is the inbreeding coefﬁcient for
the Nigerian giraffe (individual X) in Paris Zoo (Box 2.1)?
11.12 Deleterious effects of inbreeding: What is the probability that
individuals resulting from selﬁng are homozygous for at least one
lethal allele in an outbreeding plant species with 20000 loci, 10% of
which can mutate to produce lethals? Assume that deleterious alleles
at each of 2000 loci have equilibrium frequencies of 5104. Compare
this with the probability for a random mating population.

Problem 11.9

Problem 11.10

279

Chapter 12

Inbreeding depression
Terms:
Dominance,
epistasis,
heterosis,
inbreeding depression,
lethal equivalents,
overdominance,
purging

Inbreeding depression: survival of
juvenile pygmy hippopotamus from
Africa declines with increasing
inbreeding (F ).

Inbreeding reduces reproduction and survival in essentially all wellstudied naturally outbreeding species and to a lesser extent in
selﬁng species. Outcrossing reverses its deleterious effects

INBREEDING DEPRESSION IN NATURALLY OUTBREEDING SPECIES

Inbreeding depression in naturally outbreeding
species
Reductions in population size increase the rate of inbreeding in closed
populations. In normally outbreeding species, inbreeding results in a
decline in the mean for reproductive ﬁtness characters, termed
inbreeding depression. The deleterious effects of inbreeding were recognized before the Mendelian basis of inheritance was established.
Darwin (1876) clearly documented inbreeding depression, in studies of
57 species of plants from 52 genera and 30 families. Inbred plants were
on average shorter, weighed less, ﬂowered later and produced fewer
seeds (Table 12.1). The effects of inbreeding were substantial. On
average, selfed plants showed a 41% reduction in seed production and a
13% decline in height. Not all species showed inbreeding depression for
all characters studied, but virtually all cases showed inbreeding depression for most characters.

Table 12.1

Inbreeding in naturally
outbreeding populations of
animals and plants results in a
decline in reproductive ﬁtness,
termed inbreeding depression

Effects of inbreeding by self-fertilization (I) versus outcrossing (O) on several characters in 57 species

of plants

Characters

Number of
species

Number of
experiments

OI

OI

Similara

Difference (O  I)

Height
Weight
Flowering time
Seed production

54
8
32
23

83
11
58
33

57
8
44b
26

8
1
9
2

18
2
5
5

13%

Notes:
a
Darwin considered comparisons to be similar if they lay within 5% of each other.
b
Outbreds ﬂowered earlier than inbreds.
Source: Darwin (1876).

Subsequently, inbreeding depression has been documented in laboratory animals, domestic animals, outbred plants and humans (Table
12.2; Wright 1977; Charlesworth & Charlesworth 1987; Thornhill 1993;
Falconer & Mackay 1996; Roff 1997; Lynch & Walsh 1998). Despite the
overwhelming evidence from laboratory and domestic species, there
has been considerable scepticism that inbreeding depression occurs in
wildlife. However, Ralls & Ballou (1983) found higher mortality in
inbred versus outbred progeny in 41 of 44 mammals (Fig. 11.1). On
average, progeny of full-sib matings displayed a 33% reduction in juvenile survival (Ralls et al. 1988). This was the ﬁrst convincing evidence
that inbreeding does have deleterious effects across a variety of wildlife
species of conservation interest. Since then, inbreeding depression has
been found in essentially all well-studied naturally outbreeding species
(Lacy 1997; Roff 1997; Lynch & Walsh 1998).

41%

281

282

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Table 12.2 Inbreeding depression for different components of ﬁtness in animals and plants due to a 25%
increase in the inbreeding coefﬁcient. Inbreeding depression is expressed as % reduction in mean of inbreds compared to outbreds

Species

Character

Inbreeding
depression
(%)

Height at age 10
IQ score

4
11

Humans

Species

Character

Inbreeding
depression
(%)

Non-domesticated species

Domesticated species
Cattle
Milk yield

8

Sheep
Fleece weight
Body weight at 1 year

14
9

Litter size
Body weight at 154 days

8
11

Litter size
Body weight at 6 wks

18
2

Reproduction and survival
Egg production
Body weight

26
10
5

Reproduction and survival
Egg production
Body weight

38
10
10

Yield of seed (full-sib)
(selﬁng)
Plant height (full-sib)
(selﬁng)

14
17
5
6

Pigs

Mice

Chickens

Turkeys

Maize

Deer mice
Litter size
Age at 1st reproduction
Survival to weaning
House mice (wild)
Litter size
Body weight at 53 days
Nesting behaviour
Japanese quail
Reproduction and survival
Fertility
Survival 0–5 wks
Body weight
Chukar partridges
Reproduction and survival
Egg production
Body weight
Rainbow trout
Hatchability
Fry survival
Weight at 150 days
Zebra ﬁsh
Hatchability
Survival to 30 days
Length at 30 days
Channel catﬁsh
Hatchability
Body weight at 4 wks
Body weight at 12 wks

15
–17
8
10
10
10
64
21
10
4
58
16
1
–10, 9, 14
8, 11
12
89
43
11
–11
43
7

Source: After Abplanalp (1990); Falconer & Mackay (1996); Rolf (1997).

Inbreeding depression in the wild
There is clear and compelling
evidence for inbreeding
depression in the majority of wild
populations investigated, including
vertebrates, invertebrates and
plants

There is now clear and irrefutable evidence for inbreeding depression
in wild populations, despite earlier scepticism. Crnokrak & Roff (1999)
reviewed 35 papers investigating inbreeding depression in nature for
34 taxa that included 157 valid data sets. In 141 cases (90%) inbred individuals had poorer attributes than comparable outbreds (inbreeding

INBREEDING DEPRESSION IN THE WILD

depression), two were equal and only 14 were in the opposite direction.
Inbreeding depression was signiﬁcant for 88 data sets. Signiﬁcant
inbreeding depression has also been reported in at least another 15
other taxa, including ﬁve species of ﬁsh, great reed warblers, blue tits,
harbour seals, greater prairie chickens, Soay sheep, rock wallabies, redcockaded woodpeckers, Arabian oryx, mice, and red deer (Frankham
2000b). For example, in endangered golden lion tamarins in the wild
in Brazil, survival of inbred individuals is lower than that for outbred
individuals (Fig. 12.1). Overall, the evidence is compelling, especially
considering the inevitable small sample sizes and lack of veriﬁed
paternities in many of these studies. The desert topminnow ﬁsh (Box
12.1) provides an excellent case study of inbreeding depression in the
wild.

Evidence for inbreeding
depression is so extensive that the
default assumption for an
unstudied outbreeding species
must be that it will suffer
reductions in reproductive ﬁtness
if it is allowed to inbreed

Fig. 12.1 Inbreeding depression for survival of endangered golden lion tamarins in
natural habitats in Brazil (after Dietz et al. 2000).

Some studies have failed to detect inbreeding depression, but these
are usually very small studies, or cases where paternity has not been
veriﬁed. For example, Rowley et al. (1993) found no inbreeding depression in splendid fairy wrens from Western Australia, but later paternity
studies revealed that at least 64% of progeny were not fathered by the
group male(s), to whom paternity had previously been attributed.
Komdeur et al. (1998) detected no inbreeding depression in Seychelles
warblers, but the study involved only 12 outbred and 17 inbred
matings.
The deleterious impacts of inbreeding depression are substantially
greater, on average, in more stressful wild habitats than in captivity.
Inbreeding depression for mammals is 6.9 times higher in the wild than
in captivity (Crnokrak & Roff 1999). The impacts of inbreeding depression in the wild are usually very large when the entire life cycle is considered. For example, Meagher et al. (2000) found a 57% reduction in
total offspring production by inbred (from full-sib matings), compared
to outbred, wild house mice.

Inbreeding depression is typically
much greater in the wild than in
captivity

283

284

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Box 12.1 Inbreeding depression in desert topminnow ﬁsh
in the wild (after Vrijenhoek et al. 1992;
Vrijenhoek 1994)
Robert Vrijenhoek and his students have studied populations of desert topminnow
ﬁsh in Sonora, Mexico. The upper pools in the Plátanos were completely desiccated
during a severe drought in 1975. By 1978, these pools had been recolonized, but their
populations became quite inbred as they were founded by a single gravid female.
Prior to the drought, the topminnows co-existed with a clonal, parthenogenetic ﬁsh
of the same genus, with the forms representing 76% and 24% of the ﬁsh density,
respectively. After the populations were re-founded and the sexual form inbred, the
frequency of sexual topminnows was only 5% to the clone’s 95%, indicating 93%
inbreeding depression. No corresponding changes in relative abundance occurred in
downstream populations where topminnows did not become inbred. The inbred
population of topminnows showed spinal curvature and other deformities, and
poorer resistance to low oxygen (manifestations of inbreeding depression).
In 1983, 30 genetically variable female topminnows from the downstream mainstream pool were exchanged with 30 inbred topminnow females from the upstream
Heart Pool. By 1985, the topminnow had re-established its numerical dominance

INBREEDING DEPRESSION DUE TO SMALL POPULATION SIZE

over the clonal genotype and represented about 80% of the ﬁsh. Adding outbred ﬁsh
to the population had reversed inbreeding depression.
Another manifestation of inbreeding depression in these ﬁsh is their susceptibility
to a monogean trematode parasite (the black spots on the ﬁsh illustrated above). The
parasite load is least in outbred ﬁsh and highest in inbred and clonal ﬁsh (Lively et al.
1990).

Inbreeding depression due to small population
size
Inbreeding becomes inevitable in small populations (Chapter 11).
Consequently, small isolated populations are expected to accumulate
inbreeding depression. Small random mating populations of plants
(three species), fruit ﬂies, house ﬂies, black-footed rock wallabies, euros
(a kangaroo), greater prairie chickens, and a snake species have all
exhibited reduced population ﬁtness due to inbreeding (Polans & Allard
1989; Frankham 1995a; Heschel & Paige 1995; Madsen et al. 1996; Fischer
& Matthies 1998; Eldridge et al. 1999, personal communication;

Inbreeding due to small
population size results in
inbreeding depression

285

286

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Westemeier et al. 1998; Bryant et al. 1999). For example, Box 12.2 details
inbreeding depression for litter size and abnormal offspring in a small
Swedish population of adders.

Box 12.2 Inbreeding depression in a small isolated
population of adders in Sweden (Madsen et al.
1996)
A small isolated population of fewer than 40 individuals and fewer than 15 adult
adders in Sweden has been separated from the main distribution of the snake for at
least a century. Allozyme variability and DNA ﬁngerprints conﬁrmed that it had low
levels of genetic diversity, and so was inbred compared to other large populations of
the species.
The small population showed evidence of inbreeding depression. It displayed
lower litter size and more abnormal offspring than the large snake population. While
these differences could have been due to different environmental conditions, this
explanation was ruled out for frequency of abnormal offspring; the progeny of an
introduced male from the large population, when mated to females from the small
population, exhibited reduced frequency of abnormalities. Further, analyses of soil
samples ruled out heavy metal contamination as a reason for the difference, and food
supply was similar in the two localities.

Inbreeding and extinction
Inbreeding will increase the risk of
extinction for most species under
a wide range of circumstances

Since inbreeding reduces reproductive ﬁtness, it is expected to increase
the risk of extinction. Inbreeding clearly increases extinction risks in
captive populations (Frankham 1995b, 2001). For example, the incremental proportion of populations surviving declines with inbreeding
coefﬁcient in populations of mice and fruit ﬂies (Fig. 12.2). There is a
threshold; extinctions do not begin until intermediate levels of inbreeding. Population growth rates must become negative for extinctions to
occur in captive populations and inbreeding must accumulate to a critical level before that occurs.
Since there has been scepticism about the effects of inbreeding, it
is no surprise that there is also scepticism about the relative importance of genetic factors as a cause of extinction in wild populations.
Much of this doubt is due to lack of direct evidence identifying genetic
factors as common causes of extinction. In Chapter 2 we discussed the
relationship between inbreeding and extinction. We showed that
inbreeding is likely to increase extinction risk for a range of life histories under circumstances that are realistic for threatened species. This
is especially true when genetic effects interact with other threatening
factors. These ﬁndings (see Chapter 2; Frankham & Ralls 1998) are
based upon:
• Direct evidence of inbreeding increasing extinction risk of butterﬂy
and plant populations

CHARACTERISTICS OF INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Fig. 12.2 Relationship between
inbreeding and extinction in captive
populations of mice and fruit ﬂies
(Frankham 1995b). Incremental
survival (dlnS/dF) is plotted against
the inbreeding coefﬁcient (F).
Inbreeding increases extinction rates,
but not until intermediate levels of
inbreeding are reached, i.e. there is a
threshold.

• Circumstantial evidence that inbreeding may contribute to the
extinction proneness of island populations
• Computer projections using real life histories with all threatening
processes included, which indicate that inbreeding increases extinction risks under a wide range of realistic circumstances.

Characteristics of inbreeding depression
Inbreeding has been shown to adversely affect all aspects of reproductive ﬁtness. This includes offspring numbers, juvenile survival, longevity, interbirth interval, mating ability, sperm quantity and quality,
maternal ability, competitive ability and developmental time in
animals. In plants, pollen quantity, number of ovules, amount of seed,
germination rate, growth rates and competitive abilities all exhibit
inbreeding depression (see Tables 12.1 and 12.2). This applies not only to
domesticated species, but also to wild species, including those of conservation interest. For example, sperm abnormalities were higher, and
sperm motility lower, in small inbred populations of lions and Florida
panthers than in related large populations (Wildt 1996). Sperm
numbers and quality were negatively related to inbreeding within the
endangered Cuvier’s gazelle population in Spain (Roldan et al. 1997). In
old-ﬁeld mice, inbred dams were less likely to breed and, of those that
did, less likely to have a second litter. Their litters were smaller, survival
of inbred offspring from birth to weaning was lower (69% vs. 93%), mass
of inbred pups at weaning was lower and overall mass of progeny produced was reduced when compared to outbred dams (Lacy et al. 1996).
Inbreeding depression is most prominent for characters associated
with reproductive ﬁtness and least for characters peripherally associated with reproductive ﬁtness (Mousseau & Roff 1987; Roff &
Mousseau 1987: Falconer & Mackay 1996; Lynch & Walsh 1998). For
example, seed production/grain yield show greater inbreeding depression than height in plants (Tables 12.1 and 12.2). Similarly, reproduction, survival and litter size typically show more inbreeding depression
than body size in animals (Table 12.2).

All components of reproductive
ﬁtness are subject to inbreeding
depression

Characters most closely related to
reproductive ﬁtness show greater
inbreeding depression than those
that are peripherally related to
ﬁtness

287

288

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Inbreeding depression is greater
for total ﬁtness than for its
components

Inbreeding depression is greater in
more stressful conditions

Fig. 12.3 Inbreeding depression
in the rose pink plant is greater in
more stressful conditions (after
Dudash 1990). Relative ﬁtnesses in
propagules resulting from selfpollination, and cross-pollination
between populations when grown
in the greenhouse, and ﬁeld
conditions.

Inbreeding depression has a large
stochastic element

Unfortunately, relatively few studies have documented the extent
of inbreeding depression on total reproductive ﬁtness. Most studies
typically assess only a few components of ﬁtness, while all aspects of
reproductive ﬁtness, including survival, fecundity, mating ability,
behaviour and maternal ability are subject to inbreeding effects.
Frankel & Soulé (1981) noted that over a wide range of species each 10%
increase in inbreeding coefﬁcient caused approximately a 5%–10%
decline in the mean of components of reproductive ﬁtness, and a 25%
decline in total ﬁtness. For example, greater inbreeding depression for
overall ﬁtness than for its components has been found for old-ﬁeld
mice, house mice, chickens, turkeys, Japanese quail and chukar partridges (Table 12.2; Beilharz 1982; Abplanalp 1990; Lacy et al. 1996;
Meagher et al. 2000). Impacts of inbreeding on total ﬁtness are often
very large. For example, Meagher et al. (2000) found a 57% reduction in
total ﬁtness in mice due to full-sib inbreeding vs. outbreeding in semiwild conditions.
As might be expected, the impact of inbreeding depression is usually
greater in harsher environments (Hoffmann & Parsons 1991; Roff 1997;
Lynch & Walsh 1998). In plants, inbreeding depression is typically
greater in the ﬁeld than in greenhouses. For example Dudash (1990)
found that selfed progeny of the rose pink plant exhibited 75% inbreeding depression in the ﬁeld, but only 55% in the greenhouse (Fig. 12.3).
Inbreeding depression in the scarlet gilia plant was greater when populations were stressed by transplanting and clipping, than when they
were ‘unstressed’ (Heschel & Paige 1995). Inbreeding reduced survival in
Soay sheep under conditions of high population densities, due to gastrointestinal nematodes, but the effect was not found at low densities, or
in sheep cleared of nematodes (Coltman et al. 1999). Further, experiments with fruit ﬂies have shown that inbreeding depression is greater
under stressful than benign conditions, leading to elevated extinction
rates of inbred populations in stressful environments (Bijlsma et al.
2000).
Inbreeding depression is also generally greater in wild than in
captive populations, presumably because captive environments are
optimized (see Frankham 1995a). Based upon a meta-analysis, Crnokrak
& Roff (1999) calculated that the impact of inbreeding was 6.9 times
greater in the wild than in captivity. Meagher et al. (2000) found it to be
4.5 times greater in mice. Consequently, inbreeding depression is likely
to be substantially greater in nature than estimates from captive populations of animals and plants would lead us to believe.

Variability in inbreeding depression
Since inbreeding depression depends on the frequency of deleterious
alleles, it is expected to have a large stochastic element. As small
inbreeding populations are subject to genetic drift, the same deleteri-

CHARACTERISTICS OF INBREEDING DEPRESSION

ous allele may be absent in one population and present at high frequency in another. Furthermore, individuals with the same expected F
will have a range of actual levels of heterozygosity due to the sampling
involved in Mendelian inheritance. Different loci will become homozygous in different individuals, just by chance. Consequently, different
species, populations within a species, families within populations, and
individuals within families will differ by chance in their complement of
deleterious alleles, and show differences in their susceptibility to
inbreeding depression. Since many loci affect reproductive ﬁtness, it is
highly improbable that ﬁxation of deleterious alleles will be avoided at
all loci. This accounts for the ubiquitous but highly variable nature of
inbreeding depression.
The study by Ralls & Ballou (1983), across 44 different mammal
species, found substantial variation in inbreeding effects (Fig. 11.1).
Variation in inbreeding depression among lineages within species has
been reported in old-ﬁeld mice, dairy cattle, fruit ﬂies and ﬂour beetles
(see Hohenboken et al. 1991; Montgomery et al. 1997), and is expected to
be found in all outbreeding species. For example, Fig. 12.4 illustrates
variation in inbreeding depression among three sub-species of old-ﬁeld
mice, and among three samples within each sub-species. Such effects
appear to be common, although there have been few systematic comparisons. For example, Kärkkäinen et al. (1996) reported geographic variation in inbreeding depression in the Scots pine.

The stochastic nature of inbreeding depression also suggests that
different species and populations will vary in the components of ﬁtness
that are affected by inbreeding. Captive populations of Mexican and red
wolf do not exhibit inbreeding depression for juvenile survival
(Kalinowski et al. 1999), but do show inbreeding depression in adult survival (Wilcken 2001). Similarly, replicates differed in the ﬁtness components affected by inbreeding in the study of old-ﬁeld mice (Lacy et al.
1996).
In contrast to the differences within species, little variation among
major taxonomic groups has been found in susceptibility to inbreeding.
No differences were found among mammalian orders in inbreeding

Species, populations and families
differ in inbreeding depression

Fig. 12.4 Differences in
inbreeding depression among three
sub-species of old-ﬁeld mice and of
three samples within each subspecies for total mass of progeny
weaned per pair (after Lacy et al.
1996). Regression lines relating
ﬁtness and inbreeding coefﬁcient
for each replicate of each subspecies are plotted. The three subspecies are designated by solid,
dashed and dotted lines.

Major taxa show similar
inbreeding depression for natural
outbreeders

289

290

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

depression for juvenile survival (Ralls et al. 1988). Inbreeding depression
was very similar across birds, mammals, poikilotherms and plants
(Crnokrak & Roff 1999). Further, no differences were found among
mammals, birds, invertebrates and plants in susceptibility to extinction
due to inbreeding (Frankham unpublished meta-analysis).
The one systematic difference found so far is between gymnosperms
and angiosperms (64% vs. 39% reduction in ﬁtness traits due to selﬁng)
(Husband & Schemske 1996). While the reason for this is not clear, Lynch
& Walsh (1998) suggested that mutation rates are higher in long-lived
conifers than in short-lived angiosperms, due to differences in number
of cell divisions per sexual generation. Alternatively, it could be related
to the very different rates of polyploidy in gymnosperms and angiosperms (see below).

Inbreeding depression in species that regularly
inbreed
Species that naturally inbreed
show inbreeding depression, but
the magnitude is generally less
than that found in naturally
outbreeding species

The magnitude of inbreeding
depression depends upon
heterozygosity for deleterious
alleles (2pq), the dominance
deviations for alleles (d) and the
amount of inbreeding (F)

Since the opportunity for selection against deleterious recessives is
greater in populations that regularly inbreed (Chapter 11), naturally
inbreeding species are expected to suffer less from inbreeding depression. Species of plants that self usually show inbreeding depression, but
of a lesser magnitude than for outbreeding plants. In a meta-analysis,
the reductions in ﬁtness due to self-fertilization were 0.23 for selfers
and 0.53 for outbreeders (Husband & Schemske 1996). Further, there
was a negative correlation between inbreeding depression and selﬁng
rate.
Lower inbreeding depression in species that self could be due either
to prior inbreeding, or to natural selection having previously removed
deleterious alleles. The evidence above does not differentiate these
effects. The extent of inbreeding depression due to one generation of
inbreeding depends on the increase in inbreeding coefﬁcient ( F) from
one generation to the next. For selﬁng from an outbred population, F
is 1⁄2, while it is only 1⁄4 for selﬁng from a plant that is itself the product
of self-fertilization in the previous generation. If the selﬁng species
analysed by Husband & Schemske (1996) had been subjected to only
one generation of prior selﬁng, this could explain most of the difference in inbreeding depression between them and the outbreeding
species.

Genetic basis of inbreeding depression
An understanding of the genetic basis of inbreeding depression is essential if we are to devise means for minimizing and reversing it. The fundamental cause of inbreeding depression is that inbreeding increases
the frequency of homozygotes and decreases that of heterozygotes (see
Chapter 11).

CHARACTERISTICS OF INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Table 12.3

Impact of inbreeding on the mean of a population: single locus model

Genotype frequencies

Genotype frequencyvalue

Genotype

Value

Random mating

Inbred

Random mating

Inbred

A1A1
A1A2
A2A2

a
d
a

p2
2pq
q2

p2 Fpq
2pq(1 F)
q2 Fpq

p2a
2pqd
q2a

p2aFpqa
2pqd(1F)
q2aFpqa

Means

a(pq)2pqd a(pq)2pqd2dpqF
M0
MF Mo 2dpqF

The effects of inbreeding on the mean of a character can be illustrated using a simple model with no selection. Let us consider a population with an inbreeding coefﬁcient of F and two alleles A1 and A2, with
frequencies of p and q. The genotype frequencies are shown in Table
12.3. If the genotypes A1A1, A1A2 and A2A2 have genotypic values of a, d,
and a (Fig. 5.4), then the mean of the inbred population is obtained by
multiplying the frequencies of the genotypes by their values, and
summing them. Consequently, the inbred population has a mean MF of:
MF a(pq) 2dpq(1F)
Since a random mating outbred population has a mean M0 a(pq) 
2pqd, then:
MF M0 2pqdF
Consequently, the inbreeding depression (ID) is:
ID2pqdF

(12.1)

Inbreeding depression depends upon heterozygosity (for deleterious
alleles), dominance deviation (d) (for deleterious alleles) and the
inbreeding coefﬁcient. As inbreeding depression is directly proportional to the amount of inbreeding, this leads us to expect a linear relationship between inbreeding depression and F, an issue we address
below.
Deleterious alleles must be partially or completely recessive (and
favourable alleles dominant, or partially so), or show overdominance to
contribute to inbreeding depression (Example 12.1), i.e. a locus will only
contribute to inbreeding depression if d 0. Whether inbreeding
depression results from dominance or overdominance is an important
issue. While both mechanisms cause inbreeding depression, they
respond differently to natural selection. With dominance, selection can
reduce the frequency of deleterious alleles, but it cannot do this with
overdominance (see ‘Purging’, below). Dominance of favourable alleles,
rather than overdominance, is considered to make the major contribution to inbreeding depression (Falconer & Mackay 1996; Lynch & Walsh
1998; Charlesworth & Charlesworth 1999).

Inbreeding depression only occurs
when there is dominance, or
overdominance

291

292

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Example 12.1 Effect of different levels of dominance on inbreeding
depression
The values of d (dominance deviations for the heterozygotes) for additive, dominant and overdominant loci are 0, a and 2a, respectively
(Fig. 5.4). If we consider a locus with two alleles at frequencies of 0.99
for A1 and 0.01 for deleterious A2, with an effect of 10% on survival
(a 0.05), then the inbreeding depression for a full-sib mating (F 
0.25) will be:
For a locus with additive effects (d 0), inbreeding depression (ID)
ID2pqdF 20.010.9900.250
For a locus showing complete dominance (d a 0.05), inbreeding
depression
ID 20.01 0.990.050.252.47104
An equivalent, partially dominant, locus would cause inbreeding
depression in an amount proportional to the dominance. If it showed
intermediate dominance (d 0.05/20.025), the inbreeding depression would be half that for a fully dominant locus. The inbreeding
depression for a locus showing overdominance is expected to be
higher as the allele frequencies will probably be more intermediate,
yielding a higher value for 2pq. Further, the value of d for the overdominant case is greater than that for the dominant cases, being 2a.
Thus, dominance is required for inbreeding depression, there
being none for an additive locus. The magnitude of inbreeding
depression may seem very low for a single locus, but it must be
remembered that the effects accumulate over all loci.

Effects of inbreeding depression
accumulate over all polymorphic
loci affecting a trait

Numerous loci will generally be involved in causing inbreeding depression for ﬁtness, and its components. While the number of loci involved
is unknown, it may well be thousands. An equation equivalent to 12.1
can be derived for the sum of many loci. If the combined genotypic
values are given by the sum of the effects of the individual loci, the population mean is:
MF 

no. of
loci

兺 [a (p q ) 2d p q (1F)]
i1

i

i

M0 2 F

i

i i i

no. of
loci

兺 d pq
i1

i i i

and inbreeding depression will be
no. of
loci

ID2F

兺 d pq
i1

i i i

(12.2)

Thus, inbreeding depression depends on F, the number of loci polymorphic for deleterious alleles, the dominance of the alleles, and on their frequencies. For inbreeding to change the mean, dominance (d) must be

CHARACTERISTICS OF INBREEDING DEPRESSION

directional, i.e. deleterious alleles must be partially to completely recessive, rather than an equal mixture of dominants and recessives. This will
almost certainly be the case as natural selection reduces the frequency of
dominant deleterious alleles relative to recessives (Table 7.4). Inbreeding
depression is closely related to the dominance variance (VD) (Chapter 5).
Both depend upon 2pqd. Dominance variance is greater for ﬁtness characters than for peripheral ones and so is inbreeding depression.
The cumulative effects of multiple loci are illustrated for loci with
lethal alleles in Example 12.2. Lethals alone can account for high levels
of inbreeding depression with realistic numbers and effects of loci. In
practice, inbreeding depression is due to a combination of alleles with
effects ranging from lethal to mildly deleterious. In fruit ﬂies, the only
genus for which we have reasonable data, inbreeding depression is
about equally due to lethals and deleterious alleles of small effect
(Simmons & Crow 1977; Lynch & Walsh 1998).

Example 12.2 Inbreeding depression due to multiple loci with lethal
alleles
Following Example 11.2, we will consider 5000 loci, each with lethals
in mutation–selection equilibrium frequencies of 5104. Lethal
alleles (l) typically reduce the ﬁtness of heterozygotes by about 2%,
giving the following genotypic values:

Genotypic values

/

/l

l/l

1

0.98

0

Yielding
a (1 0) /20.5
and
d 0.98 0.50.48
If we consider a population with an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 0.25 as a
result of full-sib mating, then the inbreeding depression due to one
locus is
ID2pqdF 2 (1 5 104) (5 104) 0.480.25
1.2104
To accumulate these effects over 5000 loci, we take the ﬁtness effects
of each locus and multiply them together, as follows:
Fitness due to inbreeding at 1 locus1ID11.2104
0.99988
And the cumulative effects over 5000 loci are
Overall ﬁtness(0.99988)5000 0.55
so
Total ID 1 0.55 0.45

293

294

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Thus, lethal alleles alone could result in inbreeding depression of 45%
in survival from fertilization to adult in a vertebrate species with an
inbreeding coefﬁcient of 25%. This is similar to the answer we found
in Example 11.2, using a related approach. At an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 0.5, the inbreeding depression for survival would be 70%. In
both cases there will be an additional contribution to inbreeding
depression due to deleterious alleles of smaller effects. These are
likely to be substantial. Further, there will be effects on fecundity as
well as survival.

Linearity of inbreeding depression with F
Simple theory predicts that there
will be a linear relationship
between the mean value of a
character and the inbreeding
coefﬁcient

Fig. 12.5 Inbreeding depression
in maize. Change in mean height
and mean grain yield with
inbreeding, expressed as a
percentage of the non-inbred mean
(after Falconer & Mackay 1996,
based on data from Hallauer &
Sears [dotted lines] and Cornelius
& Dudley [continuous and dashed
lines]). The dotted and dashed lines
refer to consecutive selﬁng and the
solid line to full-sib mating. The
declines are approximately linearly
related to F, and more severe for yield
than height.

If effects of different loci combine additively, then inbreeding depression is expected to be linearly related to the inbreeding coefﬁcient F
(Equation 12.2). For survival, where we expect to multiply the ﬁtness
effects of different loci, the logarithm of survival should show a linear
relationship with inbreeding, as discussed below. More complex models
of inbreeding depression involving interactions among loci (epistasis)
suggest that there may be an additional, quadratic effect, depending on
F2.
Available data generally indicate an approximately linear relationship between the mean and the inbreeding coefﬁcient (Lynch & Walsh
1998). For example, grain yield and height in maize show essentially
linear declines with inbreeding (Fig. 12.5). However, a few cases do show
a quadratic relationship with the mean dropping proportionately less
at a low and more at higher levels of inbreeding. Even fewer cases show
the reverse trend – a decrease of inbreeding depression per unit F at high
F values.
There are methodological problems in distinguishing between

PURGING

linear and curvilinear relationships, as extinctions occur at higher
levels of inbreeding (Fig. 12.2), such that the samples of populations are
not equivalent at low and high inbreeding.

Effects of ploidy
Since inbreeding depression is directly related to the expression of deleterious alleles and to the frequency of heterozygotes, it is no surprise
that inbreeding depression is different for haploids, diploids and tetraploids. It is absent in haploids as there are no hidden deleterious alleles.
The relative impact of inbreeding in diploids and tetraploids depends
on the relative rates of ﬁxation, on the genetic loads and on whether
overdominance or dominance is causing inbreeding depression.
The most plausible models lead us to expect less inbreeding depression in tetraploids than in diploids for similar degrees of inbreeding.
First, the rate of ﬁxation is slower in tetraploids than diploids (Chapter
11). Second, genetic loads for partially recessive alleles are expected to
be similar in diploids and tetraploids (Chapter 11). Thus, there should be
fewer deleterious alleles ﬁxed and less inbreeding depression in the
genome of a tetraploid than in a diploid for the same amount of inbreeding. If overdominance was a major cause of inbreeding depression
(unlikely), then inbreeding depression is predicted to be greater for
tetraploids than for diploids (Husband & Schemske 1997).
The most carefully performed experimental study of this issue
revealed that inbreeding depression due to selﬁng was greater in
diploid than in tetraploid forms of the plant Epilobium angustifolium. For
cumulative ﬁtness, inbreeding depression due to selﬁng was 0.95 in diploids and 0.68 in tetraploids (Husband & Schemske 1997). Overall, there
is a paucity of data to evaluate the issue.

Ploidy has a major effect on
inbreeding depression; haploids
lack inbreeding depression, while
polyploids may exhibit less than
diploids

Purging
Rare deleterious recessive alleles are exposed by inbreeding and can
therefore be more effectively removed by natural selection (Chapter 11).
However, purging does not operate on the component of genetic load
due to overdominant loci, as selection continually favours heterozygotes, maintaining deleterious alleles in the population. Further, the
operation of purging depends on the magnitude of allele effects, being
highly effective for alleles of large effect (e.g. lethals), but much less so
for alleles of small effect, as they approach selective neutrality. In fact,
deleterious alleles of small effect are likely to be ﬁxed due to genetic
drift in small populations (Chapter 8), so purging regimes (i.e. intentional inbreeding to remove deleterious alleles) can actually reduce
reproductive ﬁtness, rather than increasing it (Hedrick 1994).
The relative levels of inbreeding depression expected for different

Inbreeding depression may be
reduced, or purged, by selection
against deleterious alleles. Purging
may ameliorate inbreeding
depression, but it is unlikely to
eliminate it

295

296

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Fig. 12.6 Relationship between
inbreeding depression and selﬁng
rate under models assuming
different genetic bases for
inbreeding depression (from
Barrett & Kohn 1991). The
assumed bases of inbreeding
depression are: (A) lethal or highly
deleterious recessive alleles; (B)
many loci, each with small
deleterious effects; (C)
symmetrical overdominance; (D)
asymmetrical overdominance.

genetic models in populations with different selﬁng levels are shown in
Fig. 12.6. Purging is highly effective with recessive lethals or detrimentals with large effects (A), but much less so for the many loci with alleles
having small detrimental effects yield much smaller purging effects (B).
Conversely, with symmetrical overdominance (C) inbreeding depression actually increases with selﬁng level (the opposite of purging).
Associative overdominance is also likely to result in this pattern. The
asymmetrical overdominance model (D) exhibits modest enhancement
of inbreeding depression up to intermediate frequencies, and strong
purging effects at higher F values. The proportion of alleles falling into
categories A–D is not known precisely, but A and B will form the majority and be about equally important. In small populations, associative
overdominance develops over time, so C is likely to rise in importance.
Further details are given by Charlesworth & Charlesworth (1987).
Purging has been documented in selﬁng plants, mice, birds, and
fruit ﬂies, and in the many experimental populations of species where
highly inbred lines have been developed (Frankham 1995b; Husband &
Schemske 1996; Ballou 1997).
Four factors contribute to purging:
• Genetic basis of inbreeding depression (discussed above)
• Natural selection reducing the frequency of deleterious alleles
• Effects of prior inbreeding in reducing the amount of new inbreeding
• Impact of new mutations.
These issues are now discussed and their impacts evaluated.
We would expect to detect the effects of purging by comparing
inbreeding depression in populations with different levels of selﬁng,

PURGING

and in studies of the effect of inbreeding depression with different rates
of inbreeding. We use these cases to illustrate the extent of purging, and
the contribution of the processes described above.

Inbreeding and selection
For large populations, the impact of selection under inbreeding can be
determined by modelling selection against a deleterious partially recessive allele (frequency q) with genotypic ﬁtnesses A1A1 1, A1A2 1hs
and A2A2 1 s. The decrease in the frequency of the deleterious A2
allele is then:
q  qoutbred spqF (1 2h)

(12.3)

where qoutbred is the change in allele frequency expected due to selection in an outbred population and the term on the right is the additional change due to inbreeding. Thus, selection against a deleterious
partial recessive is more effective in a large inbred population than in a
large outbred population, by an amount that depends on the inbreeding level (F), the selection coefﬁcient (s), the allele frequencies and the
dominance of the allele (h). Note that there is no difference for an additive allele (h 0.5).
In small populations subject to inbreeding, selection is less effective,
and only deleterious alleles of large effect will be effectively purged
(Hedrick 1994). Deleterious alleles of small effect will be effectively
neutral and their fate will be dominated by genetic drift. They will
approach mutation–drift equilibrium. If we compare the overall levels
of genetic diversity for rare deleterious alleles in small and large populations we expect that small population will have:
• Lower frequencies of deleterious alleles of large effect due to
purging (fate determined by selection)
• Slightly lower frequencies of partially recessive deleterious alleles of
moderate effect due to mutation–selection–drift balance
• A higher frequency of mildly deleterious alleles as they are effectively neutral in small populations and are therefore in mutation–drift equilibrium, rather than mutation–selection–drift
equilibrium
• A lower frequency of very mildly deleterious alleles that are effectively neutral in both small and large populations.
Consequently, the net effect depends on the proportion of alleles falling
into the four classes of effects. In fruit ﬂies, deleterious alleles of large
effect cause about half of the inbreeding and alleles of smaller effect the
remaining half (Simmons & Crow 1977). However, the proportions
falling into the remaining categories are unclear and are dependent
upon the population size. Overall, genetic diversity for deleterious
alleles is likely to be less in smaller than in larger populations, but the
differences may be modest, rather than very large.

Selection against deleterious
recessives is more effective under
inbreeding, but its impact depends
upon the size of effect of the
alleles and on the population size

297

298

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Relationship of inbreeding depression to rate of
inbreeding
Slower inbreeding generally
causes less inbreeding depression
than an equivalent amount of
rapid inbreeding, but the
difference is often small

We have dealt mainly with the impacts of rapid inbreeding due to
selﬁng, or full-sib mating. However, much of the inbreeding in endangered species in nature results from the cumulative impacts of small
population size, i.e. slow inbreeding. The time, in generations, taken to
reach similar levels of inbreeding is longer for small populations than
for self-fertilization or brother–sister mating. For example, the time
taken to reach an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 0.5 is one generation with
selﬁng, three generations with continued brother–sister mating and
34, 69 and 138 generations with random mating populations of size 25,
50 and 100, respectively.
Since the opportunities for natural selection to act are greater with
slower inbreeding, the effects of a similar amount of inbreeding are predicted to be less with slower inbreeding. This prediction has proved to
be generally correct (see Frankham 1998), although the effects are
usually small (as illustrated for the comparison of selﬁng and full-sib
mating in Fig. 12.5).

Inbreeding depression in species/populations with
historically small populations
A prior history of small population
size is likely to reduce subsequent
inbreeding depression, but it is
most unlikely to remove it
completely

Even in normally outbreeding species, the theory of purging predicts
that inbreeding depression can be purged if the population has been
small and has become inbred over a long period of time. This expectation has led some authors to predict that populations that have been
small for many generations are not expected to demonstrate further
inbreeding depression, or that populations or species with low levels of
heterozygosity should not show inbreeding depression if inbred
further. However, experimental evidence indicates that purging effects
are modest and that small partially inbred populations usually continue to exhibit inbreeding depression when inbred further, even when
they have low genetic diversity. Brewer et al. (1990) found no correlations
between either historical population size or amount of heterozygosity
with the severity of inbreeding depression in populations of deer mice.
Ballou (1997) detected only slight reductions in inbreeding depression
in progeny from parents that were related and subject to prior inbreeding, versus progeny of related parents with no prior history of inbreeding. In populations of fruit ﬂies that had been inbred slowly (Ne ⬃50)
over a period of about 150 generations (F 0.5–0.6), further inbreeding
to near homozygosity still caused substantial inbreeding depression
(Latter et al. 1995). The effects of prior inbreeding are not always consistent; in three populations of deer mice effects ranged from reduced
inbreeding depression (purging), through no effect to enhanced
inbreeding depression (Lacy & Ballou 1998).

DETECTING AND MEASURING INBREEDING DEPRESSION

An extreme case illustrates the small impact that natural selection
may have on inbreeding depression, through purging. The impact of
purging can be determined by comparing inbreeding depression in populations derived from an outbred base, with that in populations from
crosses between highly inbred populations. In the latter case, the highly
inbred populations should be purged, and this treatment should lead to
less inbreeding depression. The results of such an experiment yielded a
small and non-signiﬁcant difference between the two treatments (Fig.
12.7).
One reason for the persistence of inbreeding depression in small
populations and those which habitually inbreed is the steady recurrence of deleterious mutations. While selection may remove deleterious alleles, they are continually replenished by mutation. The effect of
persistent small population size (or recurrent inbreeding) on inbreeding depression depends on its effect on mutation–selection equilibrium. As we saw in Chapter 8 (Fig. 8.13), the effect of population size on
mutation–selection equilibrium for partial recessives (probably the predominant mutations contributing to inbreeding depression) is relatively small. Thus, a prior history of small size (or recurrent inbreeding)
may reduce subsequent inbreeding depression, but is unlikely to eliminate it.

Fig. 12.7 Effect of purging on
extinctions due to inbreeding. The
proportion of populations
remaining at different inbreeding
coefﬁcients in outbred and purged
populations subject to continuous
full-sib mating are given. The
purged populations were formed
from four-way crosses among
highly inbred populations (20
generations of full-sib mating prior
to crossing) from the outbred
population (after Frankham et al. in
press). The difference in extinction
rates with inbreeding between purged
and non-purged populations was
small and non-signiﬁcant.

New deleterious mutations are
being added to populations each
generations

Detecting and measuring inbreeding depression
Survival and reproduction are strongly inﬂuenced by environmental
conditions (Chapter 5). Consequently, we cannot compare the ﬁtness of
inbred and non-inbred individuals except under the same environmental conditions at the same time. For example, the deleterious effects of
inbreeding on captive mammals were studied by comparing the juvenile survival of inbred and outbred offspring matched for zoo, enclosure in zoo, year of birth and density of population (Ballou & Ralls 1982).
Another excellent example of a well-designed comparison involved deer

Contemporary comparisons of
inbred and outbred individuals (or
populations) maintained under the
same environmental conditions
are required to detect inbreeding
depression

299

300

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Fig. 12.8 Effect of inbreeding
depression on reintroduction
success increases with age in deer
mice. Inbred and outbred
individuals were released into the
wild and their survival followed
over time (after Jimenez et al.
1994). Survival of inbreds (F0.25)
relative to the survival of noninbreds is plotted against time since
release.

mice. Jimenez et al. (1994) captured animals, and bred them in captivity
to produce inbred and outbred offspring. They released both types of
offspring of the same age into the wild at the same time and followed
their subsequent survival and weights. Inbreds exhibited substantially
poorer survival than outbreds (Fig. 12.8). Chen (1993) used a similar
experimental design with snails.
An alternative approach for detecting inbreeding depression is to
outcross populations suspected of suffering inbreeding depression. If
the outcrossed progeny display increased ﬁtness (heterosis), then the
original population is suffering inbreeding depression. This method
has been used for topminnow ﬁsh by Vrijenhoek (Box 12.1), by
Westemeier et al. (1998) on greater prairie chickens, and by Madsen et al.
(1999) on adders (see Fig. 12.10 below).
An approach that does not require capture, and/or arranged breeding, is to use genetic markers such as multiple microsatellite loci to
infer the degree of inbreeding of individuals, and to compare inbreds
and outbreds in the same environment. This has recently been used to
detect inbreeding depression in harbour seals, Soay sheep and red deer
(Coltman et al. 1998, 1999; Slate et al. 2000)
Cheetahs illustrate problems that can arise in testing for inbreeding
depression. The cheetah has a low level of genetic diversity, and it is presumed to be inbred. There is, however, controversy as to whether the
cheetah, as a species, is suffering from inbreeding depression (see May
1995). The issue cannot be resolved, as there are no genetically variable,
outbred, control cheetahs to compare with. However, it is possible to ask
if the current cheetah population suffers from inbreeding depression
by comparing individuals resulting from recent inbreeding with those
that have no recent inbreeding in their ancestry. The captive cheetah
population does exhibit inbreeding depression based upon such a comparison (Hedrick 1987).
Fluctuating asymmetry (FA) measures differences within individuals between bilateral features. It has been suggested that FA provides a
simple indication of the presence of inbreeding depression, as more ﬁt
individuals may have greater developmental stability (see Clarke 1995).
Unfortunately, FA has proven to be too inconsistent to be a reliable indicator (Vollestad et al. 1999; Gilligan et al. 2000).

DETECTING AND MEASURING INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Measuring inbreeding depression
A general measure of inbreeding depression (δ) is the proportionate
decline in mean due to a given amount of inbreeding, as follows:

δ 1 

ﬁtness of inbred offspring
ﬁtness of outbred offspring

(12.4)

This is simply the ID measure deﬁned previously (Equation 12.1), divided
by the mean of the outbred population, i.e. ID / M0. This formula does not
specify the level of inbreeding, and this must be deﬁned. Example 12.3
illustrates the use of Equation 12.4 to estimate inbreeding depression in
Dorcas gazelle. A compilation of estimates of inbreeding depression due
to sib-mating (F 0.25) is presented in Table 12.2.
δ is most often used in plants. Since many plants can be selfed, the
usual estimate of inbreeding depression is obtained by comparing
selfed and outcrossed progeny; this encompasses the impact of inbreeding due to an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 50%.

Example 12.3 Inbreeding depression in Dorcas gazelle (Ralls &
Ballou 1983)
Juvenile survival rates of 50 outbred and 42 inbred Dorcas gazelle
were 72.0% and 40.5%. The inbreeding depression (δ) for juvenile survival in this species is:

δ 1 –

0.405
ﬁtness of inbred offspring
1 
0.44
ﬁtness of outbred offspring
0.720

Lethal equivalents
The usual means for expressing and comparing the extent of inbreeding
depression for survival in animals is lethal equivalents. This is obtained
from the regression of survival on level of inbreeding, as detailed below.
This measures the impact of complete inbreeding (F 1). A lethal equivalent is deﬁned as a group of detrimental alleles that would cause on
average one death if homozygous, e.g. one lethal allele, or two alleles
each with 50% probability of causing death, etc. The probability of surviving, S, can be expressed as a function of inbreeding F (Morton et al.
1956):
S e (ABF)

(12.5)

If we take natural logarithms (ln) this becomes
ln S A BF

(12.6)

where eA is ﬁtness in an outbred population, F is the inbreeding coefﬁcient, and B is the rate at which ﬁtness declines with a change in

Inbreeding depression is usually
measured as the proportionate
decline in mean per unit increase
in inbreeding coefﬁcient

301

302

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Table 12.4

Data on survival levels for offspring with different levels of
inbreeding (F) in the okapi

F

Lived

Died

0
0.125
0.25
0.375

86 (61%)
5 (71%)
12 (40%)
1 (17%)

55 (39%)
2 (29%)
18 (60%)
5 (83%)

Source: de Bois et al. (1990).

Fig. 12.9 Relationships between
survival and inbreeding coefﬁcient
in okapi (de Bois et al. 1990). The
natural logarithm of survival is
plotted against the inbreeding
coefﬁcient and the regression line
is inserted.

The effects of inbreeding on
population viability are complex
and will interact with other factors
affecting population growth, or
population ﬂuctuations, but they
will be deleterious in the long
term

inbreeding (Hedrick 1992). B measures the additional genetic damage
that would be expressed in a complete homozygote (F 1). Thus, B is the
number of lethal equivalents per gamete, and 2B the number per individual. This model assumes a linear relationship between logarithm of
survival and the inbreeding coefﬁcient F.
To estimate lethal equivalents, data are collected on survival rates of
individuals with different levels of F and weighted linear regression (or
maximum likelihood methods) used to estimate A and B. Table 12.4
illustrates such data for the okapi. Figure 12.9 shows the relationship
between ln S and inbreeding coefﬁcient for the okapi, with the regression line inserted. The slope of the line (B) is 1.80, indicating that the
population contains 1.8 haploid and 3.6 diploid lethal equivalents. Ralls
et al. (1988) found that the median number of lethal equivalents for 40
captive mammal populations was 1.57 (B) per haploid and 3.14 (2B) per
diploid, although species varied widely. These values indicate that each
gamete contains deleterious mutations equivalent to between one and
two lethals when homozygous. Similar values have been calculated for
other animal populations, including humans.

Inbreeding and population viability
Scepticism has been expressed about the signiﬁcance of inbreeding to
population viability (Caro & Laurenson 1994; Caughley & Gunn 1996).

INBREEDING AND POPULATION VIABILITY

Reference is often made to highly inbred populations with no apparent
inbreeding depression. For example, a number of small, presumably
inbred, island populations persist. This is particularly evident in bird
species, such as Chatham Island black robin, Hawaiian crow, Mauritius
kestrel, Mauritius pink pigeon, red-tailed hawk and Seychelles robin
(Box 8.1; Dhondt & Mattysen 1993; Craig 1994). Further, several bottlenecked populations, including the northern elephant seal, have recovered without apparent ill effects (Box 8.2). Since there are often no
controls with which to compare these populations, it is difﬁcult to evaluate the effects of inbreeding in these populations. Nevertheless, it is
important to consider the probable impacts of inbreeding on population viability.
Inbreeding interacts with basic parameters of population viability,
population growth rate and variation in population size. While these
interactions may be complex, inbreeding in naturally outbreeding
species will always be deleterious to closed populations in the long
term, even if the impacts on population size are not evident initially. For
example, a healthy outbred population (with a positive r) beginning at
a small size and having a potential size of K due to limited carrying
capacity, will rapidly grow to its carrying capacity (Box 12.3). A mildly
inbred population will also grow to size K, but more slowly. A moderately inbred population will grow to the same carrying capacity even
more slowly. However, a highly inbred population with a negative
growth rate will decline to extinction. Whilst the ﬁrst three populations
reach a similar K, they have quite different capacities to recover from
population catastrophes (droughts, ﬂoods, ﬁres, etc.). They also have different capacities to absorb new impacts from introduced pests, parasites, diseases or predators. In all cases, the inbred populations will be
inferior to the outbred population.
Adverse effects of inbreeding on population growth rates have been
described in eastern mosquito ﬁsh and in red ﬂour beetles, and probably
occur in all naturally outbreeding species. Populations of mosquito ﬁsh
founded from brother–sister pairs exhibited 56% lower growth in
numbers than populations founded from unrelated pairs (Leberg
1990a). McCauley & Wade (1981) found strong reductions in population
growth in ﬂour beetle populations inbred due to small numbers; they
detected adverse effects at an F of only 0.1.
An example of a population that grew in size despite inbreeding is
provided by the northern elephant seal (see Box 8.2). Despite the bottleneck of 20–30 individuals, it has recovered to over 100000. The reasons
for this are two-fold. First, the decline in numbers was due to overhunting, which has been stopped by legislative protection (i.e. the environment has improved). Second, the inbreeding did not result in a
negative population growth rate.
The susceptibility to extinction of populations with different
growth rates (r), through inbreeding, will depend on the way in which
inbreeding affects them. Populations with lower growth rates will be
more susceptible to inbreeding depression than those with more rapid

Inbreeding depression does not
necessarily cause declines in
population size

303

304

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

growth, as relatively small reductions in r may produce negative growth
rates (Mills & Smouse 1994). Populations with major ﬂuctuations in size
(which will themselves increase levels of inbreeding) will also generally
be more susceptible to the effects of inbreeding.

Box 12.3

Impact of inbreeding on population viability

To illustrate the probable effects of inbreeding on population viability, we compare
growth over time in small populations – outbred, mildly inbred, moderately inbred
and highly inbred.
The effects of inbreeding on population growth can be illustrated using equations
of population growth from ecology (see Wilson & Bossert 1971 or any modern
ecology textbook). A small population of size N in a constant environment with a
large amount of available habitat is expected to show exponential growth. The rate
of growth in terms of increments of population size (dN) per increment of time (dt)
depends on the difference between the birth (b) and death rates (d), r, and the population size N, as follows:
dN/dt(bd)N rN
and the population size at time t, Nt , is
Nt N0 ert
We can consider the effects of inbreeding on population growth by considering a
non-inbred population with a growth rate r of 0.04. Inbreeding will reduce r. Using
the value of 25% decrease in total ﬁtness per 10% increase in F from Frankel & Soulé
(1981), the r for a mildly inbred population with an inbreeding coefﬁcient of 20%
would be 0.04 (12.5 0.2) 0.02 (i.e. a 50% decrease), while r for a moderately
inbred population (F 0.3) would be 0.01. Finally a highly inbred population with an
F of 0.5 would have a negative growth rate of 0.01.
Populations usually exist in a habitat with a limited carrying capacity. Such populations show logistic population growth (see below). The outbred and the mildly and
moderately inbred populations grow to the same carrying capacity K, i.e. they will
eventually have the same population sizes. Conversely the highly inbred population
declines towards extinction. An important implication is that populations exhibiting
inbreeding depression may have the same sizes (K) as related non-inbred populations.
However, inbred populations take different times to reach the carrying capacity.

RECOVERING FROM INBREEDING DEPRESSION

An important aspect of the different growth rates of outbred and mildly and moderately inbred populations is that they will take different times to recover from catastrophes. For example, consider populations with an initial size of 1⁄2K that are
subjected to a catastrophe resulting in a 90% reduction in population size. Such
impacts have been observed for many species in nature (Young 1994). The approximate times for the populations to recover to their original sizes (Nt 10 N0) can be
determined by rearranging the second equation, as follows:
Nt / N0 10ert
Taking natural logarithms and rearranging this yields:
tln (10) / r
By substituting for r, we obtain 57.6 years for the outbred population to recover its
original size, 115 years for mildly inbred population, and 230 years for the moderately inbred population. The highly inbred population (F 0.5) that is declining in
population size (r  0.01) will decline and eventually become extinct. While the
mildly and moderately inbred populations will eventually recover to their original size,
another catastrophe may strike them before they have done so.

Recovering from inbreeding depression
The remedy for inbreeding depression is to outcross the inbred population to another unrelated population (Falconer & Mackay 1996). Such
crosses can be made with an outbred population. In many cases of conservation concern no other outbred populations exists. If other, independent, inbred populations exist they will usually allow recovery of ﬁtness.
For example, if one population is inbred and ﬁxed for deleterious allele a
and another inbred population is ﬁxed for deleterious allele b, crosses
between the two will result in multiple heterozygotes (AaBb), and ﬁtness
will be restored, or even enhanced above the original non-inbred levels of
ﬁtness. This is termed heterosis, and applies to all loci ﬁxed for different
alleles in the two inbred populations. Fitness will be reduced in subsequent generations, as segregation of alleles produces homozygotes.
Outcrossing has frequently been used to help populations recover
from inbreeding depression, especially in laboratory and agricultural
species, and more recently in small, inbred populations of several
species of plants and animals. For example, Heschel & Paige (1995)
found that small, presumably inbred, plant populations increased in
ﬁtness when outcrossed (while large populations that were presumably not inbred showed no change in ﬁtness with outcrossing).
Similarly, Madsen et al. (1999) found reductions in the proportion of
abnormal offspring in adders when they outcrossed, and a subsequent
increase in the recruitment rate and the population size (Fig. 12.10a).
A similar increase in ﬁtness and numbers following introductions of
immigrants from larger populations was shown in the Illinois population of greater prairie chickens (Fig. 12.10b) and in small inbred populations of topminnow ﬁsh (Box 12.1). Partial recovery can be obtained

Inbreeding depression is reversed
by outcrossing

305

306

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Fig. 12.10 Recovery of
reproductive ﬁtness due to
introduction of immigrants into
small partially inbred populations
of (a) adders in Sweden (after
Madsen et al. 1999), and (b) greater
prairie chickens in Illinois –
translocations began in 1992 (after
Westemeier et al. 1998).

by introducing unrelated inbred immigrants into populations.
Introduction of a single immigrant into partially inbred populations
(F  0.5) of fruit ﬂies resulted in about a 50% recovery of reproductive
ﬁtness towards that in the outbred base population (Spielman &
Frankham 1992).

Fitness rebounds following bottlenecks
Reproductive ﬁtness usually
declines following severe
population bottlenecks, but may
recover (partially) due to natural
selection removing deleterious
alleles

When populations suffer severe bottlenecks they become inbred and
usually suffer inbreeding depression. If the population size recovers
rapidly, reproductive ﬁtness may recover partially through natural
selection. As a result of the bottleneck, some deleterious alleles are
ﬁxed, some are lost and most change in frequency. Those that are ﬁxed
cause a reduction in the mean ﬁtness of the population and this contribution remains relatively constant subsequently. Those that became
lost increase ﬁtness by a minuscule amount (as they were mostly heterozygous). Deleterious alleles that are increased in frequency due to the
bottleneck event will subsequently decrease in frequency due to natural
selection, especially if they have large effects. Thus ﬁtness may rebound
over time following a bottleneck.
Partial recovery of ﬁtness following severe bottlenecks has been
reported in house ﬂies, butterﬂies and fruit ﬂies (Bryant et al. 1990;
Saccheri et al. 1996; Fowler & Whitlock 1999). Typically it involves only
partial, rather than complete, recovery of ﬁtness. In fruit ﬂies, there was
28% reduction at generation 3 in the mean ﬁtness of populations due to
a single pair bottlenecks, and the depression was still 21% at generation
20. Further, the recovery may only occur in one environment; inbred
fruit ﬂy populations that had been artiﬁcially purged showed depressed
ﬁtness in a different stressful environment (Bijlsma et al. 1999).

FURTHER READING

Summary
1. Inbreeding results in a decline in reproductive ﬁtness (inbreeding depression), in essentially all well-studied naturally outbreeding
populations of animals and plants.
2. All components of reproductive ﬁtness are subject to inbreeding
depression.
3. Inbreeding depression is much greater for total ﬁtness than for
its components.
4. The expression of inbreeding depression is typically greater in
harsher environments than benign ones.
5. Inbreeding depression has a large stochastic element due to different contents of deleterious alleles in different species, families and
populations and to the chance element of Mendelian inheritance in
their probabilities of ﬁxation versus loss.
6. Inbreeding depression is due to the ﬁxation of partially recessive
deleterious or overdominant alleles.
7. The extent of inbreeding depression is 兺2pqdF. Thus, it depends
on the number of loci heterozygous for deleterious alleles and the
directional dominance for them, and is proportional to the amount of
inbreeding.
8. Inbreeding depression is measured by lethal equivalents, or as
the proportionate change in mean (δ) for a given level of inbreeding.
9. Deleterious alleles of large effect may be purged (reduced in frequency) from inbred populations, but mildly deleterious alleles are
likely to remain.
10. Inbreeding depression occurs in selﬁng species, but is generally
of a lesser magnitude than that found in naturally outbreeding
species.
11. Outcrossing reverses the effects of inbreeding.
FURTHER READING

Charlesworth & Charlesworth (1987, 1999) Excellent scholarly reviews of both
the theory and empirical issues relating to the impact of inbreeding and the
causes of inbreeding depression.
Crnokrak & Roff (1999) A review and meta-analysis of inbreeding depression in
populations in wild habitats.
Falconer & Mackay (1996) Introduction to Quantitative Genetics. Provides a clear
treatment of the theory of inbreeding, as well as experimental evidence
from domestic plants and animals.
Hedrick & Kalinowski (2000) A review on inbreeding depression and its importance in conservation biology.
Lacy (1997) Fine review on the importance and impacts of inbreeding in
mammals.
Lynch & Walsh (1998) Genetics and Analysis of Quantitative Traits. Chapter 10 has a
wide-ranging review of both theory and experimental evidence on inbreeding depression.

307

308

INBREEDING DEPRESSION

Ralls et al. (1988) Highly inﬂuential study on the effects of inbreeding depression for captive wildlife.
Roff (1997) Evolutionary Quantitative Genetics. Considers both the theory of
inbreeding and its impacts.
Thornhill (1993) The Natural History of Inbreeding and Outbreeding: Theoretical and
Empirical Perspectives. A collection of reviews on both the theoretical and
experimental issues relating to inbreeding; especially see Chapter 15 by Lacy
et al. Has a range of controversial chapters, so requires critical reading.
Wright (1977) Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, vol. 3. A scholarly review of
evidence on the impacts of inbreeding by one of the pioneers of the ﬁeld.
PROBLEMS

12.1 Inbreeding depression: What determines the level of inbreeding depression experienced by a population?
12.2 Inbreeding depression: What effect does inbreeding have on a
haploid organism?
12.3 Inbreeding depression: How much inbreeding depression in
survival is expected due to selﬁng for the following three loci, each
with allele frequencies of 0.9: 0.1 m?

(a) Survival % (partial dominant)
(b) Survival % (overdominant)
(c) Survival % (additive)

/

/m

m/m

90
80
90

89
90
80

70
70
70

12.4 Inbreeding depression δ: The juvenile survival rates of inbred
and outbred offspring in the pygmy hippopotamus were 45% and 75%,
respectively (see Fig. 11.1). What is the inbreeding depression as measured by δ?
12.5 Lethal equivalents: How many lethal equivalents are found in
Parma wallabies, given survival of individuals with inbreeding coefﬁcients F of 0, 0.625, 0.125, 0.25 and 0.375 are 80%, 68%, 59%, 43% and
31%; the regression equation relating juvenile survival (S) and inbreeding coefﬁcient (F ) is
ln S 0.221 2.52 F
(a) Lethal equivalents per haploid genome
(b) Lethal equivalents per diploid genome
12.6 Lethal equivalents, survival and inbreeding depression: For a
mammal with a typical number of lethal equivalents (3.14 per diploid
genome), what is the ratio of survival of inbred young to non-inbred
young for the progeny of brother–sister matings? What is the inbreeding depression?
12.7 Lethal equivalents, survival and inbreeding depression: For
the case in Example 12.2, determine the impact of selﬁng on inbreeding depression for survival with 5000 loci segregating for partially
recessive lethal alleles.

Chapter 13

Population fragmentation
The genetic impacts of population fragmentation depend critically
upon gene ﬂow among fragments. With restricted gene ﬂow,
fragmentation typically leads to greater inbreeding and loss of
genetic diversity within fragments. There is genetic differentiation
among fragments, and greater risks of extinction, in the long term,
than for a single population of the same total size

Terms:
FST,
F statistics,
metapopulation,
single large or several small (SLOSS),
source–sink,
Wahlund effect

Fragmentation of Atlantic forest in
São Paulo State, Brazil, from 82%
forest cover in 1500, to 3% in the
year 2000 (from Oedekoven 1980).

310

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

Habitat fragmentation
Habitat fragmentation is the
conversion of once-continuous
habitat into a patchwork with
reduction of total habitat area, and
isolation of different patches in a
landscape of now-inhospitable
terrain

Habitat fragmentation includes two processes, a reduction in total
habitat area and creation of separate isolated patches from a larger continuous distribution. These are evident for the Atlantic forest in São
Paulo State, Brazil (see chapter frontispiece), and similar examples
abound throughout the world. Human-induced habitat loss and fragmentation, through land clearing, forestry and damming of rivers, are
recognized as the primary causes of biodiversity loss (WCMC 1992).
Habitat fragmentation leads to overall reductions in population size
for most species, and to reduced migration (gene ﬂow) among patches.
Deleterious consequences of reduced population size on genetic diversity, inbreeding and extinction risk have been addressed in Chapters 2
and 10–12.
This chapter focuses on the genetic effects of population fragmentation, the separation of a population into partially or completely isolated fragments. We address the genetic impacts of individuals being
distributed in several fragments in comparison with a single population of the same total size. This is known as ‘Single Large or Several
Small’ (SLOSS).

Population fragmentation
The genetic consequences of
population fragmentation depend
critically upon gene ﬂow. With
restricted gene ﬂow,
fragmentation is usually highly
deleterious in the long term

The impacts of population fragmentation on genetic diversity, inbreeding, differentiation and extinction risk depend on the level of gene ﬂow
among fragments. These in turn depend on:
• Number of population fragments
• Distribution of population sizes in the fragments
• Geographic distribution or spatial pattern of populations
• Distance between fragments
• Dispersal ability of the species
• Migration rates between fragments
• Environment of the matrix among the fragments and its impact on
dispersal
• Time since fragmentation.
All of the issues we have previously discussed in this book, with respect
to reduced population size, come into play when populations are fragmented. In fragmented populations with reduced gene ﬂow, these
adverse effects are usually more severe than in a non-fragmented population of the same total size. Fragmentation often results in elevated
extinction risks.
The endangered red-cockaded woodpecker in the eastern USA illustrates many of the features and genetic problems associated with fragmentation of the habitat for a species with a once continuous
distribution (Box 13.1). Isolated and small woodpecker populations
show loss of genetic diversity compared to large populations.

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

Differentiation among populations in different patches is evident, with
nearby populations generally being more similar than more distant
ones. The small populations are expected to suffer from inbreeding
depression.

Box 13.1 Impact of habitat fragmentation on the
endangered red-cockaded woodpecker
metapopulation in southeastern USA (Stangel et
al. 1992; Kulhavy et al. 1995; Daniels et al. 2000)
The red-cockaded woodpecker was once common in the mature pine forests of the
southeast United States. It declined in numbers, primarily due to habitat loss, and was
placed on the US endangered species list in 1970. It now survives in scattered and
isolated sites within the US southeast (see map from James 1995). A species recovery plan is being implemented to manage the species.

There is little migration among isolated sites. Populations would therefore be
expected to diverge genetically from each other, and lose genetic diversity, with
smaller populations showing the greatest loss of genetic diversity and the most divergence, as observed below (after Meffe & Carroll 1997).

311

312

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

Moderate divergences in allele frequencies exist among woodpecker populations.
Differentiation, measured as FST (a value of zero indicates no differentiation, and 1.0
indicates complete isolation; described later in this chapter), is 0.14 based on allozyme data, and 0.19 based on RAPD data. Both data sets show a general tendency
for closer genetic similarity among geographically proximate populations – shown in
the cluster analysis of genetic distances among 14 populations in the margin (after
Haig & Avise 1996).
Computer simulations indicate that the smallest woodpecker populations are
likely to suffer from inbreeding depression in the near future (Daniels et al. 2000).
The distribution and density of the woodpeckers are restricted by their requirement for old-growth forest providing nest holes. Steps have been taken to preserve
old-growth forest for the woodpeckers. However, hurricanes damage old-growth
forest and kill birds. In 1989 Hurricane Hugo destroyed 87% of the active woodpecker nesting trees in the Francis Marion National Forest in South Carolina, previously the second largest population, and killed 63% of the birds. This population has
recovered by 33% by 1992, due mainly to the installation of artiﬁcial cavities for
nesting.
In response to the threats posed by fragmentation, management of the woodpeckers involves habitat protection, improvement of habitat suitability by constructing artiﬁcial nest holes, reintroductions into suitable habitat where populations
become extinct, and augmentation of small populations to minimize inbreeding and
loss of genetic diversity. Recovery guidelines specify an effective size of 500 for population viability for each major fragment. This is one of the most extensive management programs for a fragmented population anywhere in the world.

This chapter begins by examining alternative population structures,
followed by considering the genetic impacts of completely isolated fragments (the most extreme case). We then consider the impact of migration and gene ﬂow, means for measuring genetic divergence and
inferring rates of gene ﬂow (F statistics) and ﬁnally the genetic impacts
of different population structures.

Population structure
The impact of population
fragmentation depends on the
details of the resulting population
structure

The genetic impacts of population fragmentation may range from insigniﬁcant to severe, depending upon the details of the resulting population structures and migration patterns among fragments. Several
potential fragmented population structures can be distinguished:
• Totally isolated population fragments with no gene ﬂow (‘islands’)
• Effectively single large – fragments where gene ﬂow is sufﬁcient to
result effectively in a single large population
• Island models where migration is equal among equally sized islands
• Linear stepping-stone models where only neighbouring populations
exchange migrants (as in riparian habitat along rivers)

POPULATION STRUCTURE

Fig. 13.1 Five different fragmented population structures: (a) a mainland–island (or
source–sink) situation where the ‘mainland’ (source) provides all the input to the island
(sink) populations, (b) an island model where migration is equal among equal sized islands,
(c) a linear stepping-stone model where only neighbouring populations exchange
migrants, (d) a two-dimensional stepping-stone model where neighbouring populations
exchange migrants (all after Hedrick 1983), and (e) a metapopulation (after Hanski &
Gilpin 1997).

• Two-dimensional stepping-stone models where only surrounding
populations exchange migrants
• Mainland–island or source–sink models, and
• Metapopulations.
The last ﬁve cases are illustrated in Fig. 13.1.
Metapopulations differ from the other structures in that there are
regular extinction and recolonization events, while no extinction is
assumed in the simpler forms of the other structures. The endangered
Glanville fritillary butterﬂy population in Finland (Box 2.2) provides a
good example. There are about 1600 suitable meadows for the butterﬂy,
320–524 being occupied in 1993–96. The population turnover rate is
high, with an average of 200 extinctions and 114 colonizations per year.
There has been a recent shift towards considering fragmented populations as metapopulations, as extinctions of fragments are an everpresent risk (Hanski & Gilpin 1997). In general, the genetic
consequences of a metapopulation structure are more deleterious than
for other population structures (apart from completely isolated fragments), as described below.
Extensive population genetic theory has been developed to model
genetic processes within different kinds of structures. We use this
theory to describe how fragmentation impacts on issues of conservation concern.

313

314

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

Completely isolated population fragments
Fragments that are completely
isolated suffer increased
inbreeding, loss of genetic diversity
and extinction risk, compared to a
single large population of the same
total size

Fig. 13.2 The genetic
consequences of a single large
population (SL) versus several small
(SS) completely isolated population
fragments of initially the same total
size (SLOSS) over different time
frames. (1) A1–A4 represent four
alleles initially present in the
population. In the short term,
without extinctions, the several
small populations (2) are expected
to go to ﬁxation more rapidly, but
to retain greater overall genetic
diversity than the single large
population (3). The chances are
greater that an allele will be totally
lost from the large population, than
from all small populations
combined. However, the SS
populations will each be more
inbred than the SL population.
In the longer term, when
extinctions of small, but not large
populations occur, the sum of the
small surviving populations (4) will
retain less genetic diversity than
the single large population (5). A
metapopulation with extinctions
and recolonizations is similar to
(4).

Completely isolated population fragments, lacking gene ﬂow, are the
most severe form of fragmentation, and the easiest to understand.
There is no gene ﬂow among such population fragments. As each population fragment has a smaller population size than a single, large,
unfragmented population, this isolation has signiﬁcant deleterious
effects on inbreeding, loss of genetic diversity and extinction risk. This
form of fragmentation has many parallels with oceanic island populations.
In Fig. 13.2 four single small isolated fragments (SS) are compared to
a single large population (SL) of the same initial total size. The large population (1) possesses four alleles, A1–A4. In the short term the four SS
populations (2) rapidly become homozygous and lose ﬁtness through
inbreeding depression. Loss of genetic diversity is slower in the single
large population (3) – it only loses allele A4. However, ﬁxation in the SS
populations is at random, so that overall all four alleles are retained,
while the SL population has lost the A4 allele. Thus, as long as there are

COMPLETELY ISOLATED POPULATION FRAGMENTS

no extinctions of SS populations, they retain greater overall allelic
diversity than the SL population (Varvio et al. 1986; Lande 1995b). This
expectation has been veriﬁed in experiments with fruit ﬂies (Margan et
al. 1998).
However, in the long term, extinction rates will be greater in smaller
than in larger population fragments due to environmental and demographic stochasticity, catastrophes (Chapter 20) and genetic factors.
With extinction of some SS populations (4), the SL population retains
more genetic diversity and has higher reproductive ﬁtness than all the
SS populations combined (now only two populations). We later derive
many of these predictions algebraically.

Isolated population fragments as ‘islands’
Since fragmentation creates ‘islands’ from once-continuous habitat, its
effects parallel those in oceanic island populations. As we have
described earlier, island populations are often inbred, have lower
genetic diversity and elevated extinction risks compared to mainland
populations (Chapter 2).
For example, island populations of black-footed rock wallabies in
Western Australia possess fewer microsatellite alleles per locus than
mainland populations – most island populations are ﬁxed at each locus
(Table 13.1). Further, the island populations differ in the alleles they
contain, in a more or less random manner. The one population whose
ﬁtness has been examined (Barrow Island – BI), exhibits inbreeding
depression, when compared with mainland populations (Box 2.3).
While these island populations have been isolated for thousands of
years, loss of genetic diversity can occur on a much shorter time-scale.
Loss of genetic diversity is already evident in three species of mammals
on islands created, in 1987, by damming a river in Thailand (Srikwan &
Woodruff 2000).

Isolated population fragments
share many of the features found
in island populations

Consequences of fragmentation in an idealized
population
We begin by considering an idealized fragmented population (Fig. 13.3)
and evaluating the impacts of totally isolated populations (all of equal
sizes) on (a) diversity in allele and genotype frequencies among fragmented populations and (b) divergence of these frequencies over time.
Later the assumption of equal size and no migration will be relaxed. In
dealing with an idealized population, we are assuming that allelic variation is selectively neutral.
When a population is subdivided, individual alleles and genotypes
are distributed among fragments. Population fragments will be genetically differentiated from the very beginning. It is useful to consider fragmentation as occurring in two steps:

Deleterious genetic impacts within
isolated fragments accumulate
with time and become increasingly
deleterious with smaller fragments

315

316

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

Table 13.1 Loss of genetic diversity in populations fragmented on islands
by post-glacial sea level rises 8000–15000 years ago. Alleles present () and
absent () at four microsatellite loci in populations of black-footed rock
wallabies on the mainland of Australia and on six offshore islands.
Island populations contain many fewer alleles than mainland populations, but they are
usually a sub-set of alleles found on the mainland. Different island populations often
contain different alleles, as expected due to genetic drift

Islands
Locus

Allele

Mainland

BI

SI

PI

MI

WiI

WeI

Pa297

102
106
118
120
124
128
130
136
































































Pa385

157
159
161
163
165
173


















































Pa593

105
113
123
125
127
129
131
133
135
137














































































Me2

216
218
220
222
224
230


















































Source: Eldridge et al. (1999).

COMPLETELY ISOLATED POPULATION FRAGMENTS

Fig. 13.3 Model of fragmentation
in an idealized population. The base
population is inﬁnite, the
populations founded from it are of
equal size, and there is no
migration among populations. Each
of the individual fragmented
populations is itself an idealized
population (after Falconer &
Mackay 1996).

1. Fragmentation resulting in an initial genetic sub-division of a
population, and
2. Cumulative diversiﬁcation, through genetic drift and inbreeding
over time in each of the population fragments.

Distribution of alleles among fragments
When a population is fragmented, different fragments will have different initial allele frequencies just by chance. The extent of diversiﬁcation
in allele frequencies can be measured as variances in allele frequencies
(Box 5.2). The variance due to the initial fragmentation can be predicted
for neutral alleles from the binomial sampling variance. Consider a
single locus with two alleles, A1 and A2, at frequencies of p and q in the
base population. For each fragment, we sample N individuals (2N gene
copies) from the base population. If a large number of samples of size 2N
are taken, the resulting allele frequencies across all fragments will be
unchanged. The variance in the frequencies of A1 among the fragments,
2
, is
p
2
pq/2N
p

(13.1)

Differentiation in allele frequencies
among fragmented populations is
greater for small than for large
fragments

317

318

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

Thus there will be greater variance, and larger differentiation of allele
frequencies, among small fragments than among large fragments
(Example 13.1). Further, variance is greatest when initial allele frequencies are equal (0.5), as pq is at a maximum with these frequencies.
As we shall see below, the degree of dispersion is also related to loss
of heterozygosity and to the level of inbreeding.

Example 13.1 Variance in allele frequencies in different sized
population fragments
Consider a locus with initial allele frequencies of 0.6 and 0.4. In fragments with sizes of 100, the variance in allele frequencies among fragments is (Equation 13.1):
2
pq/2N0.60.4/(2 100)0.0012
p

Fragments of size 10 have a variance in allele frequency of:
2
pq/2N0.60.4/(2 10) 0.012
p

Thus, variance in allele frequencies after sampling to form fragments
is directly proportional to sample size.

Distribution of heterozygosities among fragments
Heterozygosity in a fragmented
population will be lower than in
the original continuous population
and will vary among fragments

Fragmented populations have, on average, reduced heterozygosity and
increased variance in heterozygosity across loci within populations.
The average reduction in heterozygosity due to sampling from the base
population is 1/(2N) (Equation 8.3). This initial reduction is minor unless
the population fragments are very small (e.g. less than 10). This effect
was illustrated in Table 8.2 for population fragments each founded with
a single pair of parents.

Degree of fragmentation
The larger the number of
population fragments for the same
total size, the greater becomes the
rate of inbreeding and loss of
genetic diversity over time within
fragments

With increasing fragmentation, population size within each population fragment becomes smaller and differentiation among isolated
populations will be greater. Inbreeding and inbreeding depression will
be more rapid within smaller fragments, as will genetic drift and loss of
genetic diversity. As predicted, reproductive ﬁtness was lower in smaller
populations than in larger ones (Woodworth 1996; Bryant et al. 1999).
For a population of total size N, separated into f totally isolated,
equal sized fragments, the size of each fragment is N/ f. Each of the fragments will become inbred and lose genetic diversity at a rate dependent
upon N/f. A single population of the same total size will become inbred
and lose genetic diversity at a slower rate dependent upon its size, N. For
example, the proportion of initial heterozygosity retained after t generations in each of the small SS fragments is

COMPLETELY ISOLATED POPULATION FRAGMENTS

Ht / H0 SS [1 1/(2N/f )]t ⬃ etf / 2N
While for the single large (SL) population of the same total size N, the
proportion of initial genetic diversity retained is
Ht / H0 SL [1 1/(2N)]t ⬃ et / 2N
The ratio of these proportions for SS and SL (Ht / H0 SS/SL) is
Ht / H0 SS/SL ⬃ (et/2N)1f

(13.2)

If we take natural logarithms
ln [Ht / H0 SS/SL] (1 f ) t/2N

(13.3)

Thus, the proportional retention of heterozygosity in several small population fragments, compared to a single large population, declines with
the number of fragments and increases with generations. The rate of
decline is greater with smaller than larger total population size.
For a given aggregate population size, inbreeding and the loss of
genetic diversity within population fragments increase with the
number of (equally sized) fragments. Consider, for example, a single
population with a constant size of size 500 individuals per generation.
Over 50 generations, a single population of size 500 loses 5% of its initial
heterozygosity, while two populations of size 250 each lose 10%, ﬁve
populations of size 100 each lose 22%, ten populations of size 50 each
lose 39% and twenty populations of size 25 each lose 64% of their initial
genetic diversity.
Such loss of genetic diversity has been documented in many small
isolated population fragments, including black-footed rock wallabies
(Table 13.1), greater prairie chickens (Box 10.1), adders (Box 12.2),
Glanville fritillary butterﬂies (Box 2.2) and grassland daisies (Box 10.2).
Inbreeding depression has also been documented in these cases and in
isolated populations of royal catchﬂy and scarlet gilia plants (Menges
1991; Heschel & Paige 1995).

Divergence in allele frequencies over time
Loci in small isolated population fragments will differentiate at
random due to genetic drift, even if they began with identical genetic
compositions. This has two important conservation consequences.
First, it indicates that fragmentation causes genetic differences among
otherwise similar populations. Second, the degree of differentiation
provides a means for inferring levels of gene ﬂow.
In an idealized fragmented population we are considering multiple
populations of the same size, each undergoing genetic drift independently. A particular allele may increase in frequency in some fragments
and decrease in others. Even fragments that are initially identical will
differentiate genetically over time.
Dispersion in allele frequencies among small isolated fruit ﬂy populations over generations is illustrated in Fig. 13.4. All populations began

Allele frequencies within
fragments drift randomly, resulting
in further diversiﬁcation in
frequencies among fragments over
time

319

320

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

Fig. 13.4 Divergence in allele frequencies over time due to population fragmentation in
fruit ﬂies. The frequency distribution for the bw75 allele is shown over 19 generations in
105 replicate populations maintained with 16 parents per generation. All populations
began with initial frequencies of 0.5 (after Buri 1956).

with frequencies of 0.5 for each allele. Eventually many populations
reached ﬁxation. Dispersion in allele frequencies among populations is
also evident in red-cockaded woodpeckers (Box 13.1) and black-footed
rock wallabies (Table 13.1).
Diversiﬁcation in allelic frequencies continues, generation by generation, until eventually, all populations are ﬁxed (p1, or 0). The effects
of continual isolation can be predicted using binomial sampling theory,
by extending Equation 13.1 over multiple generations. The expected variance in allele frequencies among fragments after t generations is:
2
p0q0
p

{1[1 1/(2N)]t}

(13.4)

where p0 and q0 are the initial allele frequencies and the fragment size
(N) is constant over time.
From this equation, we predict that the variance in allele frequencies will
• increase with generations, and
• increase faster in small than in large populations.
These predictions are illustrated numerically in Example 13.2. The theoretical distributions of p expected after different numbers of generations are shown for two different initial values of p in Fig. 13.5. With

COMPLETELY ISOLATED POPULATION FRAGMENTS

time, the distributions become ﬂattened as allele frequencies disperse,
resulting in an essentially uniform distribution after 2N generations
(excluding the ﬁxed populations). The observed distribution for fruit ﬂy
populations (Fig. 13.4) is similar to that expected. When the number of
generations is very large and all populations have become ﬁxed, the variance is p0q0.

Example 13.2 Increase in variance of allele frequencies with time
Buri’s classic fruit ﬂy experiment (Fig. 13.4) began with pq 0.5 and
each of the populations had 16 parents per generation. The expected
variances in allele frequencies can be computed using Equation 13.4.
After the ﬁrst generation
2
pq
p

{1 [11/(2N)]t}0.50.5 {1 [1 1 / (216)]1}
0.0078

After two generations
2
pq
p

{1 [11/(2N)]t}0.50.5 [1(31/32)2] 0. 015

and after 19 generations
2
pq
p

{1 [11/(2N)]t}0.50.5 [1(31/32)19] 0.113

The variance in allele frequencies increases progressively and reaches
its maximum value of pq0.25 when all populations have become
ﬁxed.
The observed variance in this fruit ﬂy experiment increased more
rapidly than predicted, as the effective population size was less than
the 16 parents used.

Fig. 13.5 Predicted changes in
allele frequency distributions with
generations among fragmented
populations, after different
numbers of generations (t),
expressed in terms of the
population size of the fragments
(N). In the left-hand ﬁgure p0 0.5,
and in the right p0 0.1.
Populations are excluded from the
ﬁgure after they have become
ﬁxed. The horizontal axis is the
allele frequency (p) in any line. The
vertical axis is the probability,
scaled to make the area under each
curve equal to the proportion of
unﬁxed lines (after Falconer &
Mackay 1996).

321

322

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

Divergence and loss of heterozygosity
Genetic drift among fragmented
populations reduces overall
heterozygosity across all
fragments to below that expected
for Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
for the total population

As heterozygosity is lost within fragments and allele frequencies drift
among fragments, there is a deﬁciency of heterozygotes when compared to Hardy–Weinberg expectations for the entire population. Loss
of heterozygosity in fragmented populations can be treated as either a
drift, or an inbreeding process (Table 13.2).
Under drift, the reduction in heterozygosity is equal to twice the variance in allele frequency (Falconer & Mackay 1996). When fragmentation is treated in terms of inbreeding, heterozygosity is reduced in
proportion to the inbreeding level (Equation 11.1). Example 13.3 illustrates the equivalence of the inbreeding and drift approaches.

Table 13.2 Genotype frequencies in the total population (combination of
all population fragments) treated as genetic drift, or inbreeding processes
(p0 and q0 are allele frequencies before fragmentation). Note that 2p  Fp0q0.

Quantitative characters exhibit
diversiﬁcation in population
means due to genetic drift

Frequencies in the total
population after fragmentation

Genotype

Frequency
before
fragmentation

Genetic drift

Inbreeding

A1A1
A1A2
A2A2

p02
2p0q0
q02

p02  p2
2p0q0 2
q02  p2

p02 Fp0q0
2p0q0 (1F)
q02 Fp0q0

2
p

Reduction in heterozygosity, averaged over all population fragments, can be illustrated using a simple numerical example. Imagine a
number of fragments, each founded with initial frequencies p  q 
0.5. Heterozygosity is maximal (2pq  0.5) at the outset. However, as
drift occurs in each fragment, away from p  q  0.5, then 2pq is inevitably reduced (e.g. if p  0.3, q  0.7 in a fragment, then 2pq  0.42). If
there are large numbers of fragments, then p and q will still remain
close to 0.5 in the total population of fragments, but average heterozygosity will be reduced. This is referred to as the Wahlund effect after its
discoverer.
Lower than expected heterozygosity can be used to diagnose populations that are genetically fragmented. For example, the endangered
spreading avens plant has a heterozygosity of 0.052, averaged across ﬁve
populations in the eastern USA, but an expected heterozygosity of 0.098
(Hamrick & Godt 1996). Analyses using F statistics (see later) indicate
that the deﬁciency of heterozygotes is due to a combination of population fragmentation and inbreeding within populations.
So far, we have only considered the effect of fragmentation on single
loci. However, quantitative characters also exhibit diversiﬁcation due to
random genetic drift (Fig. 13.6). Diversiﬁcation among fragments in

COMPLETELY ISOLATED POPULATION FRAGMENTS

Example 13.3 Reduced heterozygosity in fragmented populations
For a locus with two alleles at frequencies of 0.7 and 0.3, the expected
Hardy–Weinberg heterozygosity under random mating He is 2 0.7
0.30.42. However for a population with an inbreeding coefﬁcient F
of 0.64, this is reduced to
HF 2 0.70.3(1 0.64)0.15
The reduction in heterozygosity of (0.420.15) / 0.42 64% is directly
proportional to the inbreeding coefﬁcient.
If a group of fragmented populations, all with effective sizes 10 per
generation, were isolated from each other for 20 generations (F 
0.64), the expected variance in allele frequency would be
2
0.70.3
p

{1 [1 1 / (210)]20}0.135

These populations would be expected to have an overall heterozygosity of
Hfrag 2p0q0 2

2
p

0.42 20.135 0.15

Again the heterozygosity is reduced below Hardy–Weinberg random
mating expectations. Consideration of fragmentation as either an
inbreeding or a drift process yields identical answers.

phenotype mean increases with generations just like allele frequencies.
Since we cannot distinguish the individual loci and follow the frequencies of their alleles, changes in additive genetic variances are measured.
Additive genetic variation (VA) among fragments increases and that
within populations decreases. For additive loci (no dominance) the
genetic variance among populations increases to 2FVA, whilst the
genetic variance within populations decreases to VA (1F) (Falconer &
Mackay 1996). With dominance the situation is more complex.
However, the genetic variation among populations increases with F,

Fig. 13.6 Random genetic drift
for abdominal bristle number in
fruit ﬂies (after Falconer & Mackay
1996, based on Rasmuson). The
ﬁgure shows the mean bristle
number in 10 populations, all
founded from the same base
population, and reproduced from a
single pair of parents in each
generation. Means drift over time for
individual populations and divergence
among population means generally
increases with time.

323

324

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

while the variation within populations may increase initially with F
before declining to zero at high values of F.
Since quantitative characters reﬂect the effects of many loci, it is
important to consider the effects of fragmentation across loci. Each
individual locus undergoes drift independently. Some attain ﬁxation,
while others remain polymorphic. The combined effect across all loci in
the genome will closely reﬂect the average effects we deﬁned above
(Tables 13.2 and 13.3), i.e. an overall reduction in heterozygosity.
However, replicate fragments from the same initial population will
have diverse genetic constitutions as they will have different alleles
ﬁxed at loci, and different loci still polymorphic.

Measuring population fragmentation: F statistics
The degree of differentiation
among fragments can be
described by partitioning the
overall inbreeding into
components within and among
populations (F statistics)

Inbreeding resulting from population fragmentation can be used to
measure the degree of differentiation that has occurred among population fragments. Differentiation among fragments or sub-populations is
directly related to the inbreeding coefﬁcients within and among populations (Table 13.2). Sewall Wright used inbreeding coefﬁcients to
describe the distribution of genetic diversity within and among population fragments. He partitioned inbreeding of individuals (I) in the total
(T) population (FIT) into that due to (Wright 1969):
• Inbreeding of individuals relative to their sub-population (S) or fragment, FIS, and
• Inbreeding due to differentiation among sub-populations, relative
to the total population, FST.
FIS is the probability that two alleles in an individual are identical by
descent. It is inbreeding coefﬁcient, F (Chapter 11), averaged across all
individuals from all population fragments.
FST, the ﬁxation index (sometimes referred to as GST), is the effect of
the population sub-division on inbreeding. It is the probability that two
alleles drawn randomly from a population fragment (either from different individuals, or from the same individual) are identical by descent.
With high rates of gene ﬂow among fragments, this probability is low.
With low rates of gene ﬂow among fragments, populations diverge and
become inbred, and FST increases.
FIT, FIS and FST are referred to as F statistics (Wright 1969). The
relationship between these quantities is given below:
FIT FIS FST (FIS)(FST)

(13.5)

Since we wish to use FST to measure population differentiation, we
rearrange Equation 13.5 to obtain
FST (FIT FIS) / (1FIS)

(13.6)

The F statistics can be calculated using the relationship between
heterozygosity and inbreeding: F 1(Ht /H0) (Equation 11.7). This
allows F statistics to be determined from genetic markers using the following equations (Nei 1987):

MEASURING POPULATION FRAGMENTATION: F STATISTICS

FIS 1 (HI / HS)

(13.7)

FST 1 (HS / HT)

(13.8)

FIT 1 (HI / HT)

(13.9)

where HI is the observed heterozygosity averaged across all population
fragments, HS is the expected heterozygosity averaged across all population fragments, and HT is the expected heterozygosity for the total population (equivalent to He). FST ranges from 0 (no differentiation between
fragments) to 1 (ﬁxation of different alleles in fragments).
The application of F statistics is illustrated using a hypothetical
example in Table 13.3. Case (a) shows two population fragments with
identical allele frequencies, but with inbreeding in fragment 2. FIS is
therefore greater than zero. When allelic frequencies are very similar
in different fragments, as would be the case when migration is high, or

Table 13.3

A hypothetical example demonstrating calculation of F statistics from genotype data

Genotypes
Fragment

A1A1 A1A2 A2A2

Allele
frequency

F

He
(2pq)

(a) FIS  0.3; FST  0; FIT  0.3
1

0.25

0.5

0.25

2

0.4

0.2

0.4

0

0.5

0.6

0.5

p 0.5
q0.5

HI 0.35

Combined

p 0.5
q0.5
p0.5
q0.5

HS 0.5
HT 0.5

(b) FIS  0; FST  0.099; FIT  0.099
1

0.25

0.5

0.25

2

0.04

0.32

0.64

HI 0.41

Combined

p 0.5
q0.5
p0.2
q0.8

0

0.5

0

0.32

p 0.35
q0.65

HS 0.41
HT 0.455

(c) FIS  0.244; FST  0.099; FIT  0.319
1

0.25

0.5

0.25

2

0.14

0.12

0.74

Combined

HI 0.31

p0.5
q0.5
p 0.2
q0.8
p 0.35
q0.65

0

0.5

0.625 0.32
HS 0.41
HT 0.455

325

326

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

the populations have only recently fragmented, then divergence is low
and HS ⬃ HT, and FST ⬃ 0. In (b) there is no inbreeding within either population fragment. The observed heterozygosity is equal to the expected
heterozygosity (HI HS), and FIS 0. However, the population fragments
have different allele frequencies, as will occur with severely restricted
gene ﬂow. HT exceeds HS, and FST 0. In (c) there is both divergence in
allele frequencies and inbreeding, FIS and FST are greater than zero and
the total inbreeding, FIT, reﬂects the effect of both (Equation 13.5).
FST can be estimated using allozyme heterozygosity data, but is
less suitable for use with microsatellite data with many alleles,
where the related measure RST is often considered more suitable
(Slatkin 1995).
Example 13.4 illustrates the calculation of the F statistics based on
heterozygosities for the endangered Paciﬁc yew in western North
America. This species exhibits inbreeding within populations (FIS 0)
and differentiation among populations (FST 0).

Example 13.4 Computation of F statistics for the rare Paciﬁc yew
This example is based on genotype frequencies and heterozygosities
for 21 allozyme loci in nine Canadian populations (El-Kassaby &
Yanchuk 1994). Average observed heterozygosity (HI) across the nine
populations was 0.085, while the average expected heterozygosity for
these populations (HS) was 0.166. Consequently, inbreeding within
populations FIS is
FIS 1 (HI / HS) 1(0.085/0.166)0.49
This is a high level of inbreeding, but it is not due to selﬁng as the
species is dioecious. It is probably due to clustering of relatives (offspring establishing close to parents) and clumping of individuals
from bird and rodent seed caches. The expected heterozygosity for the
total nine populations (HT) was 0.18, so inbreeding due to population
differentiation (FST) is
FST 1 (HS / HT) 1(0.166/0.180)0.078
This indicates only a modest degree of population differentiation.
The total inbreeding due to both inbreeding within populations and
differentiation among them (FIT) is
FIT 1 (HI / HT) 1(0.085/0.18)0.53

FST increases with time in
fragmented population at a rate
dependent on population size

Since FST values measure population divergence, they are expected
to increase over time in the absence of migration. Smaller populations
should diverge more rapidly than larger populations (Fig. 13.7).
Typically, an FST above about 0.15 is considered to be an indication of signiﬁcant differentiation among fragments.

GENE FLOW AMONG POPULATION FRAGMENTS

Fig. 13.7 Increase in FST with
generations in isolated fragments
with different population sizes.

Fragmentation in non-idealized populations
In real populations, the size of the population fragments may differ,
there may be different rates of migration among fragments, fragments
may have been separated at different times, the individual populations
may not have idealized structures, and there may be impacts of natural
selection. For example, the Indian rhinoceros population is fragmented
into eight groups in widely separated geographic locations with population sizes ranging from 1300 down to 5 (Box 14.1).
Most populations have Ne N, often by substantial proportions
(Chapter 10). The impacts of fragmentation on genetic divergence,
inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity will therefore usually be greater
than expected from the census population size. If effective population
sizes in different fragments vary, then the fragments will become
inbred and lose genetic variation at different rates, with the smallest
populations being most affected. The interactions between these
factors can be complex and their effects difﬁcult to predict using theory
alone. Computer simulations are often used to explore the genetic
implications of fragmentation in real populations.
The theory we have just explored is based on selective neutrality of
alleles. If alleles are subject to balancing selection, then the rate of diversiﬁcation will be lower than predicted. If selection differs among
patches, such that one allele is favoured in some patches and detrimental in others, then the rate of diversiﬁcation may be greater than predicted. However, if populations are small and selection is weak, then
alleles will be effectively neutral (Chapters 8 and 9).

For non-idealized populations, the
effective population size Ne is
substituted for N in the
appropriate equations

Gene ﬂow among population fragments
So far we have ignored migration in dealing with fragmented populations. Many populations have some migration among fragments, but
less than in the previous continuous population. Migration reduces the

Gene ﬂow reduces the genetic
effects of population
fragmentation

327

328

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

A single migrant per generation is
considered sufﬁcient to prevent
the complete differentiation of
idealized populations, irrespective
of their size

impact of fragmentation by an extent dependent on the rate of gene
ﬂow. With sufﬁcient migration a fragmented population will behave
just like a single large population of the same total size.
Sewall Wright obtained the surprising result that a single migrant
per generation among idealized populations was sufﬁcient to prevent
complete differentiation (and ﬁxation) (Wright 1969). Initially we consider an ‘island model’ where migration rates are equal among identically sized population fragments (other, more realistic, situations are
examined later). Figure 13.8 illustrates the theoretical equilibrium distributions of allele frequencies across population fragments for different migration rates. The migration rate m is the proportion of a
population derived from migrants per generation (Chapter 7). Thus Nm
is the number of migrants per generation. Populations with migration
rates of more than one migrant per generation (Nm 2 and 4) exhibit no
ﬁxations, while those with less than one migrant per generation (Nm 
1/2 and 1/4) differentiate to the extent that some populations are ﬁxed
for alternative alleles.
These results are independent of population size. One migrant has
as much impact on the equilibrium in a large population as in a small
population. This appears paradoxical until it is recognized that
although only one migrant is involved, the migration rate (m) is proportionally much higher in smaller than in larger populations. The higher
migration rates in smaller populations counteract their greater loss of
variation due to drift.

Fig. 13.8 Distribution of allele
frequencies in ﬁnite populations of
size N with different levels of
migration (m) among them (after
Wright 1940). Populations with one
or more migrants per generation do
not differentiate completely (no
populations become ﬁxed), while
populations with lower migration rates
differentiate with a proportion of
populations reaching temporary
ﬁxation.

In real (non-ideal) populations,
more than one migrant per
generation is required to prevent
ﬁxation in population fragments

The conclusions above assume that migrants and residents are
equally likely to successfully produce offspring, and that all population
fragments have idealized structures, apart from the occurrence of
migration. These assumptions are unlikely to be realistic. More than
one migrant per generation may therefore be required. Lacy (1987) suggested around 5 migrants per generation to prevent differentiation,
while Mills & Allendorf (1996) suggested 1–10 migrants per generation
was more realistic in practice. Vucetich & Waite (2000) concluded that

MEASURING GENE FLOW

more than 10 immigrants were required to compensate for increased
diversiﬁcation due to typical ﬂuctuations in population size.

Migration and inbreeding
Inbreeding accumulates over generations in completely isolated population fragments. This can be substantially reduced by introduction of
individuals from other fragments (Chapter 12). This occurs even when
the immigrants are themselves inbred, as long as they come from genetically distinct populations.

Inbreeding is reduced by migration
among population fragments

Equilibrium between migration and inbreeding
We have previously established that small population size increases
divergence, while migration reduces divergence among populations.
With constant population sizes and migration rates, these forces reach
an equilibrium where the reduction in divergence due to migration balances the increase due to drift. This equilibrium can be measured using
FST. Equilibrium inbreeding is related to the effective population size
and the migration rate (m) in such a population (Wright 1969) as:
FST 1/(4 Nem 1)

Inbreeding in population
fragments depends on the
effective population size and the
migration rate

(13.10)

This equation applies when m is small. Figure 13.9 illustrates the relationship between the number of migrants per generation (Nem) and the
inbreeding coefﬁcient. With one migrant per generation, FST 1/(41)
0.2. Conversely, the inbreeding coefﬁcient rises rapidly with less than
one migrant per generation, and reaches 1.0 (complete divergence – ﬁxation of populations) when there is no migration.
The deleterious effects of inbreeding on reproductive ﬁtness and
extinction risk are expected to be largely alleviated in populations with
one or more migrants per generation (Fig. 13.8). Experimental studies
support this prediction. Populations of the annual canola plant maintained at sizes of ﬁve individuals per generation for ﬁve generations,
with 0, 1 and 2.5 migrants per generation had inbreeding coefﬁcients of
Fig. 13.9 Relationship between
inbreeding coefﬁcient and the
number of migrants per generation
(Nem) for an island model at
equilibrium between drift and
migration.

329

330

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

0.33, 0.08 and 0, respectively, and average seed numbers per plant of 35,
75 and 79 (Newman 1995). Related results were obtained by Bryant et al.
(1999) in house ﬂies. A single migrant per generation reduced extinction rates and ﬁtness declines.

Measuring gene ﬂow
Gene ﬂow can be estimated from
the degree of genetic
differentiation among populations

Migration rates are notoriously difﬁcult to measure by direct tracking
of individuals, pollen, etc. Further, immigrants may not breed in their
new habitat. Consequently gene ﬂow, rather than migration rate, needs
to be estimated.
Gene ﬂow can be inferred from patterns of differentiation among
populations by calculating F statistics. FST is related to population size
and migration rate by Equation 13.10. This is an approximation based
on the island model (Fig. 13.1). Related expressions have been derived for
other models of migration (see Neigel 1996).
Equation 13.10 can be rearranged and used to estimate the migration rate. For example, for the Paciﬁc yew
Nm[1 / FST 1] / 4[1 / 0.078 1] / 42.96
On average about 3 migrants per generation are entering Paciﬁc yew
populations. This value reﬂects historical evolutionary rates of gene
ﬂow in equilibrium circumstances, so it may not reﬂect current gene
ﬂow (Steinberg & Jordan 1998).
While populations often do not strictly adhere to the details of the
island model, FST is widely used to measure restrictions in gene ﬂow. The
exact estimates of migration rates obtained from this equation are not
necessarily reliable, but they do indicate the relative rates of gene ﬂow
that populations would have if they adhered to the island population
structure. Other means for inferring rates of migration and gene ﬂow
are discussed in Chapter 19.

Dispersal and gene ﬂow
Gene ﬂow among fragmented
populations is related to dispersal
ability

Since differentiation among populations is dependent on levels of gene
ﬂow, we would expect this to be related to the dispersal abilities of
species and the degree of isolation among populations. Thus, the degree
of genetic differentiation among populations (FST) is expected to be
greater for populations:
• In species with lower vs. higher dispersal rates
• In sub-divided vs. continuous habitat
• In distant vs. closer fragments
• In smaller vs. larger population fragments
• In species with longer vs. shorter divergence times (in generations)
• With adaptive differences vs. those without.
Observations generally conﬁrm these predictions (Hastings & Harrison
1994; Hamrick & Godt 1996).

IMPACTS OF DIFFERENT POPULATION STRUCTURES ON REPRODUCTIVE FITNESS

Table 13.4

Fixation index (FST) in a range of taxa

Species

FST

Reference

Mammals (57 species)
Birds (23 species)
Reptiles (22 species)
Amphibians (33 species)
Fish (79 species)
Insects (46 species)
Plants
Selﬁng
Mixed selﬁng and outcrossing – animal pollination
– wind pollination
Outbreeding – animal pollination
Outbreeding – wind pollination

0.24
0.05
0.26
0.32
0.14
0.10

1
2
1
1
1
1

0.51
0.22
0.10
0.20
0.10

3
3
3
3
3

References: 1, Ward et al. (1992); 2, Evans (1987); 3, Hamrick & Godt (1989).

There is a strong negative correlation between FST and the dispersal
ability of species, as predicted; the average rank correlation was 0.73 in
a meta-analysis involving 333 species across 20 animal groups (Bohonak
1999). Examples of mean FST values for major groups of organisms are
given in Table 13.4. Taxa that can ﬂy, such as birds and insects, have lower
FST values than those that do not. Further, FST is higher in plants that self
(low pollen dispersal) than in outcrossing plants (Table 13.4).

Gene ﬂow and distance between fragments
Dispersal rates typically reduce with distance, as illustrated in acorn
woodpeckers (Fig. 13.10). Consequently, distant islands are expected to
receive fewer migrants than near islands (Wright 1969; Jaenike 1973).
Allozyme variability for island populations generally declines with distance from the mainland in lizards and several species of mammals
(Frankham 1997). For mainland population fragments, distant habitat
patches are expected to receive fewer migrants than nearby habitat

Distant population fragments
show reduced gene ﬂow and
greater extinction risk than closer
population fragments, for the
same sized fragments

Fig. 13.10 Dispersal distances in
acorn woodpecker males in North
America (after Koenig et al. 1996).
Dispersal rates decline rapidly with
distance.

331

332

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

Fig.13.11 Isolation with
distance. Relationship between
degree of genetic differentiation
(FST) at microsatellite loci and
geographic distance among bighorn
sheep, brown bear and gray wolf
populations in North America (after
Forbes & Hogg 1999). FST increases
with distance in all three species.

patches, but this effect depends upon the nature of the surrounding
matrix and its inﬂuence on dispersal rates. Genetic differentiation and
gene ﬂow are associated with geographic distance in bighorn sheep,
gray wolves and bears in North America (Fig. 13.11). Similarly, the redcockaded woodpecker and the northern spotted owl show relationships
between distance and genetic differentiation (Box 13.1; Haig et al. 2001),
as do many other species.

Impacts of different population structures on
reproductive ﬁtness
The overall consequences of different population structures on reproductive ﬁtness will depend primarily on the inbreeding coefﬁcient in
each fragment. The single large unfragmented population (SL) becomes
the standard for comparison. Consequences of different population
structures are:
• In the island and stepping-stone models, inbreeding and ﬁtness will
depend critically upon the migration rates and upon the variation
in population sizes on different islands (Nunney 1999). When there
is no gene ﬂow, inbreeding will depend upon the effective population sizes of the individual populations, and will be greater than for
SL. Conversely, when there is ample migration among populations,
inbreeding will depend upon the effective size of the total population, and be similar to SL.
• In source–sink (or mainland–island) structures, the effective population size will depend on Ne in the mainland (source) populations,
rather than that for the total populations. Thus, inbreeding and loss
of ﬁtness are likely to be much higher with this structure than for SL.
• Metapopulations typically have effective sizes that are markedly less
than the number of breeding adults, due to cycles of extinction and
recolonization (Hanski & Gilpin 1997; Pannell & Charlesworth 1999;
Wang & Caballero 1999). Their inbreeding will typically be greater

SUMMARY

Single population

Historical

Fragmentation

Fig. 13.12 Cycles of extinction
and recolonization in a
metapopulation, leading to
reductions in the effective size of a
species. The dotted lines indicate
bottlenecks during recolonizations.

Extinction

Recolonization

than in other fragmented and non-fragmented structures and the
ﬁtness in fragments the lowest.
Since metapopulations have features not already considered, further
consideration of them follows.

Metapopulations
Effects on inbreeding and genetic diversity in metapopulations differ
from previous examples because of extinctions and recolonizations,
and depend on details of the population structures. Figure 13.12 illustrates extinctions of fragments and bottlenecks during recolonization
in a metapopulation. The effective size will approximate the sum of the
effective sizes of fragments following extinctions, rather than the sum
of all effective sizes. Bottlenecks during recolonization will subsequently reduce Ne still further.
If there are frequent extinctions and recolonizations mainly from a
few large fragments, the structure approaches that of a source–sink,
and less genetic diversity is retained than in a single large population of
the same total size (Gilpin 1991). Conversely, a metapopulation with sufﬁcient migration and low rates of local extinctions approaches the characteristics of a single large population. In general, the higher the rates
of extinction and recolonization, the more deleterious is the metapopulation.

Summary
1. Population fragmentation usually has deleterious genetic consequences in the long term, compared to a similar sized unfragmented
population.

Metapopulations typically have
effective sizes that are much less
than the sum of their parts, due to
extinctions and bottlenecks during
recolonizations. They are likely to
suffer much more rapid inbreeding
and ﬁtness reduction than single
large populations, and the effects
are likely to be worse with higher
rates of extinction and
recolonization

333

334

POPULATION FRAGMENTATION

2. The genetic effects of fragmentation for the same total population size depend critically upon gene ﬂow. This in turn depends on the
number of fragments, details of population structure, distance among
fragments and the dispersal characteristics for the species.
3. Inbreeding and reduced ﬁtness in population fragments are
more severe with increased fragmentation, with lower gene ﬂow, and
these effects increase with time.
4. Fragmented populations diverge in allele frequencies and
heterozygosities.
5. Fragmented populations with restricted gene ﬂow share many of
the features of island populations, including elevated extinction risk.
6. Metapopulation structures, with extinctions and recolonizations of population fragments, are likely to be particularly deleterious.
7. F statistics are frequently used to measure differentiation among
populations and to infer historic levels of gene ﬂow.
FURTHER READING

Hanski & Gilpin (1997) Metapopulation Biology. A ﬁne collection of relevant
papers on metapopulations. See especially the chapters by Hedrick & Gilpin,
Barton & Whitlock and Giles & Goudet.
Hedrick (2000) Genetics of Populations. Chapter 7 provides a clear treatment of
many of the genetic issues relating to population fragmentation.
McCullough (1996) Metapopulations and Wildlife Conservation. A ﬁne collection of
papers on metapopulations with many case studies, some including genetic
issues. See especially the chapters by Hedrick, Gutiérrez & Harrison, Stith et
al. and McCullough et al.
Quammen (1996) The Song of the Dodo. An interesting and stimulating book
written for a popular audience; it has a ﬁne coverage of island biogeography
and its relevance to extinctions.
Saccheri et al. (1998) This outstanding study evaluated the effects of inbreeding
on extinction rates in a butterﬂy metapopulation.
Wright (1969) Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, vol. 2. A scholarly treatment of the genetics of population fragmentation, including F statistics,
which the author devised. Relatively advanced.
Young & Clarke (2000) Genetics, Demography and the Viability of Fragmented
Populations. An excellent collection of studies on fragmented populations of
animals and plants.
PROBLEMS

13.1 Fragmentation: What are the genetic impacts of population
fragmentation?
13.2 Variance in allele frequencies: Calculate the variance in allele
frequencies for populations with allele frequencies 0.1, 0.2, 0.2, 0.3,
0.3, 0.3, 0.4, 0.4, 0.5 (see Box 5.2 for variances).
13.3 Variance in allele frequencies: For population fragments all
derived from an initial population with two alleles at frequencies of
0.3 and 0.7, and maintained as isolated populations with effective sizes
of 50, what is the expected variance in allele frequencies (a) after 20
generations? (b) after 100 generations?

PROBLEMS

13.4 Determining migration rates: Calculate Nm among spotted
owl sub-species, given that FST is 0.2.
13.5 Population structure: Calculate HI, HS and HT for each of the
three situations in Table 13.3.
13.6 Population differentiation and F statistics: Five populations of
the spreading avens, an endangered plant endemic to mountaintops
in the eastern USA, were typed for 25 allozyme loci. Observed and
expected heterozygosities for each population and for the total of the
ﬁve populations are given below (Hamrick & Godt 1996). Calculate FST,
FIS and FIT for this data set and explain what each F statistic means.
Interpret the population structure.

Population
PMT
RMT
GMT
CTP
CGG
Population means
Species

Observed
heterozygosity

Expected
heterozygosity

0.056
0.050
0.049
0.054
0.050
0.052 (HI)

0.091
0.086
0.066
0.064
0.061
0.074 (HS)
0.098 (HT)

13.7 Population differentiation and F statistics: Three populations
of the threatened swamp pink plant in the eastern USA showed the following allozyme heterozygosities (Hamrick & Godt 1996). Calculate
FST.

Population
Appalachian region
Virginia region
New Jersey region
Species

Observed
heterozygosity

Expected
heterozygosity

0.038
0.028
0.021

0.061
0.045
0.033
0.053

13.8 Inbreeding and population differentiation: If populations are
maintained either as a single population of effective size 50, or two
isolated populations of effective size 25 for 30 generations, what are
their inbreeding coefﬁcients? What is the inbreeding coefﬁcient in
the population created by pooling the two populations of size 25?

335

Chapter 14

Genetically viable populations
Terms:
Minimum viable population size
(MVP),
mutational meltdown

Endangered Indian one-horned
rhinoceros.

As resources for threatened species are limited, it is important to
deﬁne the minimum size needed to retain genetic ‘health.’ To avoid
inbreeding depression and retain ﬁtness in the short-term Ne 50 is
required. For threatened species to permanently retain their
evolutionary potential Ne of 500–5,000 is required. Current sizes of
threatened species are typically too small to avoid genetic
deterioration

SHORTAGE OF SPACE FOR THREATENED SPECIES

Shortage of space for threatened species
Habitat loss is equivalent to loss of living space for threatened species.
Substantial proportions of mammals (56%), birds (53%), reptiles (62%),
amphibians (64%), ﬁsh (56%), gymnosperms (32%) and angiosperms (9%)
are threatened, largely through this reduction (Chapter 1). The ﬁnancial
and physical resources required to conserve them are enormous.
Providing reserves, such as national parks, is costly, and often conﬂicts
with human demands for increased land use. Captive breeding programs have been suggested as a partial solution. However, there is also a
shortage of resources for this strategy. About 2000 endangered vertebrate species require captive breeding, but space exists for only about
800 species (Tudge 1995). Pragmatic decisions must be made in allocating scarce breeding spaces. Retention of too few individuals will lead to
the deleterious genetic effects we have discussed, and ultimately jeopardize the outcome of programs. Conversely, allocating too many
resources to one species will be at the expense of others, for which no
space will be available.
Consequently, there is an urgent need to deﬁne the minimum population size required for species to be viable in the long term. This
chapter addresses the question: ‘How large must populations be, to be
genetically viable?’ This issue has been discussed under the title of
minimum viable population size (MVP), yet the population sizes are
not necessarily minimum, nor viable. Rather, we are considering the
minimum size required to maintain a population that suffers no reduction in reproductive ﬁtness or evolutionary potential over thousands of
years. This does not signify that populations of lesser size have no
future, only that their reproductive ﬁtness and evolutionary potential
are likely to be compromised, and they have an increased risk of extinction. As Soulé (1987) noted ‘there are no hopeless cases, only people
without hope and expensive cases.’
For a particular population or species, the question above reduces to:
• Is the population size large enough to avoid loss of reproductive
ﬁtness?
• Does the species have enough genetic diversity to evolve in response
to environmental change?
These questions are illustrated for the endangered Indian rhinoceros
and the northern elephant seal in Box 14.1.

Box 14.1 Is the species genetically viable in the medium
to long term?
IS THE RHINOCEROS POPULATION SIZE LARGE ENOUGH?

The Indian one-horned rhinoceros, like many wildlife populations, numbered many
hundreds of thousands. With habitat reduction and fragmentation and poaching for

There is a severe shortage of
space for threatened species, both
in wild reserves and in captivity

337

338

GENETICALLY VIABLE POPULATIONS

horns, the numbers have been reduced to about 2200 individuals in eight geographically separated areas, shown in the ﬁgure and table below (International
Rhino Fund personal communication). This species has normal levels of allozyme
genetic diversity (Dinerstein & McCracken 1990). The largest population is 1300
and the smallest 5. For the entire species, are there sufﬁcient individuals to avoid
extinction due to inbreeding and compromised ability to undergo adaptive evolutionary change? Regrettably, the arguments presented in this chapter lead us to
anticipate that the one-horned rhinoceros will undergo slow genetic deterioration
in the long term.

Area

Population size (1999)

Areas with large populations
Kaziranga (India, Assam)
Chitwan (Nepal)

⬃ 1300
⬃ 600

Areas with smaller populations
Pobitora (India, Assam)
Dudhwa/Bardia (Nepal/India)
Jaldapara (India, W. Bengal)
Orang (India, Assam)
Goruma (India, W. Bengal)
Mamas (India, Assam)
Total

76
72
53
46
19
⬃5
2175–2225

DOES THE NORTHERN ELEPHANT SEAL HAVE ENOUGH GENETIC DIVERSITY?

The northern elephant seal underwent a population size bottleneck of about 20–30
individuals, but has since recovered to well over 100 000 individuals and is no longer

RETAINING REPRODUCTIVE FITNESS

listed as endangered. However, it displays no allozyme genetic diversity (Bonnell &
Selander 1974; Hoelzel et al. 1993) and only two mtDNA haplotypes (compared to
23 in related southern elephant seals). Many other threatened species lack genetic
diversity (Chapter 3). Are these species doomed to extinction? Below we will see
that such species are likely to have compromised ability to evolve in response to environmental change and thus increased extinction risk. However, they are not predicted to become extinct in the near future, unless they experience an unexpected
catastrophe (e.g. a new disease).

How large?
How large do populations need to be to ensure their genetic ‘health’?
This involves three critical genetic goals:
• Retaining reproductive ﬁtness by avoiding inbreeding depression
• Retaining the ability to evolve in response to changes in the environment (evolutionary potential)
• Avoiding the accumulation of new deleterious mutations.
Various predictions of population sizes required to achieve these goals
are given in Table 14.1. We consider each of these issues below.

Table 14.1 How large must populations be to retain genetic ‘health’?
Various estimates of the required effective population size (Ne) are given. The
times to recover normal levels of genetic diversity following complete loss of
diversity are also given in generations
Goal
Retain reproductive ﬁtness
Retain evolutionary potential

Retain single locus genetic
diversity
Avoid accumulating
deleterious mutations

Ne
50
500
5000
570–1250
105–106
1000
100
12

Recovery time
(generations) Reference
102 –103

105–107

1, 2
1,3
4
5
3
4
6
7

References: 1, Franklin (1980); 2, Soulé (1980); 3, Lande & Barrowclough (1987); 4, Lande
(1995a); 5, Franklin & Frankham (1998); 6, Lynch et al. (1995); 7, Charlesworth et al. (1993).

Retaining reproductive ﬁtness
Small populations of naturally outbreeding species become inbred and
suffer reductions in reproductive ﬁtness (Chapter 12). What amount of
inbreeding can be tolerated without signiﬁcant inbreeding depression?

No ﬁnite population is immune
from eventual inbreeding
depression

339

340

GENETICALLY VIABLE POPULATIONS

Populations with effective sizes of
50 in fruit ﬂies and 90 in houseﬂies
show inbreeding depression

Franklin (1980) and Soulé (1980) both suggested that an effective population size of 50 was sufﬁcient to avoid inbreeding depression, in the
short term, based on the experience of animal breeders.
Is there a population size that is immune from inbreeding depression? Since inbreeding increases at a rate of 1/2Ne per generation, all
ﬁnite closed populations eventually become inbred. Further, as inbreeding depression is linearly related to the inbreeding coefﬁcient (Chapter
12), there is no threshold below which inbreeding is not deleterious.
Even low levels of inbreeding are expected to result in some low level of
inbreeding depression. Based upon the median number of lethal equivalents of 3.14, as found in captive mammals (Ralls et al. 1988), we would
expect about 2% inbreeding depression when F 0.005, 4% when
F 0.01, and 15% when F 0.05 for juvenile survival alone.
An effective size of 50, suggested by Franklin and Soulé, corresponds
to an increase in inbreeding coefﬁcient of 1% per generation. The
context of their predictions was that over a period of perhaps 5–10 generations, there would be little detectable inbreeding depression when
the Ne was 50. However, little relevant data were available at the time of
their predictions.
Subsequently, inbreeding depression was described in fruit ﬂy populations maintained at effective sizes of about 50 for 210 generations.
One-quarter of the populations became extinct (Latter et al. 1995).
Inbreeding depression was also evident in fruit ﬂy populations maintained with effective sizes of 50, or less, for 50 generations (Fig. 14.1). In
houseﬂy populations inbreeding depression was evident in populations
with Ne 50 after 12 generations, and even in those of Ne ⬃90 after only
ﬁve generations (Bryant et al. 1999; Reed & Bryant 2000).
We do not know precisely how large populations must be to avoid
meaningful inbreeding depression in the long term, but the required
size is clearly much greater than an effective size of 50. Disturbingly,
about one-half of all captive populations of threatened mammals have
N of less than 50 (Magin et al. 1994), and are likely to suffer inbreeding
depression relatively soon.
At what point will inbreeding become sufﬁcient to cause extinctions? Estimated times to extinction for different sized houseﬂy populations approximated the effective size in generations, i.e. 480
generations for Ne 500, 80 for Ne 87, 54 for Ne 50 and 32 for Ne 15
(Reed & Bryant 2000). Extinction risks in rapidly inbred populations of
mice and fruit ﬂies increase markedly at F 0.5 and beyond (Fig. 12.2). F
values for the houseﬂy populations at extinction were 0.38 to 0.66, consistent with the fruit ﬂy data.
In practice, wild populations that were listed as endangered in
1985–91 numbered 100–1000 individuals (Wilcove et al. 1993). Similarly,
the IUCN scheme for categorization of extinction risk lists 50, 250 and
1000 adults as cut-offs for the critically endangered, endangered and
vulnerable categories (IUCN 1996). Since Ne/N ratios are about 0.1, many
of these populations will have effective sizes of 50 or less and are at risk

RETAINING EVOLUTIONARY POTENTIAL

of extinction from inbreeding depression (without considering other
factors) unless their sizes are substantially increased.

Fig. 14.1 How large must
populations be to avoid inbreeding
depression? Reproductive ﬁtness
of populations of fruit ﬂies
maintained for 50 generations with
different effective sizes (numbers at
the top of the ﬁgure), compared to
the wild population from which
they were founded (after
Woodworth 1996). There is a
signiﬁcant regression of ﬁtness on
inbreeding coefﬁcient, F, as
indicated by the ﬁtted line. All
populations with sizes of 50 or less
had lower ﬁtness than the wild
population (dotted line).

Retaining evolutionary potential
Since our objective is conservation of species as dynamic entities
capable of evolving to cope with environmental change, evolutionary
potential must be retained. While there is a range of estimates of the
size of populations required, there is general agreement that it is an Ne
of at least 500 (Table 14.1). Since the debate about this issue has major
implications for the genetic management of wild and captive populations, we consider the estimations in some detail.
In his classic paper, Franklin (1980) predicted that an effective size of
500 was required. He argued that additive genetic variation, rather than
allelic diversity, determined evolutionary potential, and this is directly
related to heterozygosity (Equation 5.3). Finally Franklin assumed that
the level of additive genetic variation for peripheral characters at equilibrium was dependent on the balance between loss of quantitative
genetic variation and its replenishment by mutation.
The Ne required to balance additive genetic variation lost by drift and
with that gained by mutation (under a neutral model), is obtained as
follows:
VA Vm VA / 2Ne

(14.1)

where VA is the change in additive genetic variation in one generation,
Vm the gain in genetic variation per generation due to mutation, and VA
the additive genetic variation. The VA /2Ne term is the loss of additive
genetic variation per generation due to drift. At equilibrium, VA 0, so
Ne VA / 2Vm

(14.2)

Thus, the required population size depends upon the initial additive
genetic variation and the rate at which it is regenerated by mutation.

Effective population sizes of
500–5000 have been suggested as
necessary to maintain
evolutionary potential

341

342

GENETICALLY VIABLE POPULATIONS

Franklin (1980) noted that Vm ⬃ 103 VE for bristle characters in fruit ﬂies
(one of the few estimates of Vm then available), where VE is the environmental variation for the quantitative character. Upon substituting this
value into Equation 14.2, he estimated the required Ne as
Ne VA/ [2 103 Ve] 500 VA / VE

(14.3)

and since the heritability h VA / VP ⬃ VA / (VA VE)
2

Ne 500 h2 / (1 h2)

(14.4)

To obtain his estimate of Ne, Franklin (1980) assumed a heritability of
50%. This is a reasonable estimate of the heritability for peripheral characters (Table 5.3). Consequently, Franklin predicted that an effective size
of 500 was required to retain additive genetic variation and long-term
evolutionary potential.
Lande and Barrowclough (1987) reached a similar conclusion, based
on a model involving an equilibrium between stabilizing selection,
drift and mutation. However, Lande (1995a) later revised his estimate
and suggested that a value of 5000 was required. He argued that only
about 10% of newly generated mutations are useful for future genetic
change because most newly arisen mutations are deleterious (based on
data from Lopez & Lopez-Fanjul 1993). Since Vm has been found to be
approximately 103 VE for a wide range of quantitative characters (Table
7.1), Lande adjusted for the deleterious mutations by using Vm 104VE.
Upon substituting this value into equation 14.2, he estimated Ne as:
Ne VA / [2 104 VE] 5000 h2 / (1 h2)

(14.5)

Like Franklin (1980), Lande (1995a) also assumed a heritability of 50%.
This yielded an estimate of 5000 to retain evolutionary potential.
Reservations have been expressed about this estimate (Frankham &
Franklin 1998). First, estimates of Vm 103VE already include, in part, a
correction for deleterious alleles. Some estimates are derived from longterm experiments, which provide the opportunity for unconditionally
deleterious mutations to be eliminated, i.e. many of the 90% of deleterious mutations have already been excluded in obtaining the estimate.
Second, by introducing the issue of deleterious mutations, Lande
was beginning to consider ﬁtness, rather than peripheral characters.
For these, heritabilities are often much less than 0.5 (see Tables 5.2 and
5.3). Heritabilities for ﬁtness characters are typically 10%–20%, or less. If
we use a heritability of 10%, and Vm 104VE, then Ne ⬃ 560, and for a
heritability of 20% is Ne 1250 (Franklin & Frankham 1998).
Third, the effects of mutations depend on environmental conditions. Mutations that are deleterious in the current environment may
be favourable under altered conditions in the future. For example,
genetic adaptation to captivity in fruit ﬂies seems to be due to rare
alleles that are deleterious in the wild (Woodworth 1996). Since evolutionary potential is concerned with the capacity to adapt to environmental change, the genetic diversity that must be preserved may be
deleterious, or neutral, in the current environment. We do not know

HOW LARGE ARE THREATENED POPULATIONS?

what proportion of mutations are unconditionally deleterious versus
those that are deleterious in some conditions and beneﬁcial in others.
The calculations above are based on models that ignore natural selection, or do not consider it adequately. Reproductive ﬁtness is the central
character for evolutionary potential, as it is ﬁtness that is involved in evolutionary change. The above expressions are of dubious validity when
applied to reproductive ﬁtness subject to directional natural selection.
There is currently no theory allowing us to predict the equilibrium additive genetic variation under a model of mutation, drift and natural selection operating on reproductive ﬁtness. The issue must be resolved
empirically. Preliminary experimental estimates from fruit ﬂies indicate that the effective population sizes required to retain evolutionary
potential are from several hundred to several thousand (Gilligan 2001).
We should emphasise that estimates of the required Ne are very
approximate. There are uncertainties about mutational variances for
reproductive ﬁtness, and especially about the proportion of mutations
that are deleterious (Keightley 1996). Further, the above estimates
assume that heterozygosity determines evolutionary potential. Some
authors argue that allelic diversity may be critical (Allendorf 1986;
Fuerst & Maruyama 1986). For example, particular alleles may confer
disease, pest or parasite resistance. If allelic diversity is important in
determining evolutionary potential, the sizes required to preserve it
(particularly for rare alleles) are much larger than those required to preserve heterozygosity (see below).
What population size is required to maintain evolutionary potential
for wild populations in nature? Only very rarely is Ne known for wild
populations. Since comprehensive estimates of Ne/N are about 0.1
(Chapter 10), census sizes in wild populations must be about one order
of magnitude higher than the Ne values we have calculated, i.e.
5000–50 000. This sets a lower limit for the minimum size to maintain
long-term viability (Soulé 1987), and is within the range of values
reached from consideration of other threats (Chapter 20).

Wild populations in nature require
adult census sizes about 10 times
larger than the Ne values
estimated above, i.e. several
thousand to tens of thousands

How large are threatened populations?
We have concluded that effective sizes of at least 500 and actual
numbers of adult census sizes of at least 5000 are required to retain
genetic diversity and to minimize inbreeding depression in perpetuity.
However, we operate in a climate of severely restricted resources. The following section examines the population sizes being recommended in
practical endangered species programs.
The population size criteria used in the IUCN (1996) system for categorizing endangerment of species reﬂect the current scientiﬁc consensus
on the relationship between population size and degree of endangerment (Chapter 1). Under this system, populations (species) are considered critically endangered, endangered, or vulnerable if populations
sizes are less than 50, 250 or 1000 mature individuals, respectively. These

The population size criteria used
by IUCN to deﬁne endangerment
are well below the 5000 minimum
required to retain long-term
genetic health

343

344

GENETICALLY VIABLE POPULATIONS

Population sizes of endangered
species are usually smaller than
those required to meet genetic
objectives

correspond to Ne of about 5, 25 and 100, respectively, all within the range
where inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity will undoubtedly occur
over a relatively short period of time. These will certainly impact on the
viability of populations within the time frames speciﬁed for the endangered IUCN categories (Table 1.3). For example, the critically endangered
category refers to three generations. A critically endangered species with
Ne 5 would have an inbreeding coefﬁcient in excess of that for full-sib
mating after three generations and would suffer substantial inbreeding
depression. An endangered species with Ne 25 would have F 0.18 after
the 10-generation time frame speciﬁed by the IUCN.
Actual census population sizes for a variety of endangered species
are given in Table 14.2. Most of these have population sizes of less than
500 and, presumably, effective population sizes much less than this.

What happens to species with Ne 500?
Species with effective sizes of less
than 500 are not doomed to
extinction, but will become
increasingly vulnerable with time,
and have increased extinction risk

Species with effective sizes insufﬁcient for long-term maintenance of
genetic diversity are not doomed to immediate extinction. On average
they will suffer depletion of genetic diversity and suffer reduced ability
to evolve in response to novel environmental threats. They will slowly
become inbred, with consequent reduction in reproduction and survival rates, and require increasing human intervention to ensure their
survival. This may take the form of providing them with more benign
environments (isolating them from competitors, avoiding introduction
of diseases and improving their environment), or managing them to
increase reproduction and survival.

Reduced long-term evolutionary potential in
endangered species
Endangered species have
substantially compromised ability
to evolve in response to
environmental change, as longterm evolutionary potential
depends on Ne and reproduction
rates, in addition to initial additive
genetic variation

The long-term ability of populations to evolve is proportional to the
effective population size, both for evolutionary change due to current
genetic variation in the population and for changes due to new mutations. This dependence arises through the impact of drift on current
genetic diversity and because more new mutations occur in larger populations. The combination of these effects puts a limit on the extent of
adaptation to novel environmental conditions that can be wrought by
natural selection. We now extend several of the concepts relating to
quantitative genetic variation and selection response in small populations, ﬁrst presented in Chapter 5 and 8.
For genetic variation from the initial population, the total response
to selection in the long term (RLimit, the limit to selection) is predicted to
be approximately (Robertson 1960)
RLimit 2Ne S h2
where S selection differential and h2 heritability (Chapter 5).

(14.6)

WHAT HAPPENS TO SPECIES WITH Ne < 500?

Table 14.2

Population sizes in the wild (N) and category of endangerment for a variety of threatened taxa. The
categories are based primarily on the IUCN system and account for more than population sizes (Chapter 1)

Species

Location

Categorya

Nb

Mammals
Asiatic lion
Baiji dolphin
Eastern barred bandicoot
Ethiopian wolf
Darwin’s fox
Florida panther
Giant panda
Golden lion tamarin
Humpback whale
Javan rhinoceros
Javan rhinoceros (different sub-species)
Northern hairy-nosed wombat
Northern right whale
Tana River crested mangabey

India
China
Australia (mainland)
Ethiopia
Chile
USA
China
Brazil
Oceans
Indonesia
Vietnam
Australia
N. Oceans
Kenya

E
Cr. E
Cr. E
Cr. E
E
Cr. E
E
Cr. E
V
Cr. E
Cr. E
Cr. E
E
E

284
150
200c
500
500
30–50
1,000
600 (200d)
6000
60
5
70
350
12 000–15 000

1
2
3
4
4
5
6
7
8
9
9
10
6
11

Birds
Attwater’s prairie chicken
Bali starling
Black stilt
Kirtland’s warbler
Lord Howe Island woodhen

USA
Indonesia
New Zealand
USA
Australia

42
25
70
1530
20–30c
211
20
~ 40
22
26
~1500
9270
160 (73d)

12
5
13
14
15
15
16
5
17
18
18
19
20

Reference

Mauritius pink pigeon
Puerto Rican parrot
Seychelles magpie robin
Seychelles warbler

Mauritius
Puerto Rico
Seychelles
Seychelles

Red-cockaded woodpecker
Whooping crane

USA
N. America

E (USA)
Cr. E
Cr. E
V
E
E (NSW V)
Cr. E
Cr. E
Cr. E
Cr. E
V
V (USA E)
E

Reptiles
Aruba Island rattlesnake
Komodo dragon

Caribbean
Indonesia

Cr. E
V

350
3000

21
22

Invertebrates
Palo Verdes blue butterﬂy

California

E (USA)

200

23

Plants
Apalachicola rosemary
Bidens micrantha kalealaha
Catalina mahogany
Corrigan grevillea
Mauna Kea silversword
Schiedea haleakalensis
Small whorled pogonia

Florida
Hawaii
California
Australia
Hawaii
Hawaii
N. America

E
E
E
E
E
E
V

555c
2000
6c
27
~ 24c
100–200
2600

24
25
27
28
24
25
24

345

346

GENETICALLY VIABLE POPULATIONS

Table 14.2

(cont.)

Species
Texas snowbell
Wollemi pine

Location

Categorya

Nb

Texas
Australia

E
E (NSW)

39c
~ 40 adults

Reference
24
28

Notes:
a
b
c

Cr. E critically endangered, Eendangered, and Vvulnerable.

Numbers reﬂect those at the time of the study, and are not necessarily current.

Prior to captive breeding and reintroduction program.

d

From reintroduction.

References: 1, O’Brien et al. (1996); 2, Zhou et al. (1994); 3, Clark et al. (1994); 4, Wayne (1996); 5, Seal (1991); 6, Primack (1998); 7, Ballou et al. (1998); 8, McIntosh
(1999); 9, Pain (1998); 10, Taylor et al. (1994); 11, Kinnaird & O’Brien (1991); 12, Anonymous (1996); 13, Millar et al. (1997); 14, Richter (1996); 15, Brook et al.
(1997a); 16, Craig (1994); 17, Komdeur (1996); 18, Komdeur et al. (1998); 19, Kulhavy et al. (1995); 20, Glenn et al. (1999); 21, Seal (1992); 22, Cioﬁ & Bruford
(1998); 23, Nelson (1995); 24, Falk et al. (1996); 25, Loope & Medeiros (1994); 26, Rieseberg & Swenson (1996); 27, Rossetto et al. (1995); 28, NPWS (1998).

In practice, this overestimates the total response to selection, but
experiments in a range of species have demonstrated greater selection
response in larger, compared to smaller, populations (Chapter 8).
For evolutionary change due to new mutations, the asymptotic rate
of response per generation after mutation and drift reach equilibrium
is predicted to be (Hill 1982)
Rmutation 2Ne S Vm / VP

Fig. 14.2 Observed relationship
between long-term response to
directional selection and effective
population size (Weber & Diggins
1990). The y axis is the cumulative
response at generation 50, divided
by the response in the ﬁrst
generation (R50/R1) for selection on
a diversity of characters in mice,
fruit ﬂies, red ﬂour beetles and
maize. This is plotted against log Ne
for the populations. The dotted
exponential curve is the predicted
limit to selection based on
Equation 14.6, while the two
asymptotic curves represent 50generation predictions based on
Equation 14.8 with mutation added
using Equation 14.7 (higher curve)
and without it (lower curve).
Selection response is proportional to
log Ne.

(14.7)

where VP is the phenotypic variance. This provides a reasonable prediction of response, although not a precise one (Frankham 1983; Mackay et
al. 1994).
Importantly, both prediction equations show that evolutionary
potential is proportional to Ne. In practice, it is proportional to log Ne
(Fig. 14.2). There is a clear increase in selection response until at least
Ne 300, after which response may be asymptoting.
The ability of large populations to adapt genetically is amply illustrated by pest insects that have evolved resistance to a wide range of

WHAT HAPPENS TO SPECIES WITH Ne < 500?

insecticides (McKenzie & Batterham 1994). Conversely, an endangered
species such as black rhinoceros, which now has an effective size of
perhaps 100, may have only one-third the ability for long-term evolution
that it had previously. Example 14.1 illustrates the potential impacts of
population size on evolutionary potential in small populations of gray
wolves.

Example 14.1 Impact of population size on evolutionary potential
We can illustrate the impact of many of the variables affecting evolutionary potential, using the Isle Royale gray wolf as an example
(Wayne et al. 1991). A single pair is believed to have founded the gray
wolf population on Isle Royale in Lake Superior. Consequently, heterozygosity of the island population will be (11/2N) (1 1⁄4)  3⁄4 of that
on the mainland. Since heritability is proportional to heterozygosity,
this bottleneck at foundation reduces the evolutionary potential by
about one-quarter through its impact on h2.
Differences in reproductive rate impact on evolutionary potential
through effects on the selection differential (S). These effects are more
difﬁcult to quantify. The Isle Royale population is expected to suffer
reduced reproduction and survival rates due to inbreeding depression. With an initial inbreeding coefﬁcient of 25%, the reduction in
lifetime production of offspring reaching sexual maturity is likely to
be about 50% (Frankel & Soulé 1981). Assuming that the mainland
population has 30 pups per pair over ﬁve years, the island population
will have only 15. If the population is stable in size, then one pair of
pups from each pair contributes to the next generation. This represents 6.7% of the mainland population breeding and 13.3% of the
island population, giving selection differentials (S) of 1.9 and 1.6
(using tables in Becker 1984), respectively. The island population
would have a 16% lower selection differential and thus a 16% reduced
selection response (due to S alone).
Response (R) to several generations (t) of selection is predicted as:
RS h2 兺 [1 (1 / 2Ne)]t1
2

(14.8)

where h is the heritability. The sigma term on the right-hand side
reﬂects erosion of genetic diversity each generation due to genetic
drift.
The impact of population size on evolutionary potential over ﬁve
generations depends on the (1 1 / 2Ne)t1 term. If the mainland population of wolves is 5000 breeding individuals and the Isle Royale
population 25 potentially breeding individuals per generation, then,
with a conservative Ne/N ratio of 0.2, the effective sizes are 1000 and
5. Consequently, the loss of genetic diversity for the mainland population will be very small [(11/2000) per generation], and, after 20
generations, only 1% of the initial heterozygosity will be lost.
However, with only ﬁve effective individuals breeding on the island

347

348

GENETICALLY VIABLE POPULATIONS

10% of the existing genetic variation will be lost each generation.
Thus, the response to selection R in the Isle Royale population over
the ﬁrst ﬁve generations will be
R1  3⁄4 h2 1.61.2 h2
R2  3⁄4 h2 1.6[1 (1/10)] 1.08 h2
R3  3⁄4 h2 1.60.92 0.97 h2
R4  3⁄4 h2 1.60.93 0.87 h2
R5  3⁄4 h2 1.60.93 0.79 h2
The cumulative response over the ﬁve generations will be 4.91 h2 in
the Isle Royale gray wolf.
In contrast, response to selection in the large mainland population
in the ﬁrst and subsequent generations will be
R1 h2 1.91.9 h2
The cumulative response to selection in the mainland population
over ﬁve generations will be 9.5 h2.
Thus, response in the Isle Royale population will be only 4.91/9.5
52% that of the mainland population. The proportionate response in
the island population continues to decline with time compared to
that in the mainland population.

Ne is the major factor causing differences in medium to long-term evolutionary potential when comparing closely related endangered and
non-endangered species with similar life histories, or endangered and
non-endangered populations within species. Differences in genetic
diversity may often make a contribution, but its effects are likely to be
much smaller. There may be an even smaller contribution from differences in selection differentials as endangered species may have lower
reproductive rates than related non-endangered species due to inbreeding depression. The overall loss of evolutionary potential in very small
populations is likely to be substantial, and much worse than that due to
low initial genetic diversity.
The arguments in Example 14.1 emphasize the importance of
expanding the population sizes of endangered species to minimize
inbreeding and loss of genetic variation and to improve their ability to
evolve in response to environmental changes.

Effective population sizes of
105–106 are required to retain
single locus diversity due to the
balance between mutation and
drift

Retaining single locus genetic diversity in the
long term
We now move to considering what population size is required to
maintain genetic diversity at a single locus. Some loci, such as self-

AVOIDING ACCUMULATION OF NEW DELETERIOUS MUTATIONS

incompatibility loci in plants and MHC loci in vertebrates, are of such
importance to survival that we must retain their genetic diversity.
Population sizes required to retain single locus diversity are much
larger than those for quantitative characters. Mutation rates are lower
for individual loci (105–106) than for quantitative characters (103 
VE), but both types of variation lose similar proportions of genetic
diversity due to drift each generation. Consequently, the equilibria
between drift and mutation will result in lower genetic diversity for
single loci than for quantitative characters for the same effective population sizes.
Based on mutation–drift equilibrium, Lande & Barrowclough (1987)
5
6
suggested that effective population sizes of 10 –10 were required to
retain single locus diversity. These sizes are unattainable goals for most
species (especially vertebrates) of conservation concern, given current
habitat availability and conservation resources. Population sizes
required to maintain diversity at loci subject to balancing selection (e.g.
SI and MHC loci) will be less than this, but may also be unattainable
goals.

Time to regenerate genetic diversity
Loss of genetic diversity would not be of great concern if it were regenerated rapidly. The regeneration times for different forms of genetic
diversity depend on their mutation rates (Chapter 7). Since mutation
rates are very low, times to regenerate genetic diversity are very long
(Table 14.1). Single locus diversity with a mutation rate of 105–106 per
generation takes 100 000 to 10 million generations to regenerate.
Quantitative genetic variation has a mutation rate of 103 VE per generation, and requires only 100–1000 generations to regenerate – still about
2600–26 000 years for elephants! Clearly, we cannot rely on mutation to
regenerate genetic diversity in time spans of conservation concern. The
implication is that every effort must be made to prevent loss of current
genetic diversity.

If genetic diversity is lost, it is only
regenerated very slowly by
mutation, with recovery of original
levels taking hundreds to
thousands of generations

Avoiding accumulation of new deleterious
mutations
Recall that alleles of small effect become effectively neutral in small
populations (Chapter 9). Thus, a proportion of mildly deleterious mutations will be ﬁxed by chance in small populations, resulting in reduced
reproductive ﬁtness that may result in a decline to extinction (mutational meltdown). The deleterious alleles that are ﬁxed may have been
in the population for some period of time, or may be recent mutations.
Both forms of mutation are ﬁxed through inbreeding, or drift, so this
topic is closely related to inbreeding depression. Here we consider the
impact of newly arisen mutations.

Some mildly deleterious mutations
are ﬁxed by chance in small
populations, and result in reduced
reproductive ﬁtness. The size of
populations required to avoid
such effects is unclear

349

350

GENETICALLY VIABLE POPULATIONS

Fig. 14.3 Mean times to
extinction (in generations) as a
function of effective population size
due to ﬁxation of new mutations
(after Lande 1995a). The values of c
reﬂect different assumptions about
the variation in the effects of new
mutations, as illustrated.

Since mutation rates are low, they accumulate slowly. Thus, the
threat due to accumulation of newly arisen mutation is only evident in
the long term. Nevertheless, there is considerable evidence that mutational accumulation causes declines in asexual populations (de la Peña
et al. 2000). In contrast, in sexual populations, recombination allows
natural selection to more effectively oppose ﬁxation of deleterious
alleles, as progeny can be produced that have higher reproductive
ﬁtness than that of their parents.
The signiﬁcance of mutational accumulation in sexually reproducing populations is controversial. Lande (1995a) suggested that effective
population sizes below 1000 will suffer serious declines from the
chance ﬁxation of new, mildly deleterious mutations (Fig. 14.3), while
Lynch et al. (1995) argued that it would cause problems in populations
with sizes up to Ne 100. In contrast, Charlesworth et al. (1993) did not
consider this factor to be a serious threat to sexual populations unless
population sizes were less than Ne12.
Direct tests for mutational accumulation in fruit ﬂy populations
maintained for 45–50 generations at effective sizes of 25, 50, 100, 250
and 500 found no evidence of mutational accumulation (Gilligan et al.
1997). It is unclear whether this was due to the long times that may be
required to observe the effects of mutational accumulation, or to uncertainties about the rates and effects of new mutations affecting reproductive ﬁtness. Nevertheless, mutational accumulation does not
appear to be of major importance in the time frame of most conservation concern in naturally outbreeding species (100–200 years). In practice inbreeding depression is likely to cause extinction before
mutational accumulation is a serious issue. For example, while effects
of mutational accumulation were not detected, inbreeding depression
was evident in the populations of Ne 25 and 50 studied by Gilligan et al.
(1997) (Fig. 14.1).
Mutational accumulation cannot be discounted as a factor in the
long term, or in asexually reproducing species. Naturally inbreeding
species are likely to be more sensitive to declines in ﬁtness due to mutational accumulation than outbreeders. Their known susceptibility to

GENETIC GOALS IN THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

inbreeding depression is probably primarily due to relatively recent
mutations.

Genetic goals in the management of wild
populations
We are only aware of a few management plans for endangered species
in the wild where genetic objectives are deﬁned. In the golden lion
tamarin, the objective is to retain 98% of genetic diversity for 100 years,
corresponding to an effective population size of about 400 (Example
14.2). Currently there are about 600 wild individuals, plus 400 animals
resulting from reintroductions, in the wild. Five hundred individuals
are maintained in captivity. The Ne/N ratio must exceed 0.27 to attain
this goal based on all animals, or 0.4 for wild animals. Since this is
unlikely, the genetic goal is not being achieved. Lack of available habitat
to allow expansion of the population is the primary obstacle to reaching these goals.

Few management programs for
endangered species in the wild
include genetic objectives

Example 14.2 Effective population size required to retain 98% of
genetic diversity for 100 years in the golden lion
tamarin
To obtain the required population size we use Equation 10.1:
Ht /H0 (1 1/2Ne)t ⬃ et/2Ne
Substituting Ht /H0 0.98 and t 100 / 6 16.7 (tamarins have a generation length of 6 years), we obtain
0.98 e16.7/2Ne e8.333/Ne
After taking natural logarithms (ln) of both sides, we obtain
ln 0.988.33/Ne
and
Ne 8.33/ln 0.98412
Thus, the effective size required to meet the goal of retaining 98% of
genetic diversity for 100 years in wild golden lion tamarins is over 400.
In practice, the Ne needed to reach this goal is estimated using computer simulations, taking into consideration all the relevant life and
population structure details (Ballou et al. 1998).

Recovery targets for population sizes used to de-list
species
Recovery programs for endangered species often identify a target population size, the size at which the species would be removed from the

Populations size targets for delisting endangered species vary,
but are generally smaller than the
above genetic considerations
would suggest

351

352

GENETICALLY VIABLE POPULATIONS

Table 14.3

Population size targets speciﬁed for de-listing a range of
endangered species

Species
Mammals
Asian rhinoceros
Black-footed ferret
Sea otter
Birds
Attwater’s prairie chicken
Bald eagle
California condor*
Lord Howe Island woodhen
Peregrine falcon
Red-cockaded woodpecker
Plants
Lakeside daisy

Target population size
for de-listing

Reference

2500 (Ne 500) in
10populations
1500 adults in 10
populations
2650

1

5000 in 3 different areas
3900 pairs
2150 wild 150
captive
200 (endangered to
threatened)
456 breeding pairs
5 populations of
5002500

4
5
6

1000 plants

2
3

7
8
9

10

Note: *Downlist from endangered to threatened.
References: 1, Foose et al. (1995); 2, Clark (1994); 3, Ralls et al. (1996); 4, Bowdoin & Williams
(1996); 5, Millar (1999); 6, Ralls et al. (2000); 7, Brook et al. (1997a); 8, Mesta (1999); 9,
Kulhavy et al. (1995); 10, Demauro (1994).

endangered list (Table 14.3). Target sizes are based on many considerations, but frequently ignore genetic concerns. While most target sizes
are in the thousands, they are generally less than genetic arguments
require, based on a Ne/N ratio of about 0.1. The numbers for peregrine
falcons and California condors are particularly alarming at about 900
and 450. The peregrine falcon has now been de-listed as it exceeded its
target population size.

Genetic goals in management of captive
populations – a compromise
Captive populations of
endangered species are usually
managed to retain 90% of their
genetic diversity for 100 years

There are many fewer captive breeding resources available than would
be required to maintain all the species deserving captive breeding, especially if the numbers recommended above are used (e.g. Ne 500 per
species). Zoos house about 540000 mammals, birds, reptiles and
amphibians. At most, only half of the spaces are suitable for propagating
endangered animals (Conway 1986). It is estimated that about 2000 vertebrate species require captive breeding to save them from extinction
(Tudge 1995). To maintain each of these species at an effective size of 500

GENETIC GOALS IN MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS – A COMPROMISE

(assuming Ne/N0.3 in captivity) would require 3.3 million animal
spaces, about 12 times the space available for captive breeding. At an
average population census size of 500, only 540 species can be accommodated. Currently only 15% of mammal spaces in zoos house threatened
species (Magin et al. 1994), and the situation is even worse than indicated
above. There is a trade-off. If some loss of genetic diversity is accepted,
smaller populations of more species can be accommodated.
The current compromise is to manage endangered species in captivity to conserve 90% of the wild population’s genetic diversity for 100
years. The background to the 100 years time frame is that wild habitat
may become available following the predicted human population
decline in 100–200 years (Soulé et al. 1986). This requires different sized
populations for species with different generation lengths. An approximate expression for the required size can be obtained using Equation
10.1, as follows:
Ht /H0 (1 1/2Ne)t ⬃ et/2Ne
Upon taking natural logarithms, substituting 0.9 for Ht /H0, 100/L for t
(where L is generation length in years), and rearranging, we obtain
Ne 475/L

(14.9)

Consequently, the required size is inversely proportional to the generation length for the species in question. A range of examples is given in
Table 14.4. For example, the effective size required to maintain 90% of
the original heterozygosity is 475 for a species with one generation per
year, 18 for Caribbean ﬂamingos with a generation time of 26 years and
1759 for the white-footed mouse with a generation length of 14 weeks.
This is one of the few circumstances where long-lived species are at an
advantage.
Maintaining 90% of genetic diversity for 100 years is a reasonable
practical compromise. However, even with this compromised goal, it is
unlikely that all the species requiring captive breeding can be accommodated. Species are being maintained with lesser goals (and smaller
sizes) due to shortage of resources.
The cost of this compromise is increased inbreeding and reduced
reproductive ﬁtness. From Chapter 11:
F 1 (Ht /H0)
The accepted 10% loss of heterozygosity corresponds to an increase of F
of 10%, with consequent inbreeding depression. After 100 years, individuals will be related to each other to a degree somewhere between that
of ﬁrst cousins (F 0.0625) and half-siblings (F 0.125). This will reduce
juvenile survival on average by about 15% and total ﬁtness by about 25%,
in captivity (Chapter 12). The ﬁtness costs are likely to be much greater
if species are subsequently reintroduced into harsher wild environments (Crnokrak & Roff 1999). Thus, captive breeding programs are balancing the cost of permitting a moderate degree of inbreeding over 100
years against the beneﬁts of maintaining additional endangered
species within the limited resources available.

353

354

GENETICALLY VIABLE POPULATIONS

Table 14.4 Effective population sizes required to retain 90% of original
heterozygosity for 100 years in 11 different species with different generation
times
Species

Generation time (years)

White-footed mouse
Striped grass mouse
Partula snail
Brush-tailed bettong
Bullfrog
Siberian tiger
Nyala
Arabian oryx
African black-necked cobra
Mauritius pink pigeon
Indian rhinoceros
Caribbean ﬂamingo
White-naped crane

0.27a
0.75
5b
6
7
7
8
10
10
10
18
26
26

Ne
1759
633
95
79
68
68
58
48
48
48
26
18
18

Notes:
a
Millar & Zammuto (1983).
b
P. Pearce-Kelly (personal communication).
Source: Modiﬁed from Conway (1986).

Population sizes required to retain
90% of genetic diversity for 100
years are affected by small founder
numbers, by rates of population
growth and by Ne/N ratios less
than unity

The discussion above ignores the bottleneck associated with founding populations and assumes that population numbers can immediately be raised to the desired size. Captive populations typically have few
founders and grow slowly to their ﬁnal sizes. Together these factors lead
to greater losses of genetic diversity early in the captive breeding
program than predicted above. Consequently, effective population sizes
required to retain 90% of genetic diversity for 100 years are typically
greater than given above. Box 14.2 illustrates the required size for the
captive population of golden lion tamarins.

Box 14.2 Determining the effective population size
required to maintain 90% of genetic diversity
for 100 years in golden lion tamarins
Calculating the Ne required to maintain 90% heterozygosity for 100 years (the target
effective population size) requires knowledge of generation length, number of founders and potential population growth rate (to model the growth of the population
from the founders to the required Ne).
Golden lion tamarins have a generation length (average age of reproduction) of
about 6 years, started with about 15 effective founders and the population can grow
as rapidly as 20% per year, although a more realistic value might be 10% per year. How
does population growth rate affect the Ne required to meet these objectives?

GENETIC GOALS IN MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS – A COMPROMISE

Figure A, left panel, shows population (Ne) increase over time for the two different
growth rates. Number of founders is set at 15. The right panel shows the loss of
heterozygosity over time. The slower-growing population needs more time to reach
a larger ﬁnal size (Ne 312) than the faster-growing population (Ne 155). This is
because the slower-growing population loses more heterozygosity early in its history
than does the more rapidly growing population, and needs to grow to a larger ﬁnal
size to compensate for the early loss of heterozygosity.

The number of founders also affects the required Ne. Figure B illustrates this bottleneck effect on the target population size for two populations with the same growth
rate (20% per year) but with different numbers of founders (15 and 30). The population with the fewer founders must reach a larger size (Ne 155) than the population founded with 30 individuals (Ne 98) due to loss of heterozygosity during its
more severe founding bottleneck.

Genetic management of captive populations, by planned matings, allows Ne/N ratios
to be higher than those in the wild. Typical Ne/N for captive populations is about 0.3.
Thus, from the example above, the population size required to maintain 90% heterozygosity for 100 years in golden lion tamarins might range from 326 for a wellfounded and rapidly growing population, to 1040 for a slow-growing population
started with a small number of founders. The current population is being managed
at about 500 individuals (Box 18.1).

355

356

GENETICALLY VIABLE POPULATIONS

Frequently, the desired population size is larger than the number of
spaces available. This is often the case for small mammals with short
generation lengths. Black-footed ferrets require over 19000 individuals
to maintain 90% of their heterozygosity for 100 years. Their generation
length is about 2.5 years and they started with only eight effective
founders.
When requirements exceed the available resources, the program
must accept either that the population will become more inbred than
10%, or that the time frame for management is shorter than 100 years.
For example, with black-footed ferrets, the captive management objectives were adjusted to 90% retention of heterozygosity for 50 years. The
shorter time frame was justiﬁed because a reintroduction program was
implemented within the ﬁrst three generations of founding the captive
population (Ballou & Oakleaf 1989). Detailed treatment of genetic issues
concerned with captive breeding and reintroduction is given in
Chapters 17 and 18.

The fallacy of small surviving populations
The persistence of a few small
populations following severe
bottlenecks does not contradict
the conclusions that inbreeding
and loss of genetic diversity are
normally deleterious and that
population sizes in the thousands
are usually required for long-term
viability

Several species have survived bottlenecks of a few individuals, while
others have survived at small sizes for considerable periods of time
(Craig 1994) (although many more have gone extinct). For example, the
golden hamster and Mauritius kestrel went through a bottleneck of a
single pair (Groombridge et al. 2000). The northern elephant seal was
reduced to 20–30 individuals. Several island birds, including the
Chatham Island black robin and Seychelles warbler, have gone through
serious bottlenecks and recovered (Dhondt & Mattysen 1993; Komdeur
et al. 1998). The Mauritius pink pigeon has persisted at a population size
of less than 20 for over 150 years, while the Socorro Island red-tailed
hawk survived with 20 pairs of adults for over 120 years (Walter 1990).
These and similar cases have led some authors to question the importance of inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity in population viability
(see Craig 1994; Elgar & Clode 2001).
Do these cases refute the requirement for population sizes in the
thousands for long-term viability? It is fallacious to argue from a few
surviving bottlenecked populations, that bottlenecks do not lead to
extinctions (Soulé 1987). This is akin to arguing that ‘Granddad smoked
30 a day and lived to 80, so smoking doesn’t contribute to cancer’
(Sunnucks 2000a). While some bottlenecked populations have survived,
we must not ignore those (the majority?) that have failed to do so (Laikre
et al. 1997), or those that are trapped in the vortex leading to extinction
(Fig. 2.3). An unbiased quantitative assessment of the relationship
between population size and extinction rate in bighorn sheep found
that small populations were more extinction prone than larger ones
(Fig. 2.4).
The effects of inbreeding have a large stochastic element as they
depend on the chance ﬁxation of deleterious alleles. A modest propor-

SUMMARY

tion of populations deliberately inbred to essentially complete homozygosity survive in benign laboratory conditions (Frankham 1998). The
small surviving populations of wildlife are not a random sample. They
are likely to be the few exceptional survivors, i.e. they are analogous to
the few highly inbred lines that survive, or the few heavy smokers who
live long lives. Most of these small inbred wild populations will be
highly vulnerable, as the extinction proneness of island populations
attests (Frankham 1998).
Further, many remnant populations have beneﬁted from intensive
management. For example, northern elephant seals recovered following protection from hunting, Mauritius kestrels following banning of
DDT use, European bison herds following protection from hunting and
provision of supplementary feeding during winter and Seychelles warblers following translocation to nearby islands with greater food supplies.
Some island populations of threatened species survive as they lack
the predators or diseases that drive mainland populations to extinction. For example, black-footed rock wallabies are being decimated on
mainland Australia by introduced red foxes, but foxes are absent from
the islands where the wallabies are found. Several island populations
survive and some are numerically larger, but they show evidence of
severe genetic problems (loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding depression; Eldridge et al. 1999; Groombridge et al. 2000).
We should not let the occasional persistence of genetically impoverished populations mislead us. We wish to conserve the majority of
threatened species, rather than permitting extinction of many species
and conserving only a few exceptional cases.
The conclusions in this chapter set minimum population sizes only
for genetic viability. They do not ensure sizes that are sufﬁcient to minimize extinction risk in natural settings. In natural populations, demographic and environmental stochasticity and catastrophes, as well as
genetic factors, combine to cause extinctions. The relative roles of these
factors and their interactions will be considered in Chapter 20.

Summary
1. Since resources for maintaining threatened species in the wild
and in captivity are limited, attempts have been made to deﬁne
minimum sizes for genetically viable populations.
2. The size of populations required to avoid inbreeding depression
is much greater than Ne 50. All small populations of outbreeding
species are likely to eventually suffer inbreeding depression. Times to
extinction (in generations) due to inbreeding depression (in captivity)
approximate the effective size of populations.
3. To retain evolutionary potential, effective population sizes of
500–5000 have been recommended, corresponding to actual population sizes of 5000–50 000 in the wild.

357

358

GENETICALLY VIABLE POPULATIONS

4. Essentially all threatened species have reduced long-term evolutionary potential, as this is related to the logarithm of Ne, as well as to
genetic diversity and reproductive rate.
5. The size of population required to avoid accumulation of new
deleterious mutations is unclear and is a matter of controversy.
6. Current population sizes for most threatened species in the wild
and in captivity are typically too small to avoid genetic deterioration
within time frames of conservation concern.
7. Due to space and resource constraints, captive populations of
endangered species are typically managed to retain 90% of the genetic
diversity for 100 years.
8. The existence of a few cases where small populations have survived does not contradict the general rule that small populations are
at a high risk of extinction.
FURTHER READING

Franklin (1980) The classic paper that provided the foundation for considering
the genetic issues involved in deﬁning viable populations for conservation.
Franklin & Frankham (1998) A response to Lande’s (1995a) estimate that
Ne 5000 is required to retain evolutionary potential.
Lande (1995a) Revised the Ne required to maintain evolutionary potential from
500 to 5000. Also considers the likely impact of mutational accumulation.
Soulé (1987) Viable Populations for Conservation. A series of chapters considering
different aspects of ‘How large’, both genetic and ecological. See especially
Lande & Barrowclough’s chapter and Soulé’s Introduction and concluding
remarks.
Soulé et al. (1986) Seminal paper on the issues described in this chapter.
Proposed the captive breeding goal of retaining 90% of genetic diversity for
200 years (later modiﬁed to 100 years).
PROBLEMS

14.1 Evolutionary potential: If Vm is 3 103 VE and the heritability
is 15%, what Ne is required to preserve short-term evolutionary potential?
14.2 Evolutionary potential: If 90% of mutations are deleterious,
what Ne is required under the conditions in Problem 14.1?
14.3 Maintenance of genetic diversity: Derive the expression for the
effective size required to maintain 95% of genetic diversity for 100
years.
14.4 Maintenance of genetic diversity: How large does a bank vole
population, with three generations per year, need to be to retain 90%
of its genetic diversity for 100 years?
14.5 Maintenance of genetic diversity: How large a population is
required for the endangered palm cockatoo (generation length of 20
years) to retain 90% of its genetic diversity for 100 years?
14.6 Maintenance of genetic diversity: How many elephants (26
years per generation) and deer mice (three generations per year) are
needed to maintain (a) 95% of the diversity for 100 years (b) 90% of original diversity for 50 years?

PROBLEMS

14.7 Evolutionary potential: The population size goal for the
California condor recovery program is 150 birds in each of three populations (two wild and one captive). This is substantially less than the Ne
needed to maintain evolutionary potential. Will the California condor
go extinct because of this?

359

Section III
From theory to practice

In Sections I and II we covered the evolutionary genetics of populations
and the deleterious genetic consequences of population size reduction.
In Section III we apply this information to the genetic management of
threatened populations and species.

Taxonomic uncertainties and management units
A critical ﬁrst step in conserving a species is to gain a clear understanding of its taxonomy. Is the population of interest a unique species? Does
it actually consist of multiple cryptic species? Or is it simply another
population of a common species? Without this knowledge endangered
species may be denied protection, or resources wasted on populations of
common species. The use of genetic techniques to assist in resolving taxonomic uncertainties is described in Chapter 15. To do this we must ﬁrst
deﬁne what is meant by a species and consider brieﬂy how speciation
occurs. Populations within species may be so distinct that crosses suffer
reduced reproductive ﬁtness (outbreeding depression). Consequently,
they may require management as separate entities. The chapter concludes by considering means for deﬁning management units within
species.

Management of wild populations
The genetic management of wild populations is considered in Chapter
16. Typically wild population management is concerned with increasing population sizes and alleviating the effects of population fragmentation. Species with inadequate gene ﬂow among population fragments
will suffer an insidious process of inbreeding depression, loss of genetic

362

FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE

diversity and eventually population extinctions, unless gene ﬂow is reestablished. Sadly, there is limited activity in this area. Genetic management of fragmented populations represents the greatest unmet genetic
challenge in conservation biology. The chapter also addresses the different management regimes required for species varying in breeding
systems.

Captive management and reintroduction
A large and increasing number of species have had their numbers
reduced to the point where they are at risk of extinction unless there is
benign human intervention. In many cases the only way to save species
from extinction is by ex situ conservation, i.e. to preserve species away
from their natural habitats. About 2000 species of terrestrial vertebrates
alone require captive breeding to save them from extinction. Ex-situ conservation takes many forms; it includes captive breeding in zoos, wildlife parks and aquaria, conservation of plants in botanical gardens and
arboreta, seed storage, cryopreservation of animals, plants, cell cultures
and gametes. However, space, numbers, costs, continuity and adaptation to captivity limit ex-situ conservation. It is most appropriate for
large vertebrates and for plants. Chapter 17 covers the genetic management of captive populations. Captive breeding of animals has been
highly successful, with hundreds of captive breeding programs underway for threatened species. Maintaining viable populations with the
potential for reintroduction to the wild is an objective of many of the
programs. Chapter 18 considers the genetic management of captive
populations to minimize genetic changes that adversely affect reintroduction success, as well as the genetic issues involved in the reintroduction process itself. Reintroduction is a difﬁcult and expensive process
and, so far, has a relatively low success rate.

Use of molecular genetics in forensics and to
understand species biology
Molecular genetic methods are being used in forensics to detect illegal
hunting and trade in endangered species. These methods are also
helping us understand the basic biology of species, knowledge necessary for their conservation (Chapter 19). Genotyping endangered
species can be done following non-destructive sampling of hair, skin,
egg shells, faeces, etc., and PCR ampliﬁcation of DNA. Genetic markers
can be used for resolving paternity, sexing birds and marine mammals,
determining mating systems, population structure, dispersal rates,
population size and diet, and detecting disease and hybridization with
other species. Gene trees and coalescence provide powerful techniques
for understanding many aspects of species biology.

FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE

The broader context
Wild populations in natural habitats suffer human impacts (habitat
loss and degradation, over-exploitation, pollution and introduced
species) and stochastic threats (demographic, environmental and
genetic stochasticity, and catastrophes) that contribute to extinctions.
Chapter 20 discusses the combined impacts of all threatening processes, and so provides a connection between conservation genetics and
broader issues in conservation biology. This chapter provides an introduction to the use of population viability analysis (PVA) for predicting
the risk of extinction due to the combination of human impacts and stochastic factors, and as a tool to compare management options for
species recovery.

363

Chapter 15

Resolving taxonomic
uncertainties and deﬁning
management units
Taxonomic status must be accurately established so that endangered
species are not denied protection, nor effort wasted on abundant
species. Genetic information assists in resolving taxonomic
uncertainties and is used to deﬁne management units within
species

Terms:
Allopatric,
allopolyploidy,
autopolyploidy,
biological species concept,
coadapted gene complex,
conspeciﬁc,
evolutionarily signiﬁcant units (ESU),
genetic distance,
lineage sorting,
management unit,
monophyletic,
outbreeding depression,
polyphyletic,
sibling species,
speciation,
sympatric,
taxa

Rock wallabies in Australia, along
with the chromosomes from a
sample of species (after Eldridge &
Close 1992). Many are endangered.

366

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

Importance of accurate taxonomy in
conservation biology
Many inappropriate conservation
decisions can be made if the status
of taxa is incorrect

The taxonomic status of, and relationships among, many taxa are unresolved. This is particularly true for lower plants and invertebrate
animals, but also applies to large and obvious animals including deer,
wallabies and wolves.
In conservation, many erroneous decisions may result if the taxonomic status of populations is not correctly assigned. These include:
• Unrecognized endangered species may be allowed to become extinct
• Incorrectly diagnosed species may be hybridized with other species,
resulting in reduced reproductive ﬁtness
• Resources may be wasted on abundant species, or hybrid populations
• Populations that could be used to improve the ﬁtness of inbred populations may be overlooked
• Endangered species may be denied legal protection while populations of common species, or hybrids between species, may be
granted protection.
This chapter explores the rationale and methodologies for deﬁning taxonomic status. A similar approach can be used for practical deﬁnition of
management units within species – genetically differentiated populations whose crossing can result in reduced population ﬁtness (outbreeding depression). Further, taxonomic and phylogenetic distinctiveness
may provide means for setting conservation priorities. For example, the
unique tuataras are considered to have greater conservation value than
an endangered species within a speciose genus (Crozier 1997).
Taxonomic uncertainties result from inadequate data. It is somewhat disconcerting that many species and sub-species descriptions
trace to limited information on the geographic distribution of a small
number of (usually morphological) traits of unknown genetic basis
(Avise 1996). Velvet worms (Phylum Onychophora) in Australia provide
an extreme example. Only seven named species were recognized in a
1985 review, based on morphology. However, over 100 clearly diverged
species were identiﬁed using allozymes (Briscoe & Tait 1995).
Incorrect ‘lumping’ of several distinct species into one recognised
species has denied protection to endangered species. The threatened
tuataras in New Zealand, the only surviving members of an ancient reptilian order, are now known to include two species; one of which was at
serious risk of extinction (Box 15.1). Likewise, the endangered Kemp’s
Ridley sea turtle is a genetically distinct species, rather than a form of a
related non-endangered species, as was previously thought. It is now
being afforded protection (Bowen & Avise 1996). The Ofﬁce of
Endangered Species in the USA ignored Helianthus exilis, a sunﬂower
from California, as it was considered to be closely related to a sympatric
sunﬂower with which it hybridized. However, allozymes, cpDNA and

IMPORTANCE OF ACCURATE TAXONOMY IN CONSERVATION BIOLOGY

rDNA identiﬁed H. exilis as a distinct endangered species deserving conservation (Rieseberg 1991).
Conversely, ‘splitting’ of one species into two or more recognized
taxa may lead to erroneous conservation decisions. Two rare ﬂightless
chafer beetles in New Zealand, previously considered to be different
species, have been shown to belong to a single species, based on allozyme data (Emerson & Wallis 1994). Similarly, there is no genetic differentiation among the eight recognized morphological sub-species of
North American pumas, including the critically endangered Florida
panther (Box 15.1). The controversial northern spotted owl also involves
questionable splitting (Box 1.1; Haig et al. 2001).
Probably the greatest confusion, and often acrimony, has arisen
when hybrids among common species have been mis-identiﬁed as rare
species deserving conservation. The red wolf was thought to be such a
case, but this is highly controversial (Fig. 15.1). Hybridization between
populations whose taxonomy is incorrect has created problems in
some conservation efforts. For example, while the last Norfolk Island
boobook owl was successfully hybridized with its closest relative from
New Zealand (Norman et al. 1998), the sole remaining dusky seaside
sparrow was unsuccessfully hybridized with an inappropriate seaside
sparrow sub-species and became extinct (Avise 2000). Ryder et al. (1989)
found that infertility in a captive population of dik-dik was due to
mixing of different chromosome races (probably undescribed species).
A similar problem has been found in owl monkeys (Templeton 1986).
Lack of recognition of the degree of genetic differentiation between
the Bornean and Sumatran sub-species (possibly separate species) of
orangutans previously led to their hybridization in many zoos (Box
15.2). Concerns about potential hybridization have inﬂuenced management decisions in the opposite direction. For example, two populations of Mexican wolf were kept separate from the one known small
and inbred ‘pure’ population as it was suspected that they had hybridized with dogs, coyotes or gray wolves (Hedrick et al. 1997) (see
Chapter 19).

Box 15.1 Taxonomic uncertainty in tuataras and North
American pumas and their conservation
implications (Daugherty et al. 1990; Culver et al.
2000)
TUATARA

The threatened tuataras in New Zealand are the only survivors of the ancient reptilian Order Rhynchocephalia, and were thought to be a single species. Studies of different island populations, using both 25 allozyme loci and morphology, revealed that the
‘species’consists of three distinct groups, Sphenodon punctatus punctatus in the north,
a western Cook Straits sub-species (S.p.western), and S.guntheri. The latter was being
neglected and at serious risk of extinction without active conservation management.

367

368

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

NORTH AMERICAN PUMAS

Mammalogists have recognized approximately eight morphological sub-species of
North American pumas (also referred to as cougars, panthers and mountain lions),
including the critically endangered Florida panther. However, microsatellite and
mtDNA analyses found no signiﬁcant differentiation among the populations, but did
separate these from a number of South American sub-species.
An important conservation implication is that the number of separate subspecies requiring conservation is reduced. Further, the recent controversial decision
to augment Florida panthers with individuals from the Texas sub-species, to remove
inbreeding depression, can now be recognized as a logical management action involving only simple translocation of animals.

In practice, the taxonomy of particular groups of populations can
usually be resolved with sufﬁcient morphological, reproductive and
genetic data. Genetic markers including chromosomes, microsatellites,
allozymes, mtDNA and DNA ﬁngerprints can frequently help. However,
to appreciate this use of genetic markers, we must ﬁrst review what is
meant by a biological species, what we seek to conserve and how populations differentiate and speciate.

IMPORTANCE OF ACCURATE TAXONOMY IN CONSERVATION BIOLOGY

Prob. assignment to coyote

a

Coyotes
Gray wolf
Red wolf
Algonquin wolf

b

Prob. assignment to Algonquin wolf
Fig. 15.1 Is the red wolf a distinct species, or a hybrid between wolves and coyotes?
(Wayne 1996; Wilson et al. 2000).
The endangered red wolf in the southern USA has variously been considered to be
either a separate species, or a hybrid population between gray wolves and coyotes. It is
subject to a captive breeding and reintroduction program requiring substantial ﬁnancial
resources. Using 10 microsatellites and mtDNA, Wayne and colleagues concluded that
the red wolf was a hybrid population, derived from gray wolves and coyotes. The red wolf
contained no alleles that were not also present in gray wolves or coyotes. The
microsatellite data revealed that red wolves were intermediate between gray wolves and
coyotes, consistent with it being a hybrid.
(a) Two-dimensional scaling of microsatellite data for red wolves, gray wolves and
coyotes. The gray wolf circle encompasses non-hybridizing populations, while the
Minnesota and southern Quebec populations have introgression from coyotes. The red
wolves are intermediate between ‘pure’ gray wolves and coyotes, as expected if they are a
hybrid population (from Wayne 1996).
(b) Recent work has reopened this controversial case. Wilson et al. (2000) have
suggested that a small-bodied (Algonquin) wolf in eastern Canada is distinct from the gray
wolf but very similar to the red wolf. Microsatellite data and mtDNA sequence data both
indicated clustering of Algonquin and red wolves as a distinct group from coyotes and gray
wolves.

369

370

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

What is a species?
There is no universally accepted
deﬁnition of species

Deﬁnitions of species generally
recognize that individuals within an
outbreeding species can exchange
genes with each other, but not
with individuals from different
species

Most named species have been delineated, on the basis of morphological characteristics, as groups of individuals that are distinct from all
other groups. However, morphological deﬁnitions of species may have
limited connection to genetics or evolution. Some groups of individuals, for example the Australian velvet worms, initially appear morphologically indistinguishable, but are composed of two or more distinct
species (cryptic or sibling species). Chinese and Indian muntjac deer
are morphologically similar, yet the former has 46 chromosomes, while
the latter has 6 in males and 7 in females, and they are clearly distinct
species (Ryder & Fleischer 1996).
Confusingly, there is no universally accepted deﬁnition to answer
the question ‘What is a species?’ At least 22 deﬁnitions exist (Claridge et
al. 1997). These include morphological species, through ecological and
genetic species to biological, evolutionary and phylogenetic species.
Some deﬁnitions can, and have, classiﬁed the sexes of one species as separate species. Other deﬁnitions are based on evolutionary units and
gene ﬂow.
The biological species concept has been the most inﬂuential deﬁnition of species in population and evolutionary genetics and in conservation biology. This deﬁnes a species as a group of actually, or potentially,
interbreeding individuals and natural populations that cannot interbreed with individuals from all other such groups (Simpson 1961; Mayr
1963). Dobzhansky et al. (1977) deﬁned species in similar terms: ‘In sexually reproducing organisms species can be deﬁned as Mendelian populations, or arrays of Mendelian populations, between which the gene
exchange is limited or prevented by reproductive isolating mechanisms. An isolating mechanism is any genetically conditioned impediment to gene exchange between populations.’ Both of these deﬁnitions
recognize that individuals within a species can exchange genes, while
those from different species normally do not.
These deﬁnitions provide practical means for delineating species
genetically. Groups of individuals sharing the same area will be
exchanging genes if they are conspeciﬁcs, but not if they belong to separate species. Geographically separated populations of the same species
will be capable of crossing and producing fertile offspring in the ﬁrst
and subsequent generations. Conversely, populations of different
species will either fail to mate, or produce offspring with reduced survival or fertility. For example, lions and tigers can be hybridized, but their
progeny are sterile.
The biological species concept does not deal adequately with
asexual, parthenogenetic and habitually inbreeding forms, becomes
blurred for species that hybridize and has little relevance to classiﬁcation of fossil specimens. Given these limitations, it is not surprising that
the biological species concept is less accepted by botanists than zoologists (Briggs & Walters 1997). The evolutionary species concept also
encapsulates much of what we wish to deﬁne. Here a species is ‘an entity
composed of organisms which maintains its identity from other such

HIGHER TAXONOMIC CATEGORIES

entities through time and over space, and which has its own independent evolutionary fate and historical tendencies’ (Mayden 1997). While
this concept has much to recommend it, it is not as widely applied as it
deserves. The evolutionary species concept perhaps accords best with
the entities we seek to conserve, followed closely by the biological
species concept. The US Endangered Species Act is based on the biological species concept, but it has encountered difﬁculties by excluding
hybrids from conservation and by not dealing adequately with asexual
forms. Lack of a universally recognized deﬁnition of species creates
enormous difﬁculties in conservation biology. The World Conservation
Union has devised objective criteria for deﬁning endangerment
(Chapter 1). It is to be hoped that the Union, or an equivalent body, will
now address the issue and formulate an internationally acceptable deﬁnition of species for conservation usage.

Sub-species
Threatened sub-species are frequently accorded legislative protection,
and are the focus of substantial conservation effort. Sub-species are
groupings of populations, within a species, that share a unique geographic range or habitat and are distinguishable from other subdivisions of the species by multiple, independent, genetically based traits
(Avise & Ball 1990; O’Brien & Mayr 1991). Members of different subspecies do not normally exhibit marked reproductive isolation. They
can usually produce fertile offspring, although there may be some
reduction in fertility or survival of crossed offspring. Crosses between
the Bornean and Sumatran sub-species of orangutans produce fertile
offspring with no apparent reduction in survival rates.
The concept of sub-species is more subjective than that of species.
They may best be considered as populations partway through the evolutionary process of divergence towards full speciation. By some deﬁnitions, such as the phylogenetic species concept (Claridge et al. 1997),
sub-species would be raised to the status of species.

Sub-species are partially
differentiated populations within a
species

Higher taxonomic categories
Higher taxonomic categories (genus, family, order, class, phylum, superphylum and kingdom) are used to organize organisms into hierarchical
groups that (preferably) reﬂect their evolutionary origins. They have
been based previously upon a largely unspeciﬁed mix of similarity by
resemblance and similarity by descent (Avise & Johns 1999). However,
there has been considerable movement, over the last few decades,
towards monophyletic classiﬁcations. In these, all members of a particular taxon are descended from a single common ancestor. Taxa containing members from diverse ancestral lineages are termed polyphyletic.
The inclusiveness of higher taxonomic categories is very arbitrary. For
example, some species of fruit ﬂies within the genus Drosophila last shared

There are no objective criteria to
deﬁne higher taxonomic
categories of genus, family, order,
class, phylum and kingdom

371

372

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

a common ancestor over 40 million years ago, whereas some primates,
currently placed in different families, only separated within the last few
million years. Some cichlid ﬁsh placed in different genera diverged
within the last few thousand years. Recently, Avise & Johns (1999) proposed that taxonomic categories, above the species level, be deﬁned by
times since isolation from a common ancestor, and that times be determined using a molecular clock based on multilocus DNA sequence data
complemented by fossil evidence. This proposal has much to recommend
it, but there is no current agreement to implement it. Such an approach
would facilitate proposals to use diversity in DNA information content in
setting conservation priorities (Crozier 1997). Phylogenetic and taxonomic distinctiveness would correspond and provide the basis for comparing the conservation value of different species.

How do species arise?
Speciation involves the genetic
divergence of populations until
they are reproductively isolated

Species arise in two ways. The ﬁrst is gradual change within a lineage,
i.e. a species changes so much over time that it is considered to be a different species at a later time. The second is diversiﬁcation, when a prior
species gives rise to two or more descendant species. This occurs when
populations genetically differentiate, become reproductively isolated
and are said to have speciated. Speciation frequently involves, at least
partial, physical isolation. We are concerned with the diversiﬁcation of
species in this chapter.

Isolating factors
Populations may become isolated
by geographic features (allopatry),
or a change (e.g. host shifts) within
the same environment (sympatry)

Physical isolating factors often result from geographic phenomena
(mountain uprises, desertiﬁcation, river changes, sea-level rises and
continental drift) or from spread of organisms to novel territories. In
this case speciation is termed allopatric. This is a very common form of
speciation (Mayr 1963). Mayr suggested that all speciation was allopatric, based largely on his studies of speciation in birds, but this is no
longer widely accepted (Howard & Berlocher 1998).
Speciation may also occur within the range of the ancestral species,
sympatric speciation, such as host shifts. For example, hawthorn ﬂies
court and mate on the developing fruits of their host plants. They began
to utilize apples in 1864 and cherries in 1960 (Howard & Berlocher 1998).
As these trees have somewhat different fruiting times, this provided an
isolating mechanism and selective forces driving differentiation
among populations on the different hosts. Bush (1975) suggested that
this is a common form of speciation in parasites. Evidence for the importance of sympatric speciation is accumulating (Howard & Berlocher
1998). While both forms of speciation occur, deﬁnitive evidence on their
relative importance is not yet available.
Other mechanisms for speciation have been suggested. White (1978)

HOW DO SPECIES ARISE?

considered that chromosomal change was fundamental to speciation,
and was attracted to the idea that reduced ﬁtness in hybrids produced
at the overlap of chromosomal races provided a driving force for evolution of reproductive isolation. However, as most species lack chromosomal races, and some related species have identical chromosome
conﬁgurations, this is unlikely to be a universal speciation mechanism.
Recent evidence indicates that adaptation to distinct environments
has an important, or even predominant, role in leading to reproductive
isolation (Schemske 2000). For example, three-spine stickleback ﬁsh in
three isolated lake populations in western Canada independently
evolved benthic (bottom dwelling) and limnetic (open water) forms with
different sizes and diets, following glacial retreat 10000 years ago
(Rundle et al. 2000). Tests of mating preference revealed that benthics
from different lakes were not reproductively isolated, nor were limnetics from different lakes. However, benthics and limnetics from the same
or different lakes showed reproductive isolation.

Reproductive isolation arises from
adaptation to different
environments

‘Instant’ speciation
Many plant species have arisen ‘instantly’ via polyploidy (Ramsey &
Schemske 1998) when the chromosome number increases by a multiple
greater than 2 of the basic haploid number (n) to 3n (triploid), 4n (tetraploid), 6n (hexaploid), 8n (octoploid), etc. These forms are, to a large
degree, isolated from their diploid (or other) progenitors. For example,
the giant California redwood tree is a hexaploid with 66 chromosomes
while its closest related living relative has 2n 22 (Lewis 1980).
Two forms of polyploidy occur, autopolyploidy and allopolyploidy,
the latter being much more important in nature (Futuyma 1998).
Autopolyploids form by increasing the number of sets of chromosomes
from within a species, presumably by production of diploid gametes.
For example, there are both diploid (2n 22) and autotetraploid (4n 
44) forms of the endangered grassland daisy in eastern Australia (Young
& Murray 2000).
Allopolyploid species form by combining the complete chromosomal constitutions from two pre-existing species, as described for the
rare allotetraploid Hong Kong lady’s tresses orchid in Fig. 15.2.
The frequency of polyploidy varies among plants, being 47%–70% in
angiosperms, 95% in pteridophytes (ferns), but only 5% in gymnosperms
overall and 1.5% in conifers (Lewis 1980; Grant 1981). Polyploidy is much
rarer in animals (especially mammals and birds) than in plants.
Sexually reproducing polyploids are known in a few groups of ﬁsh and
frogs, but polyploid animals are more frequently parthenogenetic
(asexual), for example some amphibians, reptiles and insects (Lewis
1980). Polyploid animals of conservation concern include many tetraploid salmonid ﬁsh (Allendorf & Waples 1996). In this family 22 species,
including Apache trout, cutthroat trout, Gila trout, sockeye salmon and
chinook salmon are listed as threatened.

Many plant species have been
formed due to polyploidy

373

374

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

Fig. 15.2 ‘Instant’ speciation in the rare Hong Kong lady’s tresses orchid through
allopolyploidy (after Sun 1996). The rare orchid Spiranthes hongkongensis is an
allotetraploid with 60 chromosomes. It arose from the hybridization of two diploid
ancestors each with 30 chromosomes (S. sinensis and S. spiralis) which have distributions
that overlap in the Himalayas.
The probable mode of formation for S. hongkongensis is indicated above. The initial
cross between the diploid progenitor species yielded a sterile hybrid. A spontaneous
doubling of chromosome numbers, presumably in a ﬂower meristem (or production of
rare diploid gametes), generated gametes that yielded a fertile allopolyploid. Evidence
from allozymes indicates that allotetraploid S. hongkongensis formed only once as almost
all individuals have the same multilocus genotype. This orchid can cross with its diploid
progenitor S. sinensis, but the progeny are infertile triploids.

Speciation is generally slow
Speciation takes at least thousands
of years and generally millions of
years, apart from that due to
polyploidy

Most speciation occurs gradually over long periods of time, presumed to
be thousands to millions of years (Futuyma 1998). For example, some
plant populations that have been geographically isolated for at least 20
million years, such as American and Asian sycamores and plantains,
form fertile hybrids. Similarly, European and American forms of birds,
such as tits, creepers and ravens are so similar that they are classiﬁed as
the same species. Some cases of speciation have been more rapid, but
still involve many thousands of years. For example, some populations,
including polar bears and voles, separated by Pleistocene glaciation 1.8
million years ago have developed at least partial reproductive isolation.
On average, fruit ﬂies (the best-studied group) take 1.5–3.5 million years
of separation to speciate (Coyne & Orr 1989). However, Hawaiian fruit
ﬂies have speciated in as little as 500 000 years. Hawaiian honeycreepers

USE OF GENETIC MARKERS IN DELINEATION OF SYMPATRIC SPECIES

(Chapter 3 frontispiece) diverged and speciated from a ﬁnch-like ancestor in 3–5 million years. One of the most rapid cases of speciation is the
development of endemic species of cichlid ﬁsh in Lake Nabugabo, Africa
that has only been isolated from Lake Victoria for 4000 years. About 170
species of cichlids evolved in Lake Victoria itself, even though it is only
500000 to 750 000 old. They are now being exterminated by an introduced carnivorous ﬁsh.
As evolution is an ongoing process, some populations will be
observed partway through the speciation process. They are partially differentiated, show some reproductive isolation and are very difﬁcult to
classify. Sub-species may typically represent populations progressing
towards full species status. Rock wallabies in Australia, many of which
are endangered, are examples of populations ‘caught in the act’ of speciating (Eldridge & Close 1992, 1993). Populations and species across
Australia show varying degrees of differentiation in chromosomes, allozymes and mtDNA and often have only partial reproductive isolation.
Several hybrid zones have been discovered.

Use of genetic markers in delineation of
sympatric species
Sympatric populations share the same, or overlapping, geographic distributions. According to the biological species concept, sympatric populations of the same species should exchange alleles, while distinct
species sharing the same geographic region should not. Consequently,
if any genetic marker shows lack of gene exchange, two sympatric populations belonging to different species have been identiﬁed. In practice,
several loci are required for such diagnoses. For example, two sympatric
forms of potoroos (small marsupials) in southeastern Australia were
shown to be different species based on their different chromosome
numbers and the lack of shared alleles at ﬁve allozyme loci (Fig. 15.3).
Clearly, the two forms are reproductively isolated. The long-footed
potoroo exists in very low numbers and is an endangered species.
Morphologically similar velvet worms from the same log in the Blue
Mountains inland from Sydney, Australia had ﬁxed differences at 86%
of 21 allozyme loci. Consequently, they were clearly different species
that had diverged millions of years ago. Subsequently, many cryptic
sympatric species of velvet worm have been revealed using electrophoresis (Briscoe & Tait 1995). Many of these are likely to be threatened
species.
If two sympatric populations share alleles at all loci, then the
hypothesis that they are the same species cannot be rejected. If sufﬁcient loci are studied, then conspeciﬁcity is conﬁrmed. For example,
two rare, different-coloured sympatric chafer beetles from New Zealand
were found to belong to the same species based on allozymes and
morphology (Emerson & Wallis 1994).

Genetic markers can be used to
provide a deﬁnitive diagnosis of
the taxonomic status of sympatric
populations

375

376

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

Long-footed potoroo

Fig. 15.3 Two sympatric
potoroos (macropods) in
southeastern Australia belong to
separate species, as indicated by
lack of gene exchange (Seebeck &
Johnson 1980). Potoroos are small
nocturnal marsupials, akin to pintsized kangaroos. Between 1967
and 1978, four potoroos were
collected in southeastern Australia
that appeared to differ from the
potoroo species known to occur in
that area. These specimens had
longer hind feet and were about
twice the size of the other
sympatric potoroos. The presence
of two species was conﬁrmed by
chromosome analyses showing
that the long-footed potoroo had
24 chromosomes, while the
previously described potoroo had
12 in females and 13 in males
(chromosomes from Johnston et al.
1984). Further ﬁve of 22 allozyme
loci show no electrophoretic
alleles in common.

Allopatric populations that differ
chromosomally are normally
distinctive species. However, the
use of other genetic markers is
less deﬁnitive, and requires
calibration against genetic
differentiation of other recognized
species

X X

X Y

Potoroo

X Y2 Y1

Use of genetic markers in delineation of
allopatric species
Physical isolation of allopatric populations may deny opportunity for
exchange of genetic material. In this case, the biological species concept
would require evidence from crosses between the populations. Hybrid
sterility, or markedly reduced survival, would indicate separate species.
Conversely, if the hybrids were fully viable and fertile through several
generations, then the populations belong to the same species. Such
crosses are often impractical, especially in threatened species.
Consequently, genetic markers are often used to delineate allopatric species. Fixed chromosomal differences normally provide deﬁnitive
evidence for distinct species status, as many chromosomal differences
result in partial sterility in heterozygous individuals. Chinese and
Indian muntjac deer are morphologically similar, but are clearly distinct species as the former has 46 chromosomes, while the latter has
6/7 (Ryder & Fleischer 1996). Similarity of chromosomes in allopatric
populations is not deﬁnitive evidence that they belong to the same
species.
Classiﬁcation based on molecular markers is more arbitrary than for
sympatric species, as it is based on inferred reproductive isolation. In
practice, two populations are considered to be different species if they
are as genetically differentiated as are two well-recognized species in a
related group. For example, Bornean and Sumatran orangutans differ
in mtDNA, proteins and DNA ﬁngerprints, and by a pericentric chromosomal inversion, and are as different as other well-known primate
species. Consequently, it has been suggested that they be classiﬁed as

USE OF GENETIC MARKERS IN DELINEATION OF ALLOPATRIC SPECIES

different species, as opposed to two sub-species (Box 15.2). However,
crosses between the two forms are viable and fertile in the F1 and F2.
Genetic markers have been used to establish that newly discovered
forms of mammals in Vietnam and Laos are distinct from known
species. For example, the saola or Vu Quang bovid has been identiﬁed as
a distinct species based on morphology and DNA analyses (Whitﬁeld
1998). Only a few hundred individuals of this species seem to exist, so it
is probably endangered.

Box 15.2 Genetic differentiation between Bornean
and Sumatran orangutans. Are they separate
species? (Xu & Arnason 1996; Zhi et al. 1996)

Bornean and Sumatran orangutans are restricted to their respective islands in
Southeast Asia. They differ in morphology and behaviour, and have been designated
as sub-species. Bornean and Sumatran orangutans differ by a pericentric chromosomal inversion (a reversed chromosomal segment), and in protein coding nuclear
loci, DNA ﬁngerprints and mtDNA sequences. Estimates of time since divergence
from a common ancestor average 1.7 million years, far more ancient than the separation of Borneo and Sumatra by rising sea levels 10000–20000 years ago. As they
differ genetically by at least as much as do the clearly recognized chimpanzees and
bonobos, full species status for the two forms has been suggested. However, recent

377

378

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

morphological studies reveal an even more complex story. Skulls of individuals from
southwestern Borneo were as distinct from skulls from the remainder of Borneo as
those were from Sumatra (Groves et al. 1992).

Hybrids are found in many zoos and are viable and fertile in the F1 and F2 generations
(Muir et al. 1998). Consequently, they cannot be recognized as distinct species
according to the biological species concept, but they can be so recognized under
other deﬁnitions of species. This illustrates the confusion created by different species
deﬁnitions, and the proposal to classify them as separate species has been challenged
(Muir et al. 1998). Regardless of their formal taxonomic status, they represent different evolutionary units and should be managed as separate entities.

If differentiation between allopatric populations is much less than that
between two well-recognized species in the same or related genera, then
the populations are considered to be conspeciﬁc. For example, the colonial pocket gopher population from Georgia, USA consisted of fewer
than 100 individuals in the 1960s and was listed and managed as an
endangered species. Subsequent analyses based on morphology, allozymes, chromosomes and mtDNA revealed no consistent differences
between this population and nearby populations of the common southeastern pocket gopher. On this basis, the colonial pocket gopher does
not warrant recognition as a separate species (Laerm et al. 1982).
There is only limited evidence on the ability of morphology, chromosomes, allozymes, nuclear DNA markers and mtDNA to correctly
predict taxonomic status as determined by breeding experiments. Data
on rock wallabies in Australia suggest that chromosomes provide better
predictions of hybridization results than allozymes (Eldridge & Close
1992), as do data on Australian rodents (P. Baverstock et al. personal communication). Unfortunately, chromosomal analysis is currently out of
favour for delineating taxonomic status.
Mitochondrial DNA is one of the most commonly used genetic
markers to delineate taxa. However, it has a number of limitations. First,
mtDNA differentiation can be produced by lack of female dispersal,
while male dispersal may be keeping populations genetically undifferentiated. Second, mtDNA patterns in different populations can also be
misleading as a result of selection (Box 15.3). Third, mtDNA behaves as
only a single inherited unit. If the foundation population, before divergence, is polymorphic, then drift can lead to incorrect phylogenies (Box
15.3; Nei 1996). Consequently, it is unwise to use mtDNA as the sole basis
for delineating taxonomic status.
In the absence of crossing data, the most convincing delineations of

MEASURING DIFFERENCES BETWEEN POPULATIONS: GENETIC DISTANCE

species are based on chromosomes, or the concordance of a wide array
of information including morphology, breeding behaviour, nuclear
markers (allozymes, DNA markers) and mtDNA.

Measuring differences between populations:
genetic distance
The extent of reproductive isolation among populations is correlated
with their genetic differentiation (Table 15.1; Coyne & Orr 1989). To
delineate allopatric populations as separate species on the basis of
similar genetic differentiation to that among ‘good’ species in related
groups, we require a measure of genetic differentiation, or genetic distance. The most commonly used measure is Nei’s genetic distance DN
(Nei 1987). First we deﬁne Nei’s index of genetic similarity IN
IN 

m

兺
i1

冤冢 兺 冣 冢 兺 冣冥
m

(pix piy) /

m

i1

pix2

i1

1/2

piy2

(15.1)

and then transform this to obtain Nei’s genetic distance
DN − ln (IN)

(15.2)

where pix is the frequency of allele i in population (or species) x, piy is the
frequency of allele i in population (or species) y, and m is the number of
alleles at the locus. IN is related to the correlation in allele frequencies
between populations.
When allele frequencies are similar in two populations (pix piy), the
genetic similarity approaches 1, and the genetic distance approaches
zero. Conversely, when the two populations share no alleles, the index
of genetic similarity is zero and the genetic distance is inﬁnity.
Example 15.1 illustrates calculation of genetic distance from an allozyme locus in endangered red-cockaded woodpeckers. Estimates should
be based on numerous polymorphic loci to provide reliable estimates of
genetic distances (Nei & Takezaki 1994). The method for combining
information for different loci is given by Nei (1987).

Example 15.1 Calculation of Nei’s genetic distance
Three populations of endangered red-cockaded woodpeckers have
the following frequencies at the lactate dehydrogenase (Ldh) locus
(from Stangel et al. 1992).

Frequencies
Ldh allele

Vernon

Apalachicola

Gameland

B
C
D

0.023
0.977
0.000

0.019
0.885
0.096

0.981
0.019
0.000

Nei’s genetic distance is the most
commonly used measure of
genetic differentiation among
populations and species

379

380

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

To calculate the genetic distance we need to compute the squares of
the allele frequencies and the products of their frequencies between
populations.
For the Vernon population the sum of the squared frequencies is
兺 pix2 0.0232 0.9772 0.0002 0.955
and for Apalachicola
兺 piy2 0.0192 0.8852 0.0962 0.793
The numerator is the sum of the cross products, as follows:
兺 (pix piy) 0.0230.0190.9770.88500.0960.865
Consequently, Nei’s genetic similarity for the Vernon and
Apalachicola comparison is
IN 兺 (pix piy) / [(兺 pix2) (兺 piy2) ]1/2 0.865/√[0.9550.793]
IN 0.865/0.8700.994
and the genetic distance is
DN  ln (IN) ln (0.994)0.006
Consequently, the genetic distance between the Vernon and
Apalachicola populations of the woodpeckers is 0.006, a very small
genetic distance. Calculations of the genetic distances for
Vernon–Gameland and Apalachicola–Gameland are given as
Problems.

How large are genetic distances for ‘good’ species?
Genetic distances generally
increase with level of reproductive
isolation, but the relationship is
very ‘noisy’

Genetic distances generally increase as we progress up the taxonomic
hierarchy from populations within species, to species, to genera, to families, etc. For example, average allozyme genetic distances increase with
the level of reproductive isolation among forms of fruit ﬂies (Coyne &
Orr 1989). Genetic distances in the Drosophila willistoni species complex
increases on average from geographically isolated populations (mean
D 0.03), to sub-species (D 0.23), to sibling species (D 0.66) and are
highest for non-sibling species (D 1.04).
Genetic distances for a range of species in different taxa are given in
Table 15.1. Average genetic distances, for the same taxonomic hierarchy,
differ markedly among groups (Table 15.1; Fig. 3.3). For example, differentiation among sub-species of peppers largely overlaps that among
species of macaques, and genera of Galapagos ﬁnches. This emphasizes
the arbitrary nature of taxonomic rankings. Designations of the status
of taxa on the basis of genetic distance for allozyme loci are imprecise.
A similar conclusion applies to mtDNA genetic distances in vertebrates
(Johns & Avise 1998).

MEASURING DIFFERENCES BETWEEN POPULATIONS: GENETIC DISTANCE

Table 15.1

Genetic differences (for allozyme loci) between local races, subspecies, species, genera and families, using Nei’s genetic distance, DN

Comparison

DN

Local races
Humans
Mice
Lizards
Fish
Horseshoe crabs
Drosophila willistoni group

0.011 0.029
0.0100.024
0.001 0.017
0.000 0.003
0.001 0.013
0.008 0.049

Sub-species
Red deer
Mice
Pocket gophers
Ground squirrels
Lizards
Drosophila willistoni group
Plants (peppers)

0.016
0.194
0.004 0.262
0.103
0.335 0.351
0.228 0.026
0.020.07

Species
Macaques
Ground squirrels
Gophers
Birds (Catharus)
Galapagos ﬁnches
Lizards (Anolis)
Lizards (Crotaphytus)
Amphisbaenian
Salamanders
Teleosts (Xiphophorus)
Teleosts (Hypentelium)
Fruit ﬂies
Sibling species
Drosophila willistoni group
pseudoobscura vs. persimilis
Non-sibling species
obscura group
willistoni group
Hawaiian species
Plants (peppers)

0.02 0.10
0.56
0.12
0.01  0.028
0.0040.065
1.32 1.75
0.12 0.27
0.611.01
0.18 3.00
0.36 0.52
0.09 0.33
0.54 0.05
0.05
0.29 0.99
1.21 0.06
0.33 2.82
0.050.79

Genera
Insectivora
Birds (Parulidae)
Galapagos ﬁnches
Fish (Scaenidae)
Fish (Plectonectidae)

0.42 1.10
0.05 0.69
0.040.14
1.12.8
0.471.3

Families
Human–chimpanzee

0.62

Source: After Nei (1987).

381

382

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

Constructing phylogenetic trees
Information from genetic or
morphological markers can be
used to construct phylogenetic
trees

We often wish to identify the most closely related population or subspecies to use in crossing programs to recover threatened species.
Phylogenetic trees reﬂecting evolutionary relationships among species
(or populations) can be constructed using genetic data (Hillis et al. 1996;
Avise 2000; Nei & Kumar 2000). Example 15.2 provides a simple illustration of tree-building based on mtDNA sequence data for the Norfolk
Island boobook owl and its nearest presumed relatives.
A large number of statistical methods are now available for deriving
trees from molecular markers or from morphology, including distance
matrix methods (UPGMA), maximum parsimony and maximum likelihood methods (Nei 1987; Hillis et al. 1996). Software packages are available for computation (e.g. PAUP, PHYLIP, HENNIG86, MacClade; Futuyma
1998). These methods have limited statistical foundation, but generally
yield reliable trees if there is sufﬁcient information, i.e. number of loci,
number of nucleotides or amino acids or number of morphological
characters, or preferably a combination of these (Nei 1996).

Example 15.2 Building a phylogenetic tree from DNA sequence data
mtDNA sequence differences in the Norfolk Island (NI) boobook owl
and its nearest presumed relatives are given below. The NI boobook
owl declined to a single individual, and the best recovery option was
to cross it to its most closely related sub-species. Crosses of the remaining female to a male from a related New Zealand (NZ) sub-species has
yielded 16 F1 offspring. Subsequent analyses of mtDNA sequences (298
bases of the cytochrome b locus) conﬁrmed that the sub-species
chosen for crossing was the most closely related and conformed with
morphological data (Norman et al. 1998).

Comparison
NI boobook – NZ boobook
NI boobook – Tas boobook
NZ boobook – Tas boobook
Powerful owl – rufous owl
NI boobook – powerful owl
NI boobook – rufous owl

mtDNA base pair differences
2
8
8
13
21
23

By placing the nearest relatives closest together, we obtain the following tree. The lengths of the segments are proportional to the number
of base differences between taxa, and therefore should approximate
the evolutionary time since divergence. Thus, the branch lengths to
the node below NI boobook and NZ boobook are 1 each (total of 2 differences between them). These differ from Tas boobook by 8 bases, so
we attribute 4 to the segment from Tas boobook to the node below it,
and 4 from the node to NI boobook and NZ boobook; 1 has already

CONSTRUCTING PHYLOGENETIC TREES

been attributed to the distance to the node to NI boobook and NZ
boobook, so 3 is attributed to the section from their node to the joint
node with Tas boobook. Half of the difference of 13 between powerful
owl and rufous owl (6.5) is attributed to each path to their node.
Finally the NI boobook–powerful owl and NI boobook–rufous owl
average 22 bases different, so we attribute half of this (11) to each path
to the lowest node. On the left-hand side we have already attributed 4,
leaving 7 for the section to the lowest node. On the right-hand side, 6.5
has been allocated to the path to the ﬁrst node, leaving 4.5 to allocated
to the path from this node to the lowest node.

Box 15.3 illustrates hypothetical cases of sequence evolution and the
phylogenetic trees that are inferred from their DNA sequences. Trees
will accurately reﬂect evolutionary relationships only if the foundation
population is monomorphic, rates of evolution in different lineages are
constant (A) and selection does not operate on the markers. When rates
of evolution are not equal in different lineages (B), the inferred tree does
not agree with the real tree. Unequal rates of evolution could occur as a
result of unequal rates of neutral mutations, or different rates of selective substitutions in different lineages, for example, if one lineage
changed its habitat such that amino acid substitutions at a locus are
favoured and driven to ﬁxation by natural selection. For example, in
predatory snails, neurotoxin genes show high rates of evolution, presumably as a result of natural selection (Duda & Palumbi 1999), and
would be likely to yield incorrect phylogenies.
When the starting population is polymorphic (C), as will frequently
be the case, ﬁxation of different initial sequences in different lineages
(termed lineage sorting) may lead to incorrect inferred phylogenies.
This situation can be resolved if data are available from many independent loci; Nei & Takezaki (1994) recommended about 30 polymorphic
allozyme loci or 20 microsatellite loci. For example, problems have been
encountered in inferring primate phylogenies. mtDNA data yielded
phylogenies that are inconsistent with a wide array of morphological,
behavioural and chromosomal evidence. The consensus phylogeny
based on several nuclear loci is concordant with the other evidence
(Herbert et al. 1999).

Trees based on genetic markers
will only accurately reﬂect
evolutionary relationships if rates
of evolution are constant in
different lineages, markers are
neutral and the foundation
population is monomorphic (or
there are many independently
inherited markers)

383

384

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

Box 15.3 Use of DNA sequence data to build
phylogenetic trees
The following hypothetical examples indicate the conditions where DNA sequence
data are likely to result in reliable phylogenetic trees, and those where they are not.
In each example, an initial sequence evolves as we move down the page, so that
mutations ( ,) accumulate over time.
The correct phylogeny is only inferred in A with a monomorphic initial population and a constant rate of evolution in each lineage (branch). Conversely, incorrect
phylogenies are likely when there is either unequal rates of evolution (B), or a polymorphic initial population (C). The latter problem can be overcome by using sufﬁcient independently segregating loci (Nei & Takezaki 1994).

OUTBREEDING DEPRESSION

Phylogenetic trees, or ‘gene trees’, are used for many other purposes
in conservation biology (Chapter 19).

Outbreeding depression
A perceived concern with crossing of genetically differentiated populations is the risk that hybrid offspring in the F1 and subsequent generations will suffer deleterious consequences termed outbreeding
depression. A major reason for resolving taxonomic uncertainties is to
avoid unwitting production of such crosses.
For example, there is reduced reproductive ﬁtness and production of
developmentally abnormal offspring in a zone of hybridization
between two populations of velvet worms in eastern Australia
(Sunnucks & Tait 2001). A less severe case of outbreeding depression is
found in corroboree frogs in the mountains of southeastern Australia
(Osborne & Norman 1991). Allopatric populations in the north and
south of the range have subtle differences in colour pattern and skin
alkaloids and exhibit a genetic distance of 0.17–0.49. Hybrids between
the populations are fertile and viable, but display 17% larval abnormality, compared to4% in crosses within regions.
Currently, great caution is expressed about mixing populations. For
example, Shields (1983) doubted the wisdom of crossing different populations of gray wolves, even though they clearly belong to the same
species. Many population geneticists consider that concerns over outbreeding depression, for species whose taxonomy is clearly understood,
are being taken unnecessarily far. Outbreeding depression is frequently
mentioned, but the beneﬁts of crossing are understated.

Outbreeding depression describes
the situation when crossing of
populations results in reduced
reproductive ﬁtness

Extent of outbreeding depression in animals and
plants
The extent and signiﬁcance of outbreeding depression is a matter of
controversy. Evidence for outbreeding depression in mammals and
birds is scarce, apart from cases where the taxonomy has not been adequately resolved (Frankham 1995a). The most widely quoted, but anecdotal, example is ibex in the Tatra Mountains of Czechoslovakia (Turcek
1951). Following extinction of the previous population, animals were
successfully re-established by translocating Austrian animals of the
same sub-species. However the population was eliminated by subsequent introduction of desert-adapted animals of different sub-species
from Turkey and from Sinai. The cause of extinction was disruption of
the breeding cycle, with maladapted hybrids rutting in early autumn
and, fatally, giving birth in February, the coldest month.
Lacy (1998) detected outbreeding depression for some traits in
experimental crosses between different sub-species of mice, but this
was small in comparison to the beneﬁcial effects of crossing (heterosis).

Outbreeding depression in
crosses between populations
within species has been
documented in few cases in
animals, but may be more
common in plants

385

386

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

Outbreeding depression may be
expected in crosses between
different sub-species or species

The endangered Arabian oryx is suffering simultaneously from both
inbreeding depression and outbreeding depression, but there are
chromosomal differences segregating in this population (Benirschke &
Kumamoto 1991; Marshall & Spalton 2000). Outbreeding depression has
been clearly documented in an intertidal copepod that shows marked
genetic differentiation, and limited dispersal, over relatively short geographic distances (Burton et al. 1999). F2 populations showed reduced
ﬁtness (i.e. hybrid breakdown) in developmental time and response to
osmotic stress.
In several cases where outbreeding depression has been detected in
animals, the presumed taxonomy proved to be erroneous. For example,
crosses between different populations of owl monkeys and dik-diks
resulted in sterile offspring (Templeton 1986). In both cases the two contributing forms came from different localities, had different chromosome numbers, and were most probably undescribed species or
sub-species.
Outbreeding depression is more frequent when crosses occur
between populations that have undergone signiﬁcant adaptation to
local conditions and when dispersal is limited. Not surprisingly, most
evidence for outbreeding depression comes from plants with these
characteristics (ecotypes) (Waser 1993; Dudash & Fenster 2000).
Dispersal rates are often lower in plants than in animals, especially
for inbreeding species of plants. Dudash & Fenster (2000) found simultaneous inbreeding and outbreeding depression in an outbreeding
legume in the USA, but outbreeding depression was only notable in
crosses between populations from locations 2000 km apart. Badly
needed, quantitative, estimates of the frequency, magnitude and distribution of outbreeding depression are not available.
Species and many well-deﬁned sub-species have diverged to the
point where crosses among them result in reduced ﬁtness. Outbreeding
depression in crosses between sub-species from widely different environments, such as those between ibex adapted to the environments of
Austria or Sinai, is hardly surprising. As an extreme example, crosses
between Bengal and Siberian tigers would not be expected to produce
offspring ﬁt for either environment.

Genetic basis of outbreeding depression
Outbreeding depression may
arises from combining alleles from
populations adapted to different
environments, so that the hybrid
population is not well adapted to
either environment

Outbreeding depression may arise due to two different mechanisms.
First, outbreeding depression is usually attributed to genotype
environment interactions when populations are adapted to different
environmental conditions (Fig. 15.4). The hybrid population will then
contain genotypic combinations of alleles that may be less suited to
either environment. Reduced ﬁtness can be due to additive, dominant or
more complex effects arising from the interactions among alleles from
the different source populations. This may explain the case of the ibex.
The F1 hybrids between the European and Middle Eastern ibex calved at a
time intermediate between those of the two parent populations (i.e. the

OUTBREEDING DEPRESSION

Fig. 15.4 Genetic mechanisms of outbreeding depression. The pedigree shows how
genotypes and sets of loci (coadapted gene complexes) adapted to different local
environments (shaded vs. unshaded) could reduce ﬁtness of F1 and F2 hybrids (after
Templeton & Read 1984). Here genotypes aabb and AABB are adapted to two different
environments. Furthermore, the two loci a/b and A/B form a coadapted gene complex
that has high ﬁtness only when containing alleles from the same source population.
Fitness reductions in the F1 can results when alleles from different populations form
genotypes maladapted to the environment in which the F1 reside. For example, aa and AA
are adapted to their original environments, while the F1 genotype Aa is adapted to neither.
Fitness can be further reduced in the F2 when recombination might break up the
coadapted gene complex. After recombination, a is with B, and A is with b, the loci are no
longer paired with alleles from the same source population.

alleles from the different source populations had an additive interaction). However, this was in mid-winter and all offspring died. In a similar
manner, hybrids between two populations can be deleterious if the F1
manifests the dominant phenotype of one parent, but this is deleterious
in the environment of the population to which it has been introduced.
A more complex type of outbreeding depression occurs when different populations have evolved different coadapted gene complexes.
Coadapted gene complexes are groups of loci whose ﬁtness depends on
interactions between loci (epistatic interactions). Particular combinations of alleles at different loci are needed to produce favourable effects.
Recombination in hybrid populations produces new combinations of
alleles that are deleterious. Outbreeding depression resulting from disruption of coadapted gene complexes has been shown in a copepod,
mice and in the highly outcrossing legume Chamaecrista fasciculata (Lacy
1998; Burton et al. 1999; Dudash & Fenster 2000).
This form of outbreeding depression can also occur in crosses
between different populations adapted to the same environmental conditions. For example, one population may have evolved genotype aabb
and the other AABB (Fig. 15.4) because alleles a and b are beneﬁcial
together, as are A and B. When they are crossed, recombination among

Populations that have adapted
utilizing different sets of interacting
alleles (coadapted gene
complexes) may show
outbreeding depression as alleles
are deleterious when recombined.
This may occur for populations
adapted to the same, or different
environments

387

388

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

Even if crosses of populations
result in outbreeding depression,
natural selection will usually lead
to rapid recovery and often higher
eventual ﬁtness

the genomes in hybrid populations produces new allelic combinations
(e.g. AAbb and aaBB genotypes), that are deleterious.
Inbreeding depression and outbreeding depression due to disruption of coadapted gene complexes may be confused, as both are ﬁrst
manifested in the F2 generation. However, techniques are available to
distinguish and separate the two phenomena, whether the data being
analysed are from population crosses (Lynch 1991) or from molecular
markers (Coulson et al. 1998).
Even where outbreeding depression does occur when two partially
inbred and differentiated populations are crossed, it will not be a longterm phenomenon. Unless the F1 hybrid individuals are sterile, or of
very low ﬁtness, natural selection will act upon the extensive genetic
variation in the hybrid population adapting it to its environment
(Lewontin & Birch 1966). The hybrid population will usually, at worst, go
through a temporary decline in ﬁtness, and then increase.

Deﬁning management units within species
Populations within species may be
sufﬁciently differentiated in
adaptive characteristics or genetic
composition to require separate
management

Species clearly require management as separate units. However, populations within species may be on the path to speciation. If they show signiﬁcant adaptive differentiation to different habitats (ecological
niches), or signiﬁcant genetic differentiation, then they may justify
management as separate evolutionary lineages for conservation purposes. The desirability of separate management depends on the balance
between the cost of keeping two (or more) populations versus one, and
risks of outbreeding depression, or beneﬁts accruing from hybridizing
the populations.
Deﬁning management units within species is more difﬁcult and
controversial than deﬁning species. Below we outline the concept of
evolutionarily signiﬁcant units, together with a more recent proposal
to deﬁne such units.

Evolutionarily signiﬁcant units (ESU)
An evolutionarily signiﬁcant unit
(ESU) is a population that has a
high priority for separate
conservation

Many authors believe that genetically differentiated populations
within species should not be merged and require separate genetic management (see Moritz 1995). These populations are referred to as evolutionarily signiﬁcant units. Initially the concept was applied to
populations with reproductive and historical isolation and adaptive distinctiveness from other populations within the species (Crandall et al.
2000). Moritz (1995) suggested that genetic markers be used to deﬁne
management units within species. If mtDNA shows signiﬁcant divergence between populations, and monophyly within them, and nuclear
loci show signiﬁcant divergence of allele frequencies, then they should
be deﬁned as separate ESUs and managed separately. In broad terms this
often means that well-deﬁned sub-species are the unit of management,
but such may not be the case in little-studied groups.
While many ESUs have been deﬁned in threatened species, the

DEFINING MANAGEMENT UNITS WITHIN SPECIES

concept has been criticized on semantic and practical grounds. First,
Cracraft (1997) has argued that evolutionarily signiﬁcant units are
essentially equivalent to, and should be abandoned in favour of, phylogenetic species. The second, and more serious criticism, is that genetically deﬁned ESUs ignore adaptive differences (Crandall et al. 2000).
ESUs are unlikely to be detected within species with high gene ﬂow, even
though populations may have adaptive differences and warrant separate management. Conversely, in taxa with low gene ﬂow, populations
that have differentiated by genetic drift may be designated as separate
ESUs, even though they may not be adaptively distinct – in this case they
may beneﬁt from gene ﬂow.

Deﬁning management units on the basis of
exchangeability
Crandall et al. (2000) proposed that populations be classiﬁed according
to whether they show recent or historical ecological or genetic
exchangeability. This proposal attempts to delineate whether there is
adaptive differentiation, whether there is gene ﬂow, and whether the
gene ﬂow is historical, or due to recent admixture. It then leads to management recommendations based upon the assessment. The authors
claim that this system deals more adequately with many cases where
the ESU process yielded outcomes of doubtful justiﬁcation.
In practice, the populations are givenor  classiﬁcations in each
of four cells, representing recent and historical genetic and ecological
exchangeability (Fig. 15.5). This results in 16 categories of divergence
between two populations (Fig. 15.5). In general, the more scores the
greater the differentiation. Genetic exchangeability is concerned with
the limits of spread of new genetic variation through gene ﬂow.
Exchangeability is rejected () when there is evidence of restricted gene
ﬂow between populations (Nm1), while it is accepted () when there
is evidence of ample gene ﬂow. Evidence for gene ﬂow is ideally based on
multiple nuclear loci (allozymes, microsatellites, etc.), but could also be
based on mtDNA or cpDNA.
Ecological exchangeability is based on the factors that deﬁne the
fundamental niche and the spread of new genetic variants through
genetic drift and natural selection. Ecological exchangeability is
rejected () where there is evidence for population differentiation due
to genetic drift or natural selection. Evidence can be based on difference
in life history traits, morphology, habitat, QTL and loci under selection,
and such differences should, ideally, be demonstrably heritable. We
interpret this as primarily reﬂecting adaptive differentiation.
The recent and historical time frames are designed to distinguish
natural evolutionary processes of limited gene ﬂow ( in the
historical–genetic category) from recent population isolation ( in
recent–genetic). Further, they distinguish secondary contact ( in
recent–genetic) from long-term gene ﬂow (in historical–genetic).
Recommended management actions are given for each of the eight
categories in Fig. 15.5. Example 15.3 illustrates the application of the

Management units can be deﬁned
using ecological and genetic
exchangeability

389

390

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

Fig. 15.5 Deﬁning management
units within species on the basis of
genetic and ecological
exchangeability (Crandall et al.
2000). This method has been
proposed for measuring categories
of population distinctiveness, and
consequent management actions
recommended for each of the
categories. Categories of
population distinctiveness are
based on rejection ( ) or failure
to reject ( ) the null hypothesis of
genetic and ecological
exchangeability for both recent and
historical time frames. As the
number on the left-hand side of the
table increases there is decreasing
evidence for signiﬁcant population
differentiation.

Ho Exchangeability
Genetic

Ecological

Time frame
Recent
Historical

Relative strength of
evidence (indicated by
number)

Evidence of adaptive
distinctiveness

Recommended
management action

1






2


 



   

Treat as separate species

3




 

Treat as distinct
populations (recent
admixture, loss of genetic
distinctiveness)

4




 

Natural convergence on
ecological exchangeability
– treat as single
population

5

(a)

(b)

Are separate species

(c)


 
 




  

Anthropogenic
convergence – treat as
distinct population
(a) and (b) Recent
ecological distinction, so
treat as distinct populations; (c) Allow gene ﬂow
consistent with current
population structure

6






Allow gene ﬂow consistent
with current population
structure; treat as distinct
populations

7






Allow gene ﬂow consistent
with current population
structure; treat as a single
population

8



 




    

Treat as single populations;
if exchangeability is due to
anthropogenic effects,
restore to historical
condition; if natural, allow
gene ﬂow



 




   

DEFINING MANAGEMENT UNITS WITHIN SPECIES

methodology to black rhinoceros, African elephants, Cryan’s buckmoth and puritan tiger beetles. This methodology seems to provide a
logical means for delineating populations that justify separate management, without having an excessive number of management units that
do not show adaptive differentiation. By contrasts, the term ESU has
been applied to every category in Fig. 15.5, leading to a very large
number of management units, some with doubtful justiﬁcation. For
example, mtDNA analyses resulted in separate ESUs within African elephants, while the criteria of Crandall et al. (2000) treated this as due to
genetic drift and so did not recommend separate management units. In
a survey of 98 published studies, Crandall et al. (2000) found that over
half fell into category 8 and so did not justify separate management
units, while separate ESUs had been recommended for some of these.

Example 15.3 Assignment of black rhinoceros, African elephants,
Cryan’s buckmoth and puritan tiger beetles to the
categories deﬁned by Crandall et al. (2000)
BL AC K RHINOCEROS
For the black rhinoceros in Africa, there are insufﬁcient grounds to
reject either genetic exchangeability or ecological exchangeability.
Populations show gene ﬂow and their habitats are similar.


), leading to the
Consequently, it is classiﬁed as category 8 (

recommendation that the species be managed as a single population.
Conversely, O’Ryan et al. (1994) used mtDNA data to argue for two subspecies with separate management.
AFR IC AN E L E P HA NT
Georgiadis et al. (1994) found a reciprocal monophyletic relationship
among mtDNA of African elephants. These populations would be distinct ESUs according to the deﬁnition of Moritz (1995). However,
Georgiadis et al. (1994) argued that the genetic divergence was simply
isolation by distance due to drift across their geographic range. The
habitat of different populations is sufﬁciently similar to accept
ecological exchangeability. According to the categorization
scheme of Crandall et al. (2000), the elephants would fall into category


) and be managed as a single population, as recommended by
8 (

Georgiadis et al. (1994).
CRYAN’S BUC KMO TH
For Cryan’s buckmoth, Legge et al. (1996) found no evidence to reject
genetic exchangeability based on either mtDNA or allozymes
(there was adequate gene ﬂow), yet there was evidence to reject
recent, but not historical ecological exchangeability among popula

tions ( 
; category 6). Both the authors and Crandall et al. (2000)

argued for the adaptive signiﬁcance of the ecological differentiation
and thus for the recognition of separate management units, although
gene ﬂow consistent with current population structure is allowable.

391

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

PU RI TA N TI GER B E E T LE
Puritan tiger beetles from Connecticut River and Chesapeake Bay,
USA are not genetically exchangeable, based on mtDNA (low gene
ﬂow and signiﬁcant differentiation). Further they are not ecologically
exchangeable based on habitat parameters. Thus they were classiﬁed
as category 2 (
), indicating strong adaptive differentiation and
the recommendation to manage the two populations as separate
units for conservation purposes.





392

Summary
1. Correct diagnosis of taxonomic status of populations is critical
for conservation purposes so that undiagnosed species are not left to
become extinct, undiagnosed species are not hybridized with deleterious consequences, and resources are not wasted on populations
belonging to common species, or hybrid populations that are not distinct species.
2. There is no universally accepted deﬁnition of species.
3. The biological species concept has been highly inﬂuential in population and conservation biology. It deﬁnes species as groups of actually, or potentially, interbreeding individuals that are isolated from
other such groups.
4. According to this concept, genetic markers can be used to deﬁnitively diagnose species within sympatric populations as different
species will not be exchanging genes.
5. For allopatric populations, deﬁnitive diagnosis of species
requires information on the fertility and viability of crosses between
populations. Chromosomal differences usually also lead to deﬁnitive
classiﬁcation. Molecular markers can also be used to assist in diagnosing taxonomic status, but this is more subjective and must be calibrated against genetic differentiation of known species in related
groups of organisms.
6. Outbreeding depression is the reduction in ﬁtness that can occur
when some populations are crossed. It is more likely when there is
local adaptation to different environments and restricted gene ﬂow.
7. Populations within a species may justify management as separate units if they show adaptive genetic differentiation. Delineation of
such populations requires information on their genetic and ecological
exchangeability –if they show signiﬁcant differentiation in both, they
should be managed separately.
FURTHER READING

Avise (2000) Phylogeography. Recent textbook covering molecular methods in
taxonomy.
Avise & Hamrick (1996) Conservation Genetics. Advanced scientiﬁc reviews that
describe many cases of resolving taxonomic uncertainties with the aid of
molecular genetic techniques.

PROBLEMS

Crandall et al. (2000) Newly proposed method for using genetic and ecological
differences between populations within species as a basis for deciding on
whether they deserve separate management.
Dudash & Fenster (2000) Excellent review paper on impacts of inbreeding and
outbreeding in fragmented populations, with a plant emphasis.
Futuyma (1998) Evolutionary Biology. A textbook with an excellent readable
coverage of speciation and the genetic processes underlying it.
Hillis et al. (1996) Molecular Systematics. A major book on inferring phylogenies
using genetic markers.
Howard & Berlocher (1998) Endless Forms. Recent volume containing reviews on
many aspects of speciation, with a heavy emphasis on sympatric speciation.
Schemske (2000) provides an outstanding perspective on speciation in his
review of this book.
Nei & Kumar (2000) Molecular Evolution and Phylogenetics. Textbook on genetic
distances and building phylogenies.
Smith & Wayne (1996) Molecular Genetic Approaches in Conservation. A book containing scientiﬁc review chapters, many with cases where taxonomic uncertainties have been resolved with the aid of molecular genetic techniques.
PROBLEMS

15.1 Taxonomic uncertainties: Why are taxonomic uncertainties of
conservation concern?
15.2 Taxonomy: What is meant by sympatric?
15.3 Taxonomic uncertainties: Sympatric populations show the following characteristics. Are they the same or different species? Why?
(a) Diploid chromosome number 20 in population A and 22 in
population B.
(b) Allozyme frequencies at the Adh locus of SS in one population, and FF in the other (S and F represent slow and fast electrophoretic mobility).
(c) Microsatellite genotypes 11, 12 and 22 in one population and
33, 34 and 44 in another (1, 2, 3 and 4 are microsatellite alleles with
different sizes).
(d) Microsatellite genotypes 11, 12 and 22 in one, and 11 in the
other.
15.4 Taxonomy: What is meant by allopatric?
15.5 Taxonomic uncertainties: Allopatric populations show the following characteristics. Are they the same or different species? Why?
(a) Giant redwood trees in California have 66 chromosomes in all
individuals, while a morphologically related plant population in
China has 22 chromosomes in every individual (Lewis 1980).
(b) Tigers have an extensive distribution on the Asian mainland,
while the Sumatran population is on an island isolated by rising water
levels 6000–10 000 years ago. Separation based on morphology is
minimal, at best. Crosses between tiger sub-species are fertile. For
mtDNA sequences in the cytochrome b locus, three bases out of 1140
show distinct differences between mainland and Sumatran tigers
(Cracraft et al. 1998).
(c) Two populations of velvet worm (an invertebrate with limited
dispersal), one from the Blue Mountains and the other from the

393

394

TAXONOMIC UNCERTAINTIES AND MANAGEMENT UNITS

Border Range about 600 km away, show ﬁxed differences at 70% of 20
loci surveyed (D. A. Briscoe & N. N. Tait personal communication).
15.6 Genetic distance: Calculate Nei’s genetic distance for two populations x and y with the following frequencies for alleles at a single
locus:
Allele
1
2
3
(a) Population x
0.1 0.2 0.7
Population y
0.1 0.2 0.7
(b) Population x
0.5 0.5 0.0
Population y
0.0 0.0 1.0
(c) Population x
0.5 0.5 0.0
Population y
0
0.7 0.3
15.7 Genetic distance: Calculate Nei’s genetic distances (a) between
the Vernon and Gameland populations using the data in Example 15.1,
(b) between the Apalachicola and Gameland populations.
15.8 Management units: Use the exchangeability method of
Crandall et al. (2000) to categorize three coho salmon populations. Two
populations differ signiﬁcantly from a third in microsatellite frequencies and in heritable characters likely to be of ecological signiﬁcance
(morphology, swimming ability and age at maturation). How would
you recommend the three populations be managed?
15.9 Management units: Use the method of Crandall et al. (2000) to
categorize northern and California spotted owl populations using
data from Box 1.1.
PR ACTIC AL EXERCISE: BUILDING A PHYL OGENETIC TREE

Use DNA sequence data to build a phylogenetic tree using a computer
software package, such as PAUP or PHYLIP. Suitable DNA sequence data
on primates can be found in Hayasaka et al. (1988), while sequences for
other species can be found in GENBANK.

Chapter 16

Genetics and the management
of wild populations
Genetic management in wild populations involves increasing
population size, the recovery of small inbred populations,
management of fragmented populations, alleviating genetic
‘swamping’ due to hybridization with related species, and
minimizing the deleterious impacts of harvesting

Terms:
Clones,
corridor,
introgression,
translocation

The endangered red-cockaded
woodpecker and its current
fragmented distribution in
southeastern USA (from James
1995).

396

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

Genetic issues in wild populations
Genetic management of
threatened populations in nature
is in its infancy

There has been limited application of genetics in the practical management of threatened taxa in natural habitats. Genetic issues are not
unimportant in wild population, but are rarely considered. We have
already referred to most examples of genetic management of wild populations. Some are presented in more detail here.
As we continue to draw together observations and theoretical
genetic predictions with the practicalities of management strategies, it
is instructive to summarize the current situation. On the one hand, we
may have comprehensive knowledge of the natural history, distributions, behaviour and ecology of many species, particularly for ‘charismatic’ species – the ﬂowering plants, mammals, birds and butterﬂies
that so attract human attention. This is underpinned by ecological,
demographic and wildlife-management theory and the invaluable
insights of the practitioners who maintain our natural reserves and
manage endangered species in the wild.
On the other hand, genetic research is providing increasingly powerful molecular techniques for estimating genetic diversity, and a
growing database for many endangered and non-endangered species.
These complement an extensive theoretical base that has not been fully
utilized for wild populations. This chapter endeavours to integrate
these knowledge bases. Failure to achieve this integration into comprehensive management strategies will doom small and fragmented populations to the ‘extinction vortex’, increasing genetic impoverishment
and greatly elevated extinction risks.
As we have discussed previously, the key genetic contributions to
conservation biology are:
• Resolution of taxonomic uncertainties such that managers are conﬁdent of the status of, and relationships among, the populations they
strive to maintain (Chapter 15)
• Delineation of any distinct management units within species, as biologically meaningful entities for conservation (Chapter 15)
• Recognition that the effective sizes of populations, that determine
the genetic future of populations, are frequently about an order of
magnitude lower than census sizes
• Detection of declines in genetic diversity. Sensitive genetic markers,
particularly microsatellites, have the power to detect reductions in
heterozygosity and allelic diversity in small and fragmented populations
• Development of theory to describe past, and predict future, changes
in genetic variation. All such theories have a common, central,
element – genetic diversity is dependent on Ne
• Recognition that the genetic diversity underlying the quantitative
variation in reproductive ﬁtness is the raw material for adaptive evolution through natural selection. Loss of this class of genetic variation reduces the capacity of populations to evolve in response to
environmental change

GENETIC ISSUES IN WILD POPULATIONS

• Direct evidence for inbreeding depression in endangered species in
natural habitats
• At a practical level, potential inbreeding depression may be inferred
from its correlation with reduction in genetic variation, assessed by
markers
• Degree of fragmentation and rates of gene ﬂow can be inferred from
the distribution of genetic markers within and among populations
and calculation of F statistics.
Many of these issues are illustrated by the example of the Florida
panther (Box 16.1).
This chapter follows approximately the order of genetic management actions for wild populations:
• resolve any taxonomic uncertainties and delineate management
units
• increase population size
• diagnose genetic problems
• recover small inbred populations with low genetic diversity in naturally outbreeding species
• genetically manage fragmented populations.
These are followed by genetic issues in the design of reserves, introgression and hybridization, and the impact of harvesting in wild populations. The chapter concludes by examining management of species that
are not naturally outbreeding diploids.

Box 16.1 Identiﬁcation of genetic problems in the Florida
panther and genetic management to alleviate
them (Roelke et al. 1993; Barone et al. 1994;
Land & Lacy 2000)
The endangered Florida panther is restricted to a small relict population of approximately 60–70 individuals in southern Florida, primarily in the Big Cypress and adjoining Everglades National Park ecosystems. Prior to European settlement, they ranged
across the entire southeast of the United States, and other sub-species (called panthers, pumas, cougars, catamounts, or mountain lions) were spread throughout
North and South America. Since 1973, the main causes of deaths have been road
kills, illegal hunting or injuries. A population viability analysis in 1989 (see Chapter 20)
predicted that this population had a high probability of extinction within a short time,
unless remedial actions were taken (Seal & Lacy 1989). A more recent assessment is
more optimistic (Maehr et al. 2001).
Analyses using allozymes and morphology mtDNA, revealed that a portion of
the population had received genetic input (introgression) from a South American
puma sub-species, at some time in the past. Subsequently, records revealed that
South American animals had been released into the population by a private breeder
between 1956 and 1966. Hybrid animals are located in areas away from most
‘authentic’ animals.
The authentic Florida panther population has very low levels of allozyme, DNA
ﬁngerprint and mtDNA genetic diversity compared to the hybrids, other puma populations and felids generally.

397

398

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

Allozymes
Sub-species
Florida (authentic)
Florida (introgressed)
Western US
Other felids
Domestic cat

DNA
ﬁngerprint
heterozygosity
%

P
% (range)

He
% (range)

4.9
7.3
9.85 (4.9–17.1)
8–21

1.8
10.4
1.8
29.7
4.3 (2.0–6.7) 46.9
3–8
44.0

Authentic Florida panthers also display evidence of inbreeding depression. They
exhibit morphological abnormalities (‘cow lick’ patterns in their fur and kinked tails),
cardiac defects, the poorest semen quality of any felid (see ﬁgure below; J. Howard
& B. Pukazhenthi) and a high level of cryptorchidism. All ‘pure’males have at least one
undescended testis. This problem has become progressively worse since 1975.
Florida panthers also suffer a high prevalence of infectious disease.
How can the authentic Florida panther be recovered? Since it displays both the
genetic and physical hallmarks of inbreeding depression, its ﬁtness should be

Normal

Coiled tail, bent acrosome

INCREASING POPULATION SIZE

increased by introduction of immigrants from another population. As no other population of Florida panthers exists, the only source of individuals was from another
sub-species of puma. The nearest sub-species is from Texas, a population that was
contiguous with the Florida population, before its decline. The Florida and Texas
populations probably had historical gene exchange.
Following extensive consultations, the decision was made to introduce 6–8
females of the Texas sub-species into the Florida panther population. Outbreeding
depression is unlikely as there is no evidence for it either in the hybrid Florida population or in mixed populations of captive pumas. Further, Culver et al. (2000) have
subsequently shown that all North American panthers/cougars are genetically very
similar for molecular markers and suggested that they be reclassiﬁed as a single subspecies.
The ﬁrst eight individuals from Texas have now been introduced. Three of the
imports died, but 25 surviving outcrossed progeny are known, including some
second generation offspring from hybrids. The F1 hybrid kittens lack cowlicks and
kinked tails and appear to be more robust than authentic Florida panthers.

Resolving taxonomy and management units
As we have seen in Chapter 15, it is not possible to properly manage wild
populations (genetically, or otherwise) if the taxonomy is not correct.
The ﬁrst step in the genetic management of wild populations of threatened species is to ensure that the species’ taxonomy is correctly
assigned and that any distinct management units are deﬁned. For the
rest of this chapter, we will assume that taxonomic uncertainties and
management have been resolved, and address genetic management
within management units.

The ﬁrst step in the management
of any wild population is to ensure
that any questions about the
taxonomy and management units
within species are resolved

Increasing population size
The ﬁrst objective of threatened species management is to halt decline
and increase the size of populations. This alleviates all of the stochastic
threats to species (demographic, environmental, catastrophic and
genetic). If populations have only recently declined from far larger sizes,
and are now rapidly expanded from short-term effective population
sizes of, say ﬁfty to several hundred, then the genetic impacts are
minimal. Despite the bottleneck, short-term reductions of this magnitude allow little opportunity for variation to be lost through genetic
drift.
The ﬁrst step in this process is in the domain of wildlife biologists
and ecologists – identiﬁcation of the causes of the decline. Actions
taken to arrest population declines and recover species include legislative controls on hunting and harvesting, designation of reserves, reduction of pollutants, improvement of habitat quality and eradication of

A primary objective in managing
wild populations is to increase the
sizes of small populations

399

400

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

Some wild populations are
regularly augmented from captive
populations, but this is likely to be
genetically deleterious in the long
term

predators and competitors. Such actions beneﬁt all of the biodiversity
in the managed region. In this respect, the endangered species acts as a
‘ﬂagship’ for an entire community.
A number of success stories illustrate the beneﬁts arising from these
forms of management. Indian rhinoceroses have increased from 27 to
about 600 in Chitwan National Park, Nepal following bans on hunting
and designation of the royal hunting reserve as a national park.
Similarly, the northern elephant seal has increased from 20–30 to over
100 000 following cessation of hunting and United States legislation
protecting of all marine mammals (Halley & Hoelzel 1996). The northern hairy-nosed wombat has increased slowly in population size following designation of its only remaining habitat at Clermont in
Queensland, Australia as a national park and improvement of food
resources by exclusion of cattle (Taylor et al. 1994). As insecticides accumulate to the highest concentrations at the top of the food-chain, birds
of prey frequently suffer most from their effects. Mauritius kestrel, bald
eagle and peregrine falcon populations have all increased following
control of DDT usage (Groombridge et al. 2000). Peregrine falcons have
been removed from the endangered species list, following DDT control
and a reintroduction program.
The Chatham Island black robin has increased from ﬁve to over 140
following protection, cross-fostering and translocations (Butler &
Merton 1992). The Lord Howe Island woodhen has recovered from a size
of 20–30 following eradication of their primary threat, pigs, and a shortterm captive breeding and release program (Brook et al. 1997a). The
recovery program for Seychelles warblers has been especially wellconsidered and successful (Komdeur et al. 1998). From a low of 26–29
birds on Cousin Island between 1959 and 1968, it reached a carrying
capacity of about 320 birds in 1982 and has maintained this level. In
1988 and 1990, 29 birds were translocated to each of the nearby Aride
and Cousine Islands. By 1996, these had grown into populations of 1000
and 186, respectively. In plants, recovery has followed legislative protection to minimize harvest, creation of reserves and removal of herbivores
(Bowles & Whelan 1994; Primack 1998). Where numbers are extremely
small, forms of ex-situ conservation have been used, followed by reintroductions (Chapters 17 and 18).
While genetic information may help to alert conservation biologists
to the extent of endangerment, the management actions above involve
little, or no, genetics. However, recovery in numbers of highly inbred
populations can be substantially enhanced following introduction of
additional genetic variation (Fig. 12.11).
Insecure wild populations can be augmented using captive bred
individuals. The nene (Hawaiian goose) has been subject to a long
program of augmentation from captivity, as its wild population does
not appear to be self-sustaining (Black 1995). Such programs may be
counterproductive in the long run if the captive population adapts to
reproduction in captivity, and its reproductive ability in the wild is
reduced. This is clearly a problem in ﬁsh where long-term captive popu-

SOURCE OF UNRELATED INIDIVIDUALS FOR GENETIC AUGMENTATION

lations, used to stock wild habitats, have lower reproductive ﬁtness in
the wild than residents (Hindar et al. 1991). Genetic adaptation to captivity is considered in Chapter 18.

Diagnosing genetic problems
A necessary precursor to genetic management of wild populations of
threatened species is to diagnose their status. We need to answer three
questions:
• Has a threatened species/population lost genetic diversity?
• Is it suffering from inbreeding depression?
• Is it genetically fragmented?
The means for carrying out these diagnoses have been discussed in
Chapters 3, 12 and 13. Many threatened species have been examined to
evaluate their status. In fact, such diagnoses have been the main genetic
contributions to the conservation of wild populations, so far. However,
using this information to plan conservation management is still in its
infancy. Below, we consider the genetic management actions that
should be taken to alleviate genetic problems.

Most of the genetic contribution
to management of wild
populations has been to diagnose
the genetic status of threatened
species and populations

Recovering small inbred populations with low
genetic diversity
An effective management strategy in the recovery of small inbred populations with low genetic diversity is to introduce individuals from
other populations to improve their reproductive ﬁtness and restore
genetic diversity. There is extensive experimental evidence that this
approach can be successful. For example, it improved ﬁtness in natural
populations of greater prairie chickens, Swedish adders and a desert
topminnow ﬁsh (Chapter 12). In the scarlet gilia plant, outcrossing
improved seed mass for small inbred populations, but not for large noninbred populations (Fig. 16.1). Similar beneﬁts have been demonstrated
in experimental populations of fruit ﬂies, rye grass and Silene alba and
numerous domestic animals and plants (Polans & Allard 1989;
Spielman & Frankham 1992; Richards 2000).
In spite of the clear beneﬁts of outcrossing to recover small inbred
populations, there are very few cases where it is being done (see below).

Source of unrelated individuals for genetic
augmentation
The individuals chosen for introduction to inbred populations, for
recovery of ﬁtness and genetic diversity, may be either outbred (if available), or inbred but genetically differentiated from the population to

Small, inbred populations can be
recovered by introducing
unrelated individuals

Individuals to augment small
inbred populations with low
genetic diversity can come from
outbred populations, from inbred
but genetically unrelated
populations, or from related interfertile taxa

401

402

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

Fig. 16.1 Alleviating inbreeding
depression in the scarlet gilia plant
by outcrossing (after Heschel &
Paige 1995). Seed mass per plant
(SE) is shown for natural
pollination, hand pollination within
populations, and hand pollinations
using pollen from distant
populations, for populations at
three localities. Small populations
(Forest Hills and 151/80) exhibit
inbreeding depression for seed
mass. The different mean seed
masses in the different locations
are due to different environmental
conditions. Outcrossing improved the
seed mass in the small inbred
populations, while the large MNA
population did not change with
outcrossing.

which they are being introduced. An example of the latter situation is
provided by Australian wallabies (Table 13.1). The black-footed rock
wallaby has several inbred island populations that could be combined
to increase genetic diversity and improve reproductive ﬁtness. The combined genetic material from all the island populations contains most of
the microsatellite alleles found within the mainland populations.
There are 66 alleles at 10 microsatellite loci in mainland populations
and 47 in the pool of six island populations (Eldridge et al. 1999).
Mainland populations are threatened by fox predation. In the future, it
may be necessary to use crosses among island populations to reconstitute a new population for reintroduction to mainland localities once
foxes are eliminated. This approach is not yet being used in practice.
Where no unrelated individuals of the same taxon are available,
individuals from another sub-species can be used to alleviate inbreeding depression. This has been done for the Florida panther (Box 16.1) and
the Norfolk Island boobook owl (Example 10.4).
If an endangered species exists as only a single population, then the
only possible source of additional genetic material is from a related, interfertile species. American chestnuts have been crossed to the Chinese
chestnut to introduce genetic variation for resistance to blight that
severely depleted the American species. China is the source of the blight
disease and the Chinese chestnut possesses resistance (Hebard 1994).
The option of crossing a threatened species to a related species
requires very careful consideration. The potential beneﬁts need to be
very large, as there may be a serious risk of outbreeding depression.
However, inter-species crosses have been found to have equal probabilities of having beneﬁcial or deleterious effects on reproductive ﬁtness
(Arnold & Hodges 1995). Such crosses must be evaluated on an experimental basis, to ensure that hybrids are fertile in F1 and subsequent generations, prior to full implementation. Even where some outbreeding

SOURCE OF UNRELATED INIDIVIDUALS FOR GENETIC AUGMENTATION

depression occurs, inbreeding depression will be greatly reduced.
Further, natural selection will eventually remove most or all of the outbreeding depression, particularly if the hybrid population has a large
reproductive excess. Given that the extent of genetic differentiation
among species varies considerably across higher taxa, inter-species
crosses in some taxa will only be equivalent to crosses between subspecies in other taxa (Table 15.1).

Management of species with a single population
lacking genetic diversity
From a genetic perspective, the worst situation is where an endangered
species exists as a single, inbred population, with no sub-species or
related species with which to hybridize. Information on the level to
which genetic diversity has been reduced is useful only as an indication
of the fragility of the species. The lower the genetic diversity, the lower
becomes evolutionary potential, and the higher becomes the probability that the species has compromised ability to cope with changes in its
physical or biotic environment. For fragile species, management
regimes should be instituted to
• increase their population size (see above)
• establish populations in several location (to minimize the risk of
catastrophes)
• maximize their reproductive rate by improving their environment
(e.g. removing predators and competitors)
• insulate them from environmental change.
The latter regime should include quarantining from introduced diseases, pests, predators and competitors, and monitoring, so that remedial action can be initiated as soon as new environmental threats arise.
For example, the recently discovered and endangered Wollemi pine in
Australia entirely lacks genetic diversity at several hundred loci within
and among populations (Chapter 3). The recovery plan (NPWS 1998)
calls for (a) restricting access to the populations by keeping their location secret, (b) restricting access to the site to approved people, (c) instituting strict hygiene protocols to avoid introducing disease, (d) ﬁre
management and (e) maintaining ex-situ samples of each plant in
botanic gardens. Further, commercial propagation of the species is
increasing population size and reducing stochastic risks. Ironically, in
such a case, retention of just one individual retains the entire gene pool
of the species, although this would clearly be foolhardy in terms of
increased extinction risk from non-genetic causes. Plant species in this
situation have an advantage over animals, in that many can be propagated by cuttings.
In the less extreme case of the black-footed ferret, where there is low
genetic diversity, the recovery plan calls for the re-establishment of 10
wild populations, in different locations, to minimize the risks of disease
and other environmental catastrophes.

For species consisting of a single
population with reduced genetic
diversity, the only options are to
improve their environment and
minimize risks associated with
changed environments (especially
disease) and small population size

403

404

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

Restoration of genetic diversity in species with a single population
with low ﬁtness and limited quantitative genetic variation can only be
through mutation, or introgression from another species.

Genetic management of fragmented populations
The adverse genetic
consequences of population
fragmentation can be alleviated by
increasing gene ﬂow among
population fragments, by
improving habitat quality and by
re-establishing populations in
areas where they have become
extinct

Gene ﬂow must be re-established
to reduce the risk of extinction in
genetically isolated fragments

Fig. 16.2 Habitat fragmentation
for the giant panda in China. Both
its current and previous
distributions are shown.

Many threatened species have fragmented habitats, of the type illustrated for the giant panda (Fig. 16.2). The management options for fragmented populations to maximize genetic diversity and minimize
inbreeding and extinction risk are to
• increase the habitat area
• increase the suitability of available habitat (increase density)
• artiﬁcially increase the migration rate by translocation
• re-establish populations in suitable habitat where they have gone
extinct
• create habitat corridors.
To alleviate or prevent deleterious genetic consequences in isolated
fragments, gene ﬂow needs to be re-established by moving individuals
(translocation) or gametes (usually sperm or pollen), or by establishing
migration corridors. The beneﬁts of immigration have been established in many cases (Chapters 12 and 13). In the small scabious plant,
between-population crosses had ﬁtnesses 2.5 times that of the within-

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF FRAGMENTED POPULATIONS

population crosses (van Treuren et al. 1993). Computer projections indicate that immigration will reduce the extinction risks for two small
black rhinoceros populations in East Africa (Box 16.2). Similarly, computer projections demonstrated migration among population fragments to be beneﬁcial in the management of fragmented tule elk
populations in California (McCullough et al. 1996).
Translocation of individuals among populations may be costly, especially for large animals, and carries the risks of injury, disease transmission and behavioural disruption when individuals are released. For
example, introduced male lions regularly kill cubs. Further, sexually
mature males of many species may kill intruders. The cost of translocations can be reduced by artiﬁcial insemination for species where this
technique has been perfected. The same care to avoid outbreeding
depression, discussed previously, must be exercised in planning translocations.
Corridors among habitat fragments (frequently recommended for
non-genetic reasons) can re-establish gene ﬂow among isolated populations. Species vary in their requirements for a corridor to be an effective
migration path (Lindenmayer & Nix 1993). The most ambitious proposal
of this kind is ‘The Wildlands Project’ – to provide corridors from north
to south in North America (Davis 1992). The corridors will link existing
reserves and surround both reserves and corridors with buffer zones
that are hospitable to wild animals and plants. The time frame for
achieving this vision is hundreds of years, given the political, social and
ﬁnancial challenges. None the less, such systems are essential if we are
to conserve biodiversity in the long term. With global climate change,
plants and animals need to alter their distributions to cope with moving
climatic zones. At present, such movement is largely prevented by
inhospitable habitat between reserves and protected areas.

Box 16.2 Modelling the effects of inbreeding depression
and immigration on the survival of black
rhinoceros populations in Kenya (after Dobson
et al. 1992)
Black rhinoceros populations are threatened across their entire range due, predominantly, to poaching. In East Africa, no single population numbered more than 60
animals when this work was done (the situation is probably worse now). The population is fragmented and there is no migration among most, or all, of the fragments.
Several of the populations are in protected sanctuaries or reserves.
Dobson and co-workers investigated the demographic and genetic factors likely
to contribute to extinction risk, and the factors that must be taken into consideration in managing the populations. The study involved stochastic computer projections that followed the history of each individual from birth to death, as well as their
reproductive output (Chapter 20). Input ﬁles contained the identity and parentage
of each individual, age and sex-speciﬁc rates of survival and reproduction as well as

405

406

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

rates of immigration of different age and sex classes. Data from rhinoceros populations in sanctuaries were used as input.
Populations at Lewa Downs and Nakuru National Park, Kenya were modelled
for 200 years with (a) no immigration and no inbreeding depression (only demographic and environmental stochasticity), (b) inbreeding depression with no immigration and (c) with inbreeding depression and immigration of one immigrant every
10 years for the next 50 years. Inbreeding depression was applied to survival at a level
of 2.0 lethal equivalents per haploid genome (4.0 per diploid), approximating the
average value observed for captive mammals by Ralls et al. (1988). The initial population sizes of the two populations were set at their actual sizes, 10 females and 3
males (5 and 1 being adults) at Lewa Downs and 7 females and 11 males (5 and 8
being adults) at Nakuru National Park. Carrying capacities were estimated at 20 for
Lewa Downs and 71 for Nakuru. Rates of breeding were adjusted by a function incorporating density dependence.
The results, based on 200 simulations of the three situations are given below.
Scenario (a) yielded an extinction risk of over 50% after 200 years in the smaller Lewa
Downs population, but less than 10% in the larger Nakuru population, both due to
stochastic factors. Scenario (b) yielded increased extinction risk over those in (a) in
both populations, the extinction probabilities rising to 76% and 22%, respectively.
Thus, both of these isolated population fragments are susceptible to extinction from
inbreeding depression, as well as to demographic and environmental stochasticity.
Extinction risks were lowest with scenario (c) being about 40% and 5%, respectively.
Consequently, immigration is predicted to reduce extinction risk in these fragmented
rhinoceros populations. Additional migration after year 50 would result in further
reductions in extinction risks. Consequently, clear beneﬁts of immigration on population persistence were predicted.

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF FRAGMENTED POPULATIONS

Despite the widespread fragmentation of populations of threatened
species, we are only aware of three cases in animals and two cases in
plants, where immigration is being used as a practical measure to alleviate inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity in the wild. Individuals
from other populations are being introduced to small populations of
endangered red-cockaded woodpeckers, as computer simulations have
predicted their likely extinction without augmentation (Haig et al.
1993). The other animal cases are the endangered and inbred Florida
panther (Box 16.1) and the golden lion tamarin (Box 20.1).
The two botanical examples involve self-incompatible plants where
loss of alleles at self-incompatibility loci results in reduced ﬁtness due
to shortage of compatible pollen (Chapter 10). The threatened lakeside
daisy population in Illinois was incapable of reproducing as all individuals contained the same S allele. It has now been outcrossed to Ohio
plants, and seeds from Ohio and Ontario populations have been introduced, to increase diversity of S alleles and recover reproductive ﬁtness
(Demauro 1994). The endangered Mauna Kea silversword was reduced to
50 adult plants through overgrazing by sheep (Rieseberg & Swensen
1996). Subsequently, 450 plants were raised and outplanted to augment
the populations. However, genetic analyses revealed that all the outplanted individuals were the progeny of two female plants and had
lower genetic diversity than the original wild population (Robichaux et
al. 1997). As this is a self-incompatible plant, the outplanted individuals
produced only a 20% seed set. This rose to 60% when they were pollinated by unrelated individuals from the natural population, which presumably carried different S alleles. To alleviate these problems,
outplanted individuals have been cross-pollinated using pollen from
unrelated individuals from the natural population.
We now consider two practical decisions that must be made when
genetic augmentation of small, inbred populations is contemplated –
the source of the immigrants and the rate of input.

Genetic management of
fragmented populations is the
greatest unmet challenge in
conservation genetics

Managing gene ﬂow
Managing gene ﬂow involves considerable complexity as many issues
must be addressed, including:
• Which individuals to translocate?
• How many?
• How often?
• From where to where?
• When should translocations begin?
• When should they be stopped?
Answering these questions requires that the population be genetically
monitored. Since there are so many variables to optimize, computer
projections of the type given in Box 16.2 will often be required to deﬁne
(and reﬁne) the required management. The objective is to identify a
regime that maintains genetically viable populations with acceptable
costs and that ﬁts within other management constraints.

In managing translocations, many
variables must to optimized. This
requires continuous genetic
monitoring, computer projections
to optimize management options,
and adaptive management

407

408

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

Re-establishing extinct populations
To maintain populations at the
largest possible size, extinct
populations need to be reestablished by translocation from
other populations

To maximize population sizes and minimize extinction risks, populations that have become extinct should be re-established from extant
populations, if the habitat can still support the species.
Which populations should be used to re-establish extinct populations? To minimize inbreeding and maximize genetic diversity, the refounding population should be sampled from most, or all, extant
populations. A case of poor choice of populations is provided by the
koala in southeastern Australia (Box 16.3). Island populations with low
genetic diversity were used for reintroduction, as ample individuals
were available from those sources. Genetic issues were ignored and
deleterious genetic consequences have resulted.
Where there is evidence of adaptive genetic differentiation among
extant populations (e.g. many plants), the translocated individuals
should normally come from populations most likely to be the best
adapted to the reintroduction habitat. This is frequently the geographically closest extant population.
Care should taken when island populations are being considered as
source populations for translocation as they typically have low genetic
variation and are inbred (Frankham 1997, 1998). For example, Eldridge
et al. (1999) demonstrated that small isolated mainland populations of
black-footed rock wallabies in Western Australia had much higher levels
of microsatellite diversity than the numerically larger population on
Barrow Island. Further, there was evidence that the reproductive rate
was lower in the island population. This population would be an unwise
choice as a source for translocation.
Genetic diversity in populations available for restocking should be
compared and the most diverse population with the highest reproductive ﬁtness, or a cross among populations, chosen.

Box 16.3 Reintroduction of koalas in southeastern
Australia: a poorly designed program with
adverse genetic impacts (Houlden et al. 1996;
Sherwin et al. 2000)
The koala is a unique marsupial endemic to Eastern Australia. It is both a cultural icon
and an important contributor to tourist income. It once ranged down the East Coast
from Queensland to Victoria and South Australia (see map), but its numbers have
been reduced by hunting, habitat loss and disease. At the peak of hunting in 1924, 2
million animals were shot. By the 1930s, koalas inhabited less than 50% of their
former range. They had disappeared in South Australia, and were nearly extinct in
Victoria. However, they were still considered common in Queensland where they
subsequently recovered without large-scale assistance. The fur trade ceased by the
1930s when koalas were given legal protection in all states. Subsequently, much effort
has gone into koala conservation.

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF FRAGMENTED POPULATIONS

Extensive translocations of animals occurred in the southeast. A population was
founded from as few as 2–3 individuals on French Island (FI) in Victoria late in the
19th century. This population grew rapidly in the absence of predators and rapidly
reached carrying capacity. Surplus animals from this population were used to found
an additional population on Kangaroo Island (KI) (18 adult founders plus young) in
1923–25, and to supplement a population founded on Phillip Island (PI) in the 1870s.
The French and Phillip Island populations were used widely to supplement mainland
Victorian populations and the Kangaroo Island population to restock mainland
South Australia. The restocked South Australia mainland population has gone
through three bottlenecks, mainland Victoria→ French Island → Kangaroo
Island → mainland South Australia. Since 1923, 10 000 animals have been translocated to 70 locations.
Stocking of populations using individuals from bottlenecked populations is
expected to result in loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding. As predicted, the southeastern populations in Victoria and South Australia have about half the genetic diversity found in the less-perturbed populations further north; 5.3 versus 11.5
microsatellite alleles per locus and heterozygosities (He) of 0.44 versus 0.85. DNA
ﬁngerprints and RAPD analyses provide similar conclusions. As expected, the
Kangaroo Island populations had the lowest genetic diversity of all surveyed populations. All southeast populations showed similar microsatellite allele frequencies, and
similar mtDNA haplotypes, while the more northerly populations exhibited considerable genetic differentiation among populations.
Translocations using animals with low genetic diversity have reduced genetic
diversity and distorted natural allele frequencies. The translocations may have contributed to reductions in reproductive ﬁtness, including lowered resistance to

409

410

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

Chlamydia infection, to a lowering of sperm concentrations and motility, and to an
increased frequency of a testicular abnormality (aplasia) (Seymour et al. 2001).
What might have been done to avoid such problems? Loss of genetic diversity
and inbreeding depression would have been averted if the French Island population
had been founded with more individuals, or if its genetic diversity had been augmented to give it a greater base. The situation would have been much better if the
more diverse Phillip Island population had not been ‘swamped’ with French Island
individuals.
What can be done to reverse the current problems? The most efﬁcient strategy
would be to introduce more genetic diversity into the southeastern populations
(both island and mainland). Since the koala population is somewhat differentiated,
this would best be done from nearby populations. The ideal solution would be discovery of a remnant population in Victoria with high genetic diversity. If none exists,
then the best source of genetic diversity is from New South Wales. Genetic diversity
should be checked in source populations before they are used for translocation.

Genetic issues in reserve design
Reserves need to be sufﬁciently
large to support the target
species, and contain habitat to
which the species is adapted.
Natural or artiﬁcial gene ﬂow
must occur between reserves

There are many biological, ecological, political and genetic considerations to balance when considering the design of nature reserves. Soulé
& Simberloff (1986) are among the few authors to consider the genetic
issues. They suggested that three steps are involved in the ecology and
genetics of reserve design: (a) identify target, or keystone species, whose
loss would signiﬁcantly decrease the value of biodiversity in the reserve,
(b) determine the minimum population size needed to guarantee a high
probability of long-term survival for these species, and (c) using known
population densities for these species, estimate the area required to
sustain minimum numbers. The genetic issues in reserve design are:
• Is the reserve large enough to support a genetically viable population?
• Is the species adapted to the habitat in the reserve?
• Should there be one large reserve, or several smaller reserves?
From the arguments given in Chapter 14, a reserve of sufﬁcient size to
maintain an effective population size of at least several hundred and an
actual size of several thousand is required. Detailed computer projections support this contention (Chapter 20).
Should a threatened species be maintained in a single large reserve,
or in several smaller reserves? The issue of single large versus several
small (SLOSS) reserves was addressed in Chapter 13. In general, a single
large reserve is more desirable from the genetic point of view, if there is
a risk that populations in small reserves will become extinct (a likely scenario for many species). However, protection against catastrophes dictates that more than one reserve is preferable, or even obligatory. The
best compromise is to have more than one sizeable reserve, but to
ensure that there is natural or artiﬁcial gene ﬂow among them. In practice, the choice of reserves has often been a haphazard process, deter-

INTROGRESSION AND HYBRIDIZATION

mined more by local politics, alternative land uses and the need for
reserves to serve multiple purposes (e.g. recreation), than by biological
principles.

Introgression and hybridization
Introgression is the ﬂow of alleles from one species, or sub-species, to
another. Typically, hybridizations occur when humans introduce exotic
species into the range of rare species (Ellstrand et al. 1999), or alter
habitat so that previously isolated species are now in secondary contact.
Introgression is a threat to the genetic integrity of a range of canid,
duck, ﬁsh, plant, and other species (Rhymer & Simberloff 1996).
Introgression can be detected using a wide range of genetic markers,
including allozymes, microsatellites, DNA ﬁngerprints, RAPDs and,
where appropriate, chromosomal studies. Allozyme analyses of captive
Asiatic lions indicated that they contained alleles from African lions
(O’Brien 1994). Endangered Florida panthers consist of two populations,
one of which resulted from introgression from a South American subspecies of panthers (Box 16.1). Females of the highly endangered
Ethiopian wolf have been shown to hybridize with male domestic dogs,
with the levels varying in different populations (Gottelli et al. 1994). This
ﬁnding was based on microsatellite and mtDNA analyses. Conversely,
microsatellite data on Mexican wolf populations showed no evidence of
introgression from dogs or coyotes (Hedrick et al. 1997). Widespread evidence of introgression has been detected in salmonid ﬁsh based on
studies with genetic markers (Ryman et al. 1995; Allendorf & Waples
1996). Allozyme studies indicate that there has been extensive hybridization between the endangered Hawaiian duck and introduced
mallard ducks on the island of Oahu (Haig & Avise 1996).
Introgression has also been detected in plants. Extensive introgression into the Galapagos Islands endemic tetraploid cotton from introduced cultivated cottons has been detected using data from 59 allozyme
loci (Wendel & Percy 1990). Further, hybridization of the Catalina
mahogany, California’s rarest tree, with related species has been documented (Rieseberg 1991).
A particularly deleterious form of hybridization is that between
related diploid and tetraploid populations, resulting in sterile triploids.
This has been reported in the endangered grassland daisy in Australia
(Young & Murray 2000).

Some species are endangered due
to genetic ‘swamping’ by
interbreeding with common
related species. Genetic markers
can be used to detect
introgression and hybrid
individuals

Alleviating introgression
The Catalina mahogany (Box 16.4) provides an example of management
of a species subject to hybridization. The major part of this management
program involves protection of the remaining plants and increasing
their numbers. In this case, genetic information was critical in deﬁning

Introgression can be alleviated by
removing the hybridizing species,
by eliminating hybrid individuals,
or by expanding the number of
‘pure’ individuals

411

412

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

the hybridization problem, and in identifying hybrid individuals, but
had a limited role in the recovery process.
Options for addressing this problem include eliminating the introduced species, or translocating ‘pure’ individuals into isolated regions
or into captivity. Success for these options is hard to achieve. It will not
be practical to remove all dogs from the habitat of the Ethiopian wolf.
In the case of native salmon in the Paciﬁc Northwest, other salmonids
have already been introduced. In theory, ﬁsh could be exterminated in
closed lakes and re-stocking carried out with ‘pure’ native ﬁsh. However,
control of ﬁsh dispersal is notoriously difﬁcult, as ﬁshermen often
undertake illegal stocking.

Box 16.4 Catalina mahogany: identiﬁcation of
hybridization with a related species and
institution of a recovery plan (Rieseberg &
Swensen 1996)
The Catalina mahogany is a small endangered tree restricted almost entirely to a
single gully on Santa Catalina Island in the Channel Islands off California. The species
is extremely rare, having declined from 40 to 11 plants by 1996. Its decline was largely
a consequence of introduction of goats. The grazing and rooting by goats, pigs and
recently introduced bison and mule deer remain a serious threat, despite efforts to
control introduced species. Active management began in the late 1970s. A botanical
inventory of the island identiﬁed several individuals that resembled mountain mahogany (a separate species), or were intermediate. Genetic studies using allozymes and
RAPDs identiﬁed six of 11 adult trees as ‘true’ Catalina mahogany, and the other ﬁve
as hybrids with mountain mahogany. In addition, one mainland plant was identiﬁed as
either a relict, or a relict that had hybridized with mainland mountain mahogany.
The management of the Catalina mahogany began with the fencing of two trees,
following by fencing an area of 0.4 hectares (1 acre) around these trees. This resulted
in the production of about 70 seedlings that were mostly ‘pure’, based on allozyme
analyses. Several cuttings from the ‘pure’ trees have been propagated at the Rancho
Santa Anna Botanic Gardens and 16 of these have been planted on the island.
Survival of outplanted trees has been high (about 90%). A major remaining problem
is the lack of protection against introduced pests at most localities. Genetics has been
critical in identifying the hybridization problem and in providing a method for detecting hybrids during the recovery process.

Impacts of harvesting
Harvesting may alter sex-ratio, Ne,
breeding system, generation
length, or gene ﬂow, and result in
inbreeding and loss of genetic
diversity

Many species of wild animals and plants are harvested. This may alter
effective population size, genetic diversity and generation length.
Usually the effects are deleterious genetically. For example, Ryman et al.
(1981) showed that hunting of moose and white-tailed deer would
severely reduce genetic diversity even within short periods. Hunting
regimes reduced the effective population size by 64%–79% in moose and
by 58%–65% in the deer, depending on the regime and assumptions
made. Poaching has had a devastating impact on sex-ratio and reproduc-

IMPACTS OF HARVESTING

tive rate in Asian elephants (Box 16.5). Hunting for bighorn sheep primarily targets large-horned rams. Since rams with larger horns have
higher heterozygosity, hunting may reduce genetic diversity
(Fitzsimmons et al. 1995). Hunting the greywing francolin in South
Africa had a limited genetic impact; the reduction in local population
size in hunted populations was balanced by increased immigration following hunting (Little et al. 1993).
Logging of forest trees may alter the breeding system. In a comparison of logged and nearby unlogged forest, Murawski et al. (1994) showed
that logging increased the level of inbreeding in a rare tree in Sri Lanka
from 15% selﬁng in primary forest to 35% in logged forest. Gene ﬂow has
been reduced by fragmentation in the royal mahogany tree from
Central and South America (Dayanandan et al. 1999).

Box 16.5 Impact of poaching on sex-ratio, effective
population size, reproductive ﬁtness and
population viability in Asian elephants (Sukumar
et al. 1998)
Poaching for ivory has had a devastating impact on sex-ratios, as only male Asian elephants have tusks. Poaching over the last 20 years in Southern India has so decimated
the male population that in Periyar Reserve there are only six adult males to 605 adult
females. The effective size of this population is only 24. Further, with such a small
number of males, female reproduction rates have declined. Females that do not
breed early remain reproductively barren throughout the rest of their life. Thus, harvesting not only affects the sex-ratio and effective population size, but it also reduces
reproductive ﬁtness. Modelling suggests that the impact of this poaching over the
next 20 years will cause a population decline of between 0.6% and 1.5% per year. This
further reduction in population size will only exacerbate the genetic problems,
driving the population into an extinction vortex.

Many wild species are selectively harvested by humans who favour
particular phenotypes within the population. These include elephants, rhinoceroses, deer, moose, ﬁsh, whales, crustaceans, forest
trees and many other plants. This may result in selection pressures
that change the phenotype of the species, conﬂicting with forces of
natural selection and reducing the overall ﬁtness of the population.
For example, males with large antlers are the favoured prey of
hunters. This is expected to select for smaller antlers, conﬂicting with
natural selection favouring large antlers in males. Similarly, the frequency of tuskless male elephants is rising in several populations in
Africa and Asia, because of ivory poaching (Dobson et al. 1992;
Sukumar et al. 1998). Tuskless elephant males may be less successful
than tusked males in ﬁnding mates and less able to ward off lions and
other predators.
The obvious solution to the impacts of selective harvesting is to
change regulations to make it more random, but this may be very difﬁcult to achieve in practice. Harvest of elephant ivory is itself already an
illegal activity that is not controllable. Despite many international

Selective harvesting by humans
may change the genetic
composition and phenotypes of
populations

Impacts of selective harvest may
be alleviated by changing harvest
regimes, or by preserving a
portion of the species without
harvest

413

414

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

agreements, total ﬁsh catches are difﬁcult to regulate, as the collapse of
so many ﬁsheries attests. As harvested species often occur in large,
though frequently declining numbers, an option is to preserve a proportion of the population from harvest. In this way, fully wild stock is maintained to introduce into harvested areas so that the genetic impacts of
harvest are reduced.
The genetic and evolutionary impacts of selective harvesting deserve
more attention.

Genetic management of species that are not
outbreeding diploids
Species that are not diploid
outbreeders require modiﬁed
genetic management as they differ
in distributions of genetic diversity,
in rates of loss of genetic diversity
and in responses to inbreeding

In the material above, we have concentrated on diploid outbreeding
species. However, many species of plants, and some animals, have
diverse breeding systems that require modiﬁed management regimes.
These include:
• asexual reproduction
• self-fertilization
• haplo-diploidy (in Hymenoptera)
• polyploidy (as found in many plants and a few animals).
The remainder of this chapter is concerned with their characteristics
and the modiﬁcations to genetic management that this entails.

Asexual species
In asexual species, many
individuals may have identical
genotypes, so that great care is
required to sample the diversity of
clones within the species

Many species of plants are capable of vegetative reproduction, via
runners, bulbs, corms, etc. Species with exclusively asexual reproduction typically exist as one or a few clones. Several endangered Australian
species exist as single clones, including the triploid shrub King’s
lomatia, the Meelup mallee tree, and the Wollemi pine (Lynch et al.
1998; Rossetto et al. 1999; Hogbin et al. 2000). The endangered Limonium
dufourii plant from Spain consists of several triploid clones (Palacios &
González-Candelas 1997).
In a fully clonal species, there is no concern with inbreeding.
However, species that only exist as a single clone will have severely compromised ability to adapt in response to environmental changes, in a
similar manner to highly inbred populations of outbreeding species.
This fragility requires management of the type used for the Wollemi
pine (see above).
In species that show a mixture of sexual and asexual reproduction,
the number of genetically distinct individuals may be far less than the
number of individuals. For example, 53 individuals of endangered
Australian shrub Haloragodendron lucasii consisted of only seven clones
(Hogbin et al. 2000). Consequently, genetic diversity was much more
restricted than in an equivalent sexually reproducing species. Partially
clonal reproduction is also found in several other threatened plants,
including lakeside daisy, false poison sumac, and Santa Cruz Island

ASEXUAL SPECIES

bush mallow in North America (Demauro 1994; Hamrick & Godt 1996;
Rieseberg & Swensen 1996).
Maintenance of genetic diversity in asexually reproducing species
requires that the structure of such populations be recognized for in-situ
conservation, in re-establishing extinct populations, and in sampling
for ex-situ conservation. Genetic diversity may occur among clones, but
individuals within clones are very similar, or identical. The major conservation need is to identify and maintain as many distinct clones as
possible. In theory, one individual is sufﬁcient to capture the genetic
diversity of the entire clone. However, mutation generates low levels of
genetic diversity within clones. Thus, several members of each clone
should be preserved.

Self-fertilizing species
About 20% of plant species habitually self-fertilize and another 40% do
so occasionally. Further, some invertebrates (e.g. some slugs and snails)
also self (Chapter 11). The endangered Malheur wirelettuce is an obligate inbreeder (Falk et al. 1996), while Brown’s banksia is partially selffertilizing (Sampson et al. 1994).
Predominantly self-fertilizing species are typically less heterozygous than outbreeding species, with a higher proportion of their
genetic diversity being distributed among populations compared to
within populations (Chapter 3; Liu et al. 1998). Consequently, wide sampling of selﬁng species is required to encompass their total genetic
diversity (Falk & Holsinger 1991). The loss of individual populations is
likely to have more serious consequences than the loss of individual
populations of outbreeding species.
Inbreeding is less of an issue in selﬁng species, as they typically
suffer less inbreeding depression than outbreeding species (Chapter
12). However, selﬁng populations often outcross at intervals, so the
opportunity to do so in threatened species should be maintained.
Habitat loss and fragmentation may have greater impacts on selﬁng
species than on outcrossing species since more of their genetic diversity
is distributed among populations and less within. Reduced gene ﬂow as
a result of population fragmentation is less important in naturally
inbreeding species, as they are already highly fragmented due to
restricted gene ﬂow. To retain genetic diversity within populations, and
heterozygosity within individuals, small fragmented populations need
to be augmented with individuals from other fragments.

Haplo-diploids
More than 15% of animal species, primarily Hymenoptera (ants, bees
and wasps), have a haplo-diploid method of reproduction (Hedrick &
Parker 1997). In Hymenoptera, females are diploid and males haploid,
and all loci behave as if they are sex-linked. The effective size for a

Selﬁng species have less
heterozygosity within populations
and more differentiation among
populations than outbreeders.
Consequently, much greater effort
is required to preserve diverse
populations than for outbreeders

Haplo-diploid species have lower
effective population sizes and less
genetic diversity than diploid
outbreeders. They require larger
population sizes to retain genetic
diversity than outbreeders

415

416

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

haplo-diploid is only three-quarters that of a diploid of the same population size, when there is an equal sex-ratio (Table 10.1). Consequently,
they have lower genetic diversity than a diploid species (Hedrick &
Parker 1997).
In haplo-diploid species, equilibrium frequencies of deleterious
mutations in mutation–selection equilibrium are expected to be lower
than in diploid species, so they are expected to show less inbreeding
depression than diploids (Hedrick & Parker 1997).
Management of haplo-diploid species requires larger population
sizes to maintain equivalent proportions of genetic diversity than for a
diploid species. However, there is less concern about inbreeding depression.

Polyploids
Genetic management issues for
polyploid species are similar to
those for diploid species, but
concerns about small population
size and inbreeding are less

Genetic management of polyploids (the majority of plants) follows the
same principles as for diploids with similar breeding systems. However,
there is generally less genetic concern than for equivalent diploids
(Brown & Young 2000; Buza et al. 2000). Polyploids probably suffer less
inbreeding depression than diploids (Chapter 12). Further, loss of
genetic diversity in small populations is less in polyploids than in
similar sized diploid populations (Chapter 10). Consequently, polyploids should tolerate lower population sizes than diploids. However,
the sizes required to avoid demographic and environmental stochasticity and catastrophes will be similar to those for diploids (see Chapter 20).
Hybridization of polyploids with related diploids (where they occur)
is likely to reduce population viability. Crosses of tetraploids to diploids
yield sterile triploids, and reduce overall reproductive output, as has
been documented in the endangered grassland daisy (Young & Murray
2000). Triploid individuals were found in a re-established tetraploid
population because of hybridization with a nearby diploid population.
Genetic management should aim to minimize hybridization of polyploids and diploids.

Summary
1. Genetic management of wild populations involves increasing
population sizes, recovery of small inbred populations, management
of fragmented populations, alleviating genetic ‘swamping’ due to
hybridization with related species and minimizing the genetic
impacts of harvesting.
2. Small inbred populations with low genetic diversity can be recovered by adding immigrants from other populations (where they exist),
and by increasing their sizes to minimize further genetic deterioration.
3. Fragmented populations with inadequate gene ﬂow require

PROBLEMS

translocations, or creation of corridors, to avoid genetic deterioration.
Further, extinct populations should be re-established to maximize
population size.
4. Hybridization with common related species is a threat to some
mammals, birds and plants, and numerous ﬁsh species. Management
is required to minimize hybridization by reducing the common
species or by protecting ‘pure’ populations.
5. Selective harvesting genetically alters species. Harvest regimes
should be designed so that they are as non-selective as possible, or segments of the population should be maintained without harvest.
6. Species that are not outbreeding diploids have altered susceptibility to loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding depression and
require modiﬁed genetic management regimes.
FURTHER READING

Avise & Hamrick (1996) Conservation Genetics. Contains case histories on wild
management of threatened species.
Bowles & Whelan (1994) Restoration of Endangered Species. Covers both the conceptual issues in restoration and case studies for animals and plants.
Clark et al. (1994) Endangered Species Recovery. Describes case histories on endangered species recovery, but contains little genetics.
Falk & Holsinger (1991) Genetics and Conservation of Rare Plants. Contains a
number of chapters on management of wild threatened plant species.
Woodford (2000) The Wollemi Pine. An interesting, well-written popular book on
the discovery, conservation and genetics of the Wollemi pine.
PROBLEMS

16.1 Recovering inbred populations: How would you alleviate the
genetic problems of a moderate sized, but inbred population of euros
on Barrow Island? Other non-inbred populations exist on the mainland.
16.2 Recovering inbred populations: Which population would you
choose to recover a small inbred population with a heterozygosity of
zero, and a genotype of A1A1B1B1C1C1? (a) A large population with genotype A1A1B1B1C1C1, or (b) a small one with A2A2B1B1C2C2?
16.3 Recovering inbred populations: Which population would you
choose to recover a small inbred population with zero heterozygosity,
and a genotype of A1A1B1B1C1C1? (a) A large population with zero
heterozygosity, or (b) a small one with 2.5% heterozygosity?
16.4 Genetic management: How would you address the problem of
loss of alleles at the self-incompatibility locus and consequent sterility
in small populations of the endangered grassland daisy (Young et al.
2000)? Other populations of this plant exist.
16.5 Genetic management: How would you address the problem of
fragmentation among isolated island populations of the endangered
black-footed rock wallaby?
16.6 Managing fragmented populations: Which species in a fragmented habitat is expected to require most translocations to maintain

417

418

GENETICS AND THE MANAGEMENT OF WILD POPULATIONS

reproductive ﬁtness and genetic diversity in local populations? A bird,
a snail, or a rodent (assume that all have the same effective sizes in
each patch)?
16.7 Selective harvesting: What effect would you expect from the
selective harvesting of the largest trees in a forest tree species over a
long period?
16.8 Genetic management: How would you address the genetic
management of the asexual plant King’s lomatia in Tasmania,
Australia? All individuals belong to a single clone (Lynch et al. 1998).

Chapter 17

Genetic management of captive
populations
Captive breeding provides a means for conserving species that are
incapable of surviving in their natural habitats. Captive populations
of endangered species are managed to retain high levels of genetic
diversity over long periods. Minimization of kinship is the current
recommended genetic management strategy

Terms:
Coancestry,
ex-situ conservation,
gene dropping,
genome resource bank,
genome uniqueness,
in-situ conservation,
kinship,
mean kinship,
reintroduction

A selection of endangered species
that have been saved from
extinction by captive breeding:
Guam rail, Franklin tree (North
America), Partula snail (Tahiti),
Potosi pupﬁsh (Mexico), Socorro
dove (Mexico), Père David’s deer
(China) and European bison.

420

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

Why captive breed?
Many species are incapable of
surviving in their natural habitats
due, predominantly, to human
impacts

IUCN, the premier world
conservation body, has endorsed
captive breeding as an essential
component in the conservation of
species

For terrestrial vertebrates alone, it is estimated that 2000–3000 species
will require captive breeding over the next 200 years to save them from
extinction (Soulé et al. 1986; Seal 1991; Tudge 1995). Already, 25 animal
species, including addax, Arabian oryx, black-footed ferret, California
condor, Père David’s deer, Przewalski’s horse, scimitar-horned oryx, and
11 species of Partula snail and several plants, including the Franklin tree
and Cooke’s kok’io, have been preserved in captivity following extinction in the wild. Further, many threatened species have captive populations that act as insurance against extinction in the wild. Traditionally,
the objective of captive breeding programs was simply preservation of
species, sometimes ironically called ‘living museums’, and increase of
numbers. Now managers of zoos, botanic gardens and wildlife parks
almost universally accept the necessity to retain species as dynamic evolutionary entities and to maintain their genetic ‘health’ both for longterm viability and, hopefully, for subsequent release back to their
natural habitats.
The World Conservation Union (IUCN 1987) has recognized the critical value of captive breeding programs. They assist conservation by:
• Establishing populations in secure ex-situ locations
• Educating and engaging the public on conservation issues
• Providing a focus for funding-raising efforts for conservation
• Providing animals for research on the basic biology of species,
knowledge that can then be applied to conservation of species in the
wild
• Providing animals for reintroduction programs, where applicable.
Techniques and management strategies in ex-situ conservation range
from relatively simple cultivation of plants and husbandry of animals
to high-technology procedures such as artiﬁcial insemination and cryopreservation of organisms, cells and gametes. These are being applied to
a wide variety of animals and plants. Most emphasis is placed on the
more charismatic species, ﬂowering plants, mammals and birds, with
lower plants and invertebrates only rarely receiving attention.

Extent of captive breeding and propagation activity
Considerable resources are being
devoted to captive breeding and
other ex situ conservation
activities, but they are inadequate
to conserve all needy threatened
species

Approximately 1150 zoos and aquaria worldwide currently house about
1 232 000 individual animals, including 584 000 individual ﬁsh, 202 000
mammals, 351 000 birds, 74 000 reptiles and 21 000 amphibians (Magin
et al. 1994). Perhaps 5%–10% of the available spaces are used for endangered species (Seal 1991). With changes in priority, there could be breeding space for about 800 endangered species in zoos and wildlife parks.
In contrast, an estimated 2000–3000 species of terrestrial vertebrates
alone will require captive breeding within the foreseeable future. As of
1989/90 245 threatened vertebrate species were being bred in captivity,

WHY CAPTIVE BREED?

174 mammals (34% of threatened species), 32 birds (3%), 34 reptiles (20%)
and 5 amphibians (9%) (Magin et al. 1994).
Perhaps 30% of all vascular plants are represented in the collections
of approximately 1500 botanic gardens worldwide (Briggs & Walters
1997). The Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew, UK alone houses about 10% of
all vascular plants; and 2700 out of about 25 000 threatened species
(Primack 1998). The Center for Plant Conservation in the USA now maintains 480 endangered US plants in protective cultivation or seed storage
(Falk et al. 1996).

Zoos in the 21st century
The menageries of the late 1800s and early 1900s were consumers of
wildlife. They exhibited small collections of exotic species, primarily as
single individuals or single pairs. Zoo collections changed dramatically
in the 1970s (Ginsberg 1993). Wildlife populations were declining, legislation was being adopted to limit the trade in endangered species (e.g.
US Endangered Species Act in 1972; CITES in 1973), and a conservation
ethic was growing, partly as a result of public exposure to wildlife
through television. The late Gerald Durrell, charming author, broadcaster and founder of the Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust and Jersey
Zoo, was a leading ﬁgure in recognizing and promoting the role of zoos
and captive breeding in conservation. Consequently, zoos began to
maintain larger collections and to devote more effort to breeding
endangered species in captivity. However, each zoo can only maintain
a certain number of individuals and these small breeding groups can
rapidly become inbred and potentially non-viable. By the early 1980s,
zoo managers recognized that their contribution to conservation
could best be made through regional and international cooperative
breeding programs and through collaborations with in-situ conservation programs.
During the last 20 years, the role of zoos has expanded substantially,
with active participation in a wide range of collaborative captive breeding and conservation activities. In North America, Species Survival
Plans (SSP), co-ordinated by the American Zoo and Aquarium
Association, were ﬁrst developed in 1981. SSPs involve co-ordinated
management of all captive individuals held by co-operating institutions, and are now in place for many endangered species. Regional and
international studbooks (computer databases containing the pedigree
and life history of all individuals in the population) are used to make
recommendations on which animals should breed, with whom, how
often and where. Individual institutions permit their animals to be
managed under one genetic and demographic objective, determined by
the co-ordinator, and animals are frequently moved among participating institutions for breeding to optimize genetic management. Similar
programs have also been developed in Australia, Europe, Japan, New
Zealand, South Africa and Central America.

The menageries of the 19th
century are now zoological parks
and the best are major animal
conservation centers

Zoos are now involved in a wide
range of collaborative captive
breeding programs and in general
conservation activities

421

422

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

A long-term goal for many captive
breeding programs is to eventually
reintroduce species back into the
wild

Information on pedigrees, individual histories, breeding experiences and health records are collected at each zoo and maintained by
the International Species Information System (ISIS) in Minnesota. ISIS
provides a central repository, with 1.4 million records on 7600 species
from 554 zoos and wildlife parks in 56 countries (as of early 2000). To
better collect and manage the information, ISIS has developed record
keeping software such as the Animal Record Keeping System (ARKS),
Single Population Analysis and Record Keeping System (SPARKS) and
Medical Animal Record Keeping System (MEDARKS).
Zoos also contribute to both ex-situ and in-situ conservation through
involvement with the Conservation Breeding Specialist Group (CBSG) of
the Species Survival Commission of IUCN, led by Ulysses Seal. Their programs include (a) Conservation Assessment and Management Plans
(CAMPs) that provide initial assessments of the global status of species
and initial research and management recommendations, (b) population and habitat viability assessments (Chapter 20) that provide detailed
quantitative assessment, evaluation of management options, and recommendations for conservation action, (c) zoo conservation planning,
(d) providing expertise relating to captive breeding, and (e) co-ordinating meetings and workshops on topics required to advance conservation, etc. Their CAMPs provided much of the recent information for the
Red List of Threatened Animals (IUCN 1996). In many very difﬁcult cases,
CBSG has facilitated resolution of disputes among agencies and groups
involved in high proﬁle conservation programs (e.g. the cases of Florida
panthers, black-footed ferrets and giant pandas).
Captive populations can provide animals for reintroduction programs. While reintroduction programs exist for many species, habitats
are not available, and threatening processes continue for the majority
(Primack 1998). The next chapter details the genetic issues involved in
reintroducing species to the wild.

Stages in captive breeding and reintroduction
Captive breeding and reintroduction may be viewed as a process involving six stages (Fig. 17.1):
• Decline of the wild population and its genetic consequences
• Founding a captive population
• Growing the captive populations to a secure size
• Managing the captive population over generations
• Selecting individuals for reintroduction
• Managing the reintroduced population (probably fragmented) in
the wild.
Genetic issues of importance in the ﬁrst stage are the rate of decline of
the wild population, the size to which it declines, and the resulting loss
of genetic diversity and inbreeding that it has suffered prior to captive
breeding. The ﬁrst four issues were introduced in Chapters 10–14 and
their management implications are discussed here. Additional aspects

FOUNDING CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

Fig. 17.1 Captive breeding and
reintroduction as components of a
six-stage process.

of the fourth issue, and genetic management of reintroductions, are
deferred until the next chapter.
Captive populations must be managed through three phases, foundation, growth and maintenance. Management during each of these
phases focuses on different priorities. During foundation, population
size is usually small, and knowledge of the husbandry of the species
lacking. Management focuses on basic research to develop husbandry
techniques and efforts to ensure reproduction of the founders.
During the growth phase, the focus is on rapid reproduction and
expansion of the population to multiple facilities. During the maintenance phase, the population is managed at zero population growth, at
a size determined by the genetic goals of the program. Typically,
animals are not removed from the captive population (e.g. for reintroduction) until the population size approaches this target size. The
growth of the captive population of golden lion tamarins over these
three phases is illustrated in Fig. 17.2.
Fig. 17.2 Growth of the golden
lion tamarin captive population
(Ballou & Mickelberg, unpublished
data). Foundation was from 1970
to 1980, growth from 1980 to 1990
and the population has been stably
maintained with intense genetic
management from 1990 to 2000.

The following sections discuss the genetics of captive breeding in
more detail.

Founding captive populations
Potential founders may come from different sources or be of unknown
origin. It is therefore essential to resolve any taxonomic uncertainties,
or the need for separate management units prior to foundation
(Chapter 15). This avoids outbreeding depression or a population of

Many captive populations of
endangered species have been
founded with few individuals, such
that considerable genetic diversity
has been lost and rapid inbreeding
cannot be avoided

423

424

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

IUCN recommends that captive
populations be established when
wild populations drop below 1000

Small founder numbers lead to
loss of genetic diversity and to
rapid rates of inbreeding and
inevitable inbreeding depression

undesirable hybrids. It was not until late in the program that it was discovered that several of the founders of the Asiatic lion captive breeding
program were identiﬁed as actually AfricanAsiatic lion hybrids,
resulting in termination of the program, but only after substantial
resources had been expended in its development and support.
The founding process sets the genetic characteristics for, and ultimately affects the conservation value of, the captive population. If the
population is to encompass the genetic diversity in the wild and minimize subsequent inbreeding, then a fully representative sample of
founders is required. Some selection is also inevitable during foundation as typically only a moderate proportion of wild-caught individuals
successfully breed in captivity. For example, 242 wild-caught animals
entered the golden lion tamarin captive population (mostly before it
was being managed), but only 48 individuals contributed to the current
living gene pool. Furthermore, two-thirds of the gene pool prior to management was derived from just one proliﬁc breeding pair (Box 18.1).
There are economic trade-offs among the number of founders, the
cost of starting captive populations and the subsequent size required to
maintain 90% of genetic diversity for 100 years (the current objective of
captive management). With few founders, the initial cost of obtaining
individuals is minimized, but large populations are required to maintain genetic variation and avoid inbreeding. Subsequent costs will be
much greater. With large founder numbers, the initial costs are higher,
but subsequent costs are reduced, yielding substantial savings in the
long term.
The need to acquire a solid genetic base, the effects of selection in
reducing the number of contributing founders, and economics all
argue for establishing populations with a large number of founders.
Unfortunately, most captive populations have been established
using an inadequate number of founders. Some captive populations
were only founded when the endangered species was ‘at the last gasp’,
when few founders were available. Founders for most other captive
breeding programs were the few animals (or ancestors of animals) that
were already in captivity at the time the program was formalized (Table
17.1).
Captive populations should be established before the wild population approaches extinction, if we are to avoid serious genetic impacts.
Consequently, IUCN (1987) recommended that captive populations be
founded before wild populations drop below 1000 individuals. Beneﬁts
of this include (a) the ability to obtain wild founders with low inbreeding levels, (b) removal of animals will be less detrimental to wild populations than when they are smaller, and (c) it provides time to develop
suitable husbandry techniques.

Genetic consequences of small founder numbers
Population size bottlenecks at foundation lead to loss of genetic diversity, result in inbreeding, and reduced reproductive ﬁtness (Chapters 8

FOUNDING CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

Table 17.1

Founder numbers in captive populations of endangered
species. Many species have fewer than the recommended minimum of 20–30
founders

Species
Mammals
Arabian oryx
Black-footed ferret
European bison
Golden lion tamarin
Indian rhinoceros
Przewalski’s horse
Red-ruffed lemur
Siberian tiger
Snow leopard
Speke’s gazelle

Number of founders
10
7
13
242 (current population descended
from only 48)
17
12 (1 domestic mare)
7
25
7
4 (1씹,3씸)

Birds
California condor
Guam rail
Lord Howe Island woodhen
Mauritius pink pigeon
Plain pigeon
Puerto Rican parrot

14 (3 clans)
12 (only 9 bred)
6 (3 pairs)
6
21
13

Invertebrates
British ﬁeld cricket

12 (6 pairs)

Source: Ryder (1988); Brock & White (1992);; Hedrick & Miller (1992); Haig et al. (1994);
Olney et al. (1994); Tongue (1999).

and 10–12). To avoid bottlenecks, it is recommended that a minimum of
20–30 contributing (i.e. genetically effective) founders be used. Most of
the captive populations of endangered species referred to in Table 17.1
had fewer founders than recommended and so will have lost genetic
diversity and become inbred more rapidly than desirable.
The relationship between number of founders and the proportion of
the heterozygosity that they capture is shown in Fig. 17.3. The proportion of heterozygosity retained is [1(1 / 2Ne)] (Equation 8.2). Thus, even
10 contributing founders capture 95% of the heterozygosity in an outbreeding species, while 30 founders capture over 98%.
The number of founders required to capture allelic diversity
depends on the number and frequencies of alleles, but typically
requires more individuals than needed to capture heterozygosity. More
founders are needed if rare alleles are to be sampled. Marshall & Brown
(1975) recommended that the number of founders be sufﬁcient to
obtain, with a 95% certainty, all the alleles at a random locus occurring
in the target population with a frequency greater than 0.05.

425

426

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

Fig. 17.3 Relationship between
the number of founders and the
proportion of the heterozygosity
that they capture. 20–30 founders
will capture most of the heterozygosity
in the source population.

For a locus with two alleles, the probability that a random sample of
n founders contains at least one copy of each allele P(A1, A2) is given by:
P(A1, A2) 1(1p)2n (1q)2n

(17.1)

where p is the frequency of allele A1 and q is the frequency of A2. P(A1, A2)
is plotted against founder number in Fig. 17.4 for a locus with allele frequencies at (0.05, 0.95) and (0.01, 0.99). At least 30 founders are needed
to meet Marshall & Brown’s recommendations (95% certainty of capturing an allele with frequency of 0.05). For the rarer allele, at a frequency
of 1%, even 50 founders only have about a 60% chance of capturing the
allele. Rare alleles are unlikely to be sampled unless founder numbers
are very high.

Fig. 17.4 Probability of sampling
at least one copy of each allele
against number of founders for loci
with alleles at frequencies of p
0.05 and p 0.01.

Growth of captive populations
During the growth phase for
captive populations, priority is on
rapid population growth as
opposed to intense with minimal
genetic management

The second phase of captive breeding programs is to multiply the population size as rapidly as possible up to the desired size set by the genetic and
demographicobjectivesoftheprogram.Thisalsomeetstheneedtocreate
a demographically secure population. The primary objective is to grow
the population as fast as possible. Genetic management is de-emphasized
during this phase as it may conﬂict with the goal of rapid population

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

growth. Offspring must be produced from all adults, not just the genetically most valuable. Some animals display strong mating preferences and
may refuse to mate in genetically ideal crosses. If a genetically undesirable pairing is broken up in a monogamous species, new pairings may not
mate for several years, slowing population growth. Genetic management
during this phase is usually limited to avoid pairing between close relatives. This will also be desirable for demographic reasons, as inbreeding
will reduce reproductive and survival rates.
During the growth phase in golden lion tamarins, black-footed
ferrets and California condors (still growing), limited genetic management was applied, but subsequently these programs have been subjected to intensive genetic management (as detailed below).

How is the target population size set?
The current goal of most captive breeding programs for endangered
species is to retain 90% of genetic diversity for 100 years (Chapter 14). For
a population with a stable size, the effective size required to meet this
goal is inversely proportional to the generation length, Ne 475/L where
L is the generation length in years (Box 14.2). For example, it takes an
effective population size of 475 for a species with a generation a year,
but only 21 to retain 90% of the genetic variation in a species, such as
mountain gorillas, with a generation length of 23 years. Conversely, an
insect with 10 generations per year requires a population of 4750. In
practice, demographic security would dictate a size larger than 21 for
gorillas.
The founding phase has a signiﬁcant impact on the required Ne, and
it is likely to be greater than the value above (Chapter 14). The required
number of animals depends critically on the founder effects, Ne/N ratio,
the generation length, and on how quickly the population increases
after the bottleneck. The Ne/N ratio depends on variance in family size,
sex-ratio, mating system and ﬂuctuations in N (Chapter 10). Computer
programs are available to estimate the required Ne for these cases (Lacy
et al. 2000).

The target size is the population
size required to retain 90% of
genetic diversity for 100 years

Genetic management of captive populations

Genetic deterioration in captivity
As the population approaches its target size, the focus increasingly
shifts to more intense genetic management. The objective becomes
maintaining demographic stability and counteracting deleterious
genetic changes including:
• inbreeding depression
• loss of genetic variation
• accumulation of new deleterious mutations

Captive populations deteriorate
genetically through inbreeding
depression, loss of genetic
diversity, accumulation of new
deleterious mutations and through
genetic adaptations to captivity
that are deleterious in the wild

427

428

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

• genetic adaptations to captivity that are deleterious in the wild
• outbreeding depression.
These factors have different impacts, operate over different time scales,
and have different relationships with population size. Inbreeding
depression, loss of genetic diversity and genetic adaptation to captivity
are expected in all closed captive populations. The accumulation of new
deleterious mutations is only a long term concern and is of unknown
importance. The most immediate threat during foundation is inbreeding depression.
The effects of inbreeding depression, loss of genetic diversity and
mutational accumulation are all more severe in smaller than in larger
populations. Conversely, genetic adaptation to captivity is more extensive in larger than smaller populations. While this is beneﬁcial in captivity, its deleterious effects are only felt when the population is
returned to the wild. All deleterious changes in captivity are likely to be
more deleterious when populations are reintroduced into harsher wild
environmental conditions (Chapter 18).

Inbreeding and inbreeding depression
Many captive populations of
threatened species are too small
to avoid inbreeding depression
even within relatively few
generations

Fig. 17.5 Distribution of
effective population sizes in SSP
programs for endangered species
(from Hodskins 1997). This
assumes an Ne/N ratio of 0.3.

Inbreeding and inbreeding depression are unavoidable in small closed
captive populations of endangered species (Chapter 8, 11 and 12). For
example, the endangered Przewalski’s horse has an inbreeding coefﬁcient of about 20% (Box 11.1), despite intensive genetic management.
For many endangered species, the effective sizes of captive populations (Fig 17.5) are so low that they will suffer inbreeding depression and
signiﬁcant loss of genetic diversity over relatively short time spans.
Individual zoos frequently have populations of only a few individuals.
For example if just two pairs were maintained as a closed population,
then inbreeding would accumulate rapidly and the population would
be at serious risk of extinction within about ﬁve generations. To minimize such problems, the total captive population of an endangered
species is often managed as a single unit under regional (e.g. SSPs) or
global management plans (e.g. golden lion tamarin). These involve
interchange of animals among zoos to minimize inbreeding.
Despite interchange, these pooled populations are still not large.
The SSP programs have a mean effective population size of only 41,

CURRENT GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

smaller than sizes where inbreeding depression due to ﬁnite size has
been observed (Chapter 12). A population with Ne 41 will have an
inbreeding coefﬁcient of 12% after 10 generations, and one of 26% after
25 generations, i.e. after 25 generations the population average F is
greater than that arising from one generation of full-sib mating. It is not
surprising that Ralls et al. (1988) and many others have found substantial evidence of inbreeding depression in zoo populations.

Loss of genetic diversity
Captive populations of threatened species lose genetic diversity at foundation, and because of small subsequent population size. Equation 10.1
can be recast to illustrate both the effect of Ne /N ratio and the effect of
founder, versus subsequent population, numbers, as follows:
Ht / H0 {1 1 / [2N (Ne/N)]}t

Captive populations lose genetic
diversity at foundation, and due to
subsequent small population sizes

(17.2)

This can be partitioned in terms of the founder effect, and the subsequent size effects, as:
Ht / H0 [1 (1 / 2Nfo)] {1 1/[2N (Ne / N)]}t1

(17.3)

where Nfo number of effective founders. The ﬁrst term reﬂects the
founder effect and the second term is the effect of subsequent population size restrictions. From Equation 17.3 genetic variation in captive
breeding programs can be retained by:
• Maximizing the initial genetic variation by using adequate numbers
of founders
• Minimizing the number of generations by breeding from older
animals, or using cryopreservation
• maximizing population size
• maximizing Ne /N.

Current genetic management of captive
populations
The goal of genetic management is to preserve to the greatest extent possible the genetic diversity of the wild source population. Since the
founders are presumed to be a representative sample of the wild population (frequently not the case), this goal translates into minimizing any
changes to the founder gene pool from one generation to the next, in
other words ‘freezing’ evolution in the captive population.
The current target of genetic management is a loss of genetic diversity, and a concomitant increase in inbreeding coefﬁcient, of no more
than 10% over 100 years (see Chapter 14). Unfortunately, such goals are
unattainable in many populations (due to small founder numbers,
and/or limitations in space), and the genetic objective is often relaxed.
Targets may be lowered to 80% for 100 years, or 90% for 50 years. If

Captive populations are managed
to minimize genetic changes that
might occur in captivity

429

430

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

reintroduction appears feasible, the length of a program may be shortened. It is disturbing that there has been a continuing relaxation of
goals since they were ﬁrst deﬁned. The original proposal was to retain
90% of genetic diversity for 200 years (Soulé et al. 1986), but goals as low
as 80% for 50 years are now appearing. Conversely, some programs have
made genetic goals stricter. For the black lion tamarin, the goal is to
maintain 95% of genetic diversity in perpetuity. This is being achieved
by periodic infusion of new founders from the wild. This goal was
selected as the captive population is seen as one population contributing to the wild metapopulation in this species.
The remainder of this chapter addresses genetic management strategies that maximize retention of genetic diversity and avoidance of
inbreeding such that genetic diversity can be kept as high as possible.

Maximizing Ne/N
As captive breeding resources are clearly limited, and the number of
species requiring captive breeding to save them from extinction is
increasing, it is important to maximize the Ne for each species using the
minimum number of individuals. The following procedures can be used
to maximize Ne /N ratios:
• Equalizing family sizes so that Ne ⬃2N (Chapter 10). This recommendation can double the effective captive breeding resource and it is
being applied in practice.
• Equalizing the sex-ratio of breeders, i.e. avoiding harems if possible.
This is difﬁcult to achieve in mammals as most are polygamous and
many breed best with harem structures. Many mammals are maintained in harems to avoid injury and deaths from male–male aggression, and this is sometimes practiced for species that do not naturally
have harems. Maintaining an equal sex-ratio is generally a lesser
problem in birds, as many adapt well to being maintained as pairs.
• Equalizing population sizes across generations. Following the foundation and growth phases, captive populations are typically maintained at relatively stable sizes (Fig. 17.2).
• Maximizing generation length. This may be done by (a) allowing
parents to reproduce from sexual maturity, with successive euthanasia of offspring as new siblings are produced (not ethically acceptable to many), (b) retaining all offspring, but only using later-born
siblings to be parents of subsequent generations (wasteful in terms
of resources), (c) delaying reproduction until they are older; this
risks death, or sterility before breeding, (d) breeding parents when
young, and then avoiding reproduction (often contracepting) until
older, and breeding them again, or (e) cryopreservation of embryos,
or gametes; often the technology to do this is not available for the
species (see later). These procedures, while theoretically sound, are
not widely practiced, although there is some use of (d).

CURRENT GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

Table 17.2

Effective population size to census size (Ne/N) ratios in captive
populations of endangered species

Endangered species

Ne/N

Reference

Mammals
Arabian oryx
Black-footed ferret
Cheetah
Golden lion tamarin
Grevy’s zebra
Okapi
Red panda
Rodriguez fruit bat
Scimitar-horned oryx
Tiger

0.14
0.35
0.21
0.22
0.28
0.38
0.42
0.18–0.43
0.20
0.05–0.08

1
2
3
2
1
2
2
1
1
4

Birds
California condor
Cinereous vulture
Hooded crane
King penguin
Red-crowned crane
Spix macaw
White-winged wood duck

0.21
0.37
0.24
0.36
0.45
0.14
0.05–0.09

2
5
5
5
1
5
1

References: 1, Frankham (1995c); 2, values computed from studbooks by J. D. Ballou; 3,
Marker & O’Brien (1989); 4, Ballou & Seidensticker (1987); 5, L. Bingaman Lackey personal
communication

The beneﬁts of genetic management of captive populations in terms of
increasing the Ne /N ratio can be very large. The Ne /N ratio is approximately 0.11 in unmanaged populations (Frankham 1995c). Ratios of
close to 2 can be achieved in experimental populations by equalizing
family sizes, sex-ratios and numbers in different generations (Borlase et
al. 1993). Thus, an 18-fold improvement is possible.
In captive populations of endangered species, Ne /N ratios of 0.2–0.4
appear common (Mace 1986). Ratios for a range of endangered species
are given in Table 17.2. These range from 0.065 in the tiger to 0.45 in the
red-crowned crane and average 0.26. These ﬁgures are in part low as
total population size is often used as N and about 1/3 of populations are
juveniles. To adjust for this, we multiply by a factor of 4/3, yielding an
average of 0.35. These values are about three times higher than for wild
populations because of stricter control over breeding, but there is still
considerable room for improvement. Practical considerations (mate
incompatibility, compliance with recommendations and stochastic
factors) will probably always limit Ne /N to some extent.

431

432

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

Maximum avoidance of inbreeding
Maximum avoidance of inbreeding
schemes involve equalization of
family sizes and a circular mating
pattern

Fig. 17.6 Maximum avoidance of
inbreeding.

Probably the greatest contribution of genetics to captive population
management is the design of mating schedules that minimize inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity. A maximum avoidance of inbreeding
scheme is shown in Fig. 17.6. This scheme involves equalization of
family sizes, which doubles the effective population size (Chapter 10).
It also delays inbreeding for as long as possible using a circular mating
system.
The example has eight unrelated founders, and female 1 mates with
male 2, female 3 with male 4, etc. Each of the four matings produces one
female and one male. In the next generation, the female from 12
mates to the male from 34, the female from 56 mates with the male
from 78, etc. In the succeeding generation, the female from
(1 2)(3 4) mates with the male from (56)(78). After this
point, inbreeding cannot be avoided. To be fully effective, however, the
scheme only works when applied from the ﬁrst (founder) generation
and it requires that equal numbers of breeding females and males are
produced to become parents of the next generation.
Unfortunately, this scheme is very difﬁcult to apply to captive populations of threatened species. First, genetic management in the vast
majority of cases begins with individuals several generations removed
from the founders. Second, the scheme must be followed precisely to be
effective, with no practical allowance for problems such as mortality of
offspring and parents, incompatibility of breeders, reduced fertility,
etc. Captive breeding programs are confronted with complex pedigrees

CURRENT GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

with unequal founder representation, possibly already high levels of
inbreeding, and loss of genetic diversity. Managing populations by
minimizing mean kinship is the most effective way to deal with these
problems.

Minimizing kinship
The individuals used to found captive populations typically make very
unequal contributions to subsequent generations. As we have already
noted, two-thirds of the pre-genetic-management gene pool of the
golden lion tamarin was derived from just one breeding pair. A range of
procedures, including maximum avoidance of inbreeding, genome
uniqueness, founder importance and minimizing kinship have been
recommended and used in captive management of threatened species.
What is the optimum way to manage pedigreed captive populations of
threatened species?
Ballou & Lacy (1995) compared the above procedures using both
theoretical predictions and computer simulation and found that minimizing kinship was best for retaining genetic variation. In brief, minimization of kinship involves choosing individuals with the lowest
relationship in the population to be parents of the subsequent generation. It reduces inequalities in founder contributions. When it is
applied, beginning with unrelated founders, it involves equalization of
family sizes and is very similar to maximum avoidance of inbreeding.
We formally deﬁne kinship and show how it is calculated in the next
section. In the subsequent section, mean kinship is deﬁned together
with an example of its use.
The kinship (or coancestry) of two individuals is directly related to
inbreeding, and, in fact, is the inbreeding coefﬁcient of their offspring
(if they had them). Example 17.1 illustrates the computation of kinship
coefﬁcients.

Example 17.1 Pedigree for a small golden lion tamarin population
and the computation of kinships
The kinship of Robert (next page) to the other named individuals is
zero; he shares no common ancestors with them.
kRo-Ri kRo-Th kRo-L 0
The kinship of Rita with Robert and Robert with Rita are the same.
The kinship of Louise and Rita is most easily obtained by computing the inbreeding coefﬁcient of hypothetical offspring X from a
mating between them (hypothetical as they are both female). Using
the pedigree method (Chapter 11), we have the following paths
through their common ancestors, A and B:

The recommended genetic
management regime is to choose
parents to minimize kinship

The kinship of two individuals is
the probability that two alleles
taken at random, one from each,
will be identical by descent

433

434

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

Paths

n

Fcommon ancestor

Contribution to FX

LFAHR
LGAHR
LFBHR
LGBHR

5
5
5
5

0
0
0
0

(1⁄2)5
(1⁄2)5
(1⁄2)5
(1⁄2)5
FX 4/32 1/8

Thus,
kL-Ri kRi-L FX 1/8
The kinship of Rita with herself is the probability that two random
gametes from her contain alleles that are identical by descent. As Rita
is not inbred, she does not herself contain alleles that are identical by
descent. If she is labelled with a genotype of A5A6, then Rita’s kinship
with herself is
kRi–Ri P(both A5) P(both A6)  1⁄4  1⁄4  1⁄2
This is the same value as the F for the progeny of selﬁng, as we expect.
Robert is inbred, so his kinship with himself is increased, as
follows:
kRo–Ro  1⁄2 (1 FRo)
and since Robert results from a full-sib mating, his inbreeding coefﬁcient FRo  1⁄4, and
kRo–Ro  1⁄2 [1  1⁄4] 5/8
Computation of other kinship values are given as Problems at the end
of the chapter.

CURRENT GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

The mean kinship is:
mki 

N

兺k
j1

ij

/N

(17.4)

where kij kinship between i and j, and N is the number of individuals
in the population. Example 17.2 illustrates the computation of mean
kinship for the named individuals in Example 17.1.

The mean kinship for individual i
(mki) is the average of kinship
values for that individual with
every individual in the population,
including itself

Example 17.2 Computation of mean kinships
The kinship and mean kinship for the named individuals in the pedigree from Example 17.1 are:

Thelma
Louise
Rita
Robert

Thelma

Louise

Rita

Robert

Mean
kinship

5/8
9/32
1/8
0

9/32
5/8
1/8
0

1/8
1/8
1
⁄2
0

0
0
0
5/8

0.258
0.258
0.187
0.156

For example, the mean kinship for Thelma is (5/8 9/321/8 0) / 4
0.258.

The distribution of mean kinship in the entire population of 480 golden
lion tamarins is given in Fig. 17.7 below.

Fig. 17.7 Distribution of kinship values of 480 golden lion tamarins. The individuals
with the lowest mean kinships are recently acquired founders (mk 0) and F1
descendents of founders in Brazilian zoos that have yet to reproduce.

The rationale behind the use of mean kinship in genetic management is illuminated by noting the relationship of average mean kinship
to genetic diversity (Ht /H0):

Mean kinship for a population is
inversely related to genetic
diversity

435

436

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

1  mk Ht/H0

(17.5)

where mk is the average mean kinship in the population (Ballou & Lacy
1995). Consequently, if kinship is minimized, heterozygosity is maximized.
Individuals with low mean kinship are the most valuable. They have
fewer relatives in the population than individuals with high mean
kinship and therefore carry fewer common alleles. For the pedigree
in Example 17.1, Robert has the lowest mean kinship and he is the most
valuable animal in his generation as he is unrelated to Rita, Louise and
Thelma. In numerical terms, he has a mean kinship of 0.156, while the
other named individuals have values that are greater than this.
Conversely, Thelma and Louise share most genes with the rest of the
population, and are least valuable genetically. Their mean kinship is
0.258, the highest value amongst the named individuals. Under a mean
kinship breeding program, animals with lower mean kinship are given
breeding priority. Managing by mean kinships would then increase the
contribution of genes from Robert and decrease those of Thelma and
Louise.
An extreme case may help to illustrate management by mean
kinship (i.e. management that minimizes mean kinship). A pedigree
involving 10 founders with maximum distortion of founder representation is shown in Fig. 17.8a. One individual in generation 3 is unrelated
to the remaining individuals, and represents eight founders that are
otherwise unrepresented. The other seven individuals in that current
generation trace to only two founders. Consequently, management by
mean kinship involves mating the single unrelated male with the four
females on the left, as shown in Fig. 17.8b. In this way his genetic contribution and that of his eight ancestors is increased, while the contribution of the two over-represented founders is decreased.
When all animals are unrelated, or related with the same kinship,
all individuals have the same mean kinship and managing by mean
kinship becomes equalization of family sizes, which approximately
doubles the effective population size (Chapter 10).
Populations of fruit ﬂies, with the initial pedigree illustrated in Fig.
17.8, and subsequently managed by minimizing kinship retained more
genetic diversity than those managed with maximum avoidance of
inbreeding, or unmanaged populations (Montgomery et al. 1997).
However, there were no signiﬁcant differences among treatments in
reproductive ﬁtness, although the kinship treatment was best or equal
best in ﬁtness.

Applying mean kinship breeding strategies
When applying minimizing kinship to a threatened population, the
mean kinship for each individual is calculated from pedigrees. Parents
to be used for breeding are chosen as those with the lowest mean kinships. Two additional considerations are required to determine speciﬁc
matings. First, mates are chosen such that matings between individuals

CURRENT GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

Fig. 17.8 Management by minimizing kinship. (a) A pedigree with 10 founders and
maximum distortion of founder representation, and (b) the matings that would be set up
using mean kinship management. At generation 3, seven progeny come from only two
founders following two generations of full-sib mating, while the remaining individual (ﬁlled
male symbol) is outbred and represents the contributions of the other eight founders. To
minimize kinship, the single outbred male is mated to the four inbred females, and the
three inbred males are not used for breeding.

with quite different mean kinships are avoided as they limit management options in the future. If a valuable individual is mated to one of
low value, increasing the contribution of the under-represented individual also increases the contribution of its over-represented mate
(unless the valuable individual is subsequently remated to another individual). Second, mating of close relatives is avoided to minimize
inbreeding. For example, two sibs with low mean kinships should not be
mated to each other. In complex pedigrees mean kinship, inbreeding,
and genome uniqueness (see below) are computed using software, such
as SPARKS (Scobie 1997) in combination with PM2000 (Lacy et al. 2000).

437

438

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

Genome uniqueness
Genome uniqueness is used to
identify individuals carrying unique
founder alleles

A second procedure is often used in addition to minimizing kinship to
identify individuals who are the sole carriers of founder alleles. For
example, an offspring with one parent carrying very common alleles
and the other parent carrying rare alleles might not have a low enough
mean kinship to readily identify the offspring as carrying some rare
alleles. Such offspring can often be identiﬁed using genome uniqueness. Genome uniqueness (gu) is the probability that an allele chosen at
random from that individual is unique in the population (i.e. no other
copies of the alleles exist). Further details of gu are given by Ballou &
Lacy (1995).

Incomplete pedigree information
Both the minimizing mean kinship and genome uniqueness protocols
require that the pedigree of the population is completely known.
However, in many captive populations, ancestry is not known with complete certainty. Records on parentage may not have been kept during
the early years of the pedigree, while some species may require multiple
breeders in an enclosure at the same time. Molecular genetic techniques can be used to determine parentage when putative mates and
offspring are available for sampling (Chapter 19), but unknown ancestry in many generations past can be difﬁcult to rectify. Methods have
been developed to estimate mean kinship when part of the parentage is
unknown, but this does not provide optimal management of genetic
diversity (Ballou & Lacy 1995).

Limitations of management by minimizing kinship
Minimizing kinship in a single large
population does not address all
the genetic concerns in captive
breeding. However, its use in
partially fragmented populations is
likely to be optimal

While minimizing kinship maximizes retention of genetic diversity in
a single population, it is not the only defensible means for managing
captive populations. Management of the entire captive population as a
single large unit involves frequent movement of animals among institutions. Such translocations entail high costs and risks of disease spread.
Further, a single population is not the optimal way to maximize retention of genetic variation (Chapter 13). Loss of genetic variation is least in
populations split into sub-populations, provided none of the subpopulations suffers extinction. As endangered species already exist in
fragmented populations spread over many zoos, alternative management involving partially fragmented populations (each managed using
minimizing kinship) is considered in the next chapter.
Minimizing kinship does not directly address probable changes in
reproductive ﬁtness. It does not necessarily minimize inbreeding, but it
is very close to a minimization of inbreeding strategy.
Genetic adaptation to captivity is a concern for populations destined
for reintroduction to the wild (Chapter 18). Equalization of family sizes

CAPTIVE MANAGEMENT OF GROUPS

(a component of minimizing kinship) minimizes genetic adaptation to
captivity for a given sized population (Frankham et al. 2000). However,
maximization of Ne in a single large population promotes genetic adaptation to captivity. A partially fragmented population structure (with
each fragment managed using minimizing kinship) will reduce genetic
adaptation to captivity, as we describe in Chapter 18.

Captive management of groups
Pedigrees are usually not available for populations that are maintained
in groups. Some species breed best in multi-female, multi-male groups,
where paternities are unknown. For example, chimpanzees and many
ungulates breed best in groups, while other species live in colonies
(social birds and mammals, many ﬁsh and corals). Consequently, effective populations sizes, inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity cannot
be accurately predicted and minimizing kinship cannot be used.
For group breeders, strategies have been devised to minimize
inbreeding by exchanging individuals among groups on a regular basis
(Box 17.1). These procedures utilize the maximum avoidance of inbreeding (MAI) scheme described above (Fig. 17.6), but applied to groups
rather than to individuals. They are similar to the equalization of family
sizes that is used when founder representation is not distorted.
Contributions of groups to be parents of the following generation are
equalized and individuals are regularly exchanged among groups. In
Box 17.1 eight groups are shown. In the ﬁrst generation, males are
moved one group in a clockwise direction. In the second generation,
males are moved two groups in a clockwise direction. In this example,
inbreeding cannot be avoided after the third generation
Group genetic management is also an option that can be used for
non-threatened species, as a less intensive procedure when resources
are insufﬁcient for full-scale genetic management using minimizing
kinship. It is also suitable for management of small wild populations,
but the form shown in Box 17.1 with the movement of all males would
be expensive.
Genetic management of groups is one of the poorest-understood
areas in captive population management. This and the problem of genetic adaptation to captivity are badly in need of further consideration.

Box 17.1 Low intensity genetic management for groups
using maximum avoidance of inbreeding
(Princée 1995)
This procedure involves applying maximum avoidance of inbreeding to groups,
rather than to individuals. Maximum avoidance of inbreeding (MAI) in pedigreed
populations involves equalization of family sizes and a mating system that avoids
mating between relatives for as long as possible (Wright 1969; Crow & Kimura

Where pedigrees are unavailable,
management of groups by
maximum avoidance of group
inbreeding is recommended

439

440

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

1970). Application of MAI to groups is illustrated with eight groups in the two ﬁgures
below.
Maximum avoidance of inbreeding for eight breeding groups in the ﬁrst generation is shown in the ﬁgure. Maternal and paternal lineages are indicated with letters
AB, CD, …, OP. Boxes represent breeding groups. Arrows indicate transfer of males
from natal groups to host groups. Bloodlines of males are shown near the arrows.
The operation of the MAI system can be illustrated by following group 1. In generation one, males are moved to the next group in a clockwise direction. Group 1 starts
with lines A and B. Males of group 1 (bloodlines AB) are moved to group 2. Male offspring of group 8 (bloodlines OP) are moved into group 1.

In the second generation, male offspring are moved two groups in a clockwise direction. This is necessary, as moving males by one group would result in inbreeding. For
example, moving males of group 1 (bloodline ABOP) to group 2 (ABCD) is akin to
cousin mating. Moving males by two groups results in group 1 males (ABOP) being
mated to group 3 females (CDEF), thus avoiding inbreeding, i.e. no original breeding
group is genetically represented in both males and females.

REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY AND GENOME RESOURCE BANKS

In the third generation, males are moved four groups in a clockwise direction, 1 to 5,
2 to 6, 3 to 7 and 4 to 8. This avoids inbreeding. Inbreeding can no longer be avoided
after the third generation as all groups have bloodlines ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOP.
Exchange of individuals in generation 4 reverts to that in generation 1 and the cycle
is repeated.
Detailed guidelines for applying this system to different numbers of groups are
provided by Princée (1995).

Ex-situ conservation of plants
Genetic management of captive plant populations is not nearly as
complex an issue as it is in animals. Many plants can be stored as seeds,
and some can be cryopreserved. Consequently, they progress through
fewer generations in captivity and suffer little inbreeding, loss of
genetic diversity, mutational accumulation or genetic adaptation due
to captive propagation. However, preservation of seeds is not successful
for about 15% of species, mainly tropical species that lack seed dormancy (Briggs & Walters 1997).
The major issues for most plants are the sampling regime involved
in collecting specimens for captive propagation or storage (Frankel et al.
1995). Two features of sampling are the size of samples and ensuring
that collected material is representative and encompasses the full
genetic diversity of the species. Concern about representation is greater
for plants than for animals, and if the species is selﬁng, as a higher proportion of genetic diversity is often distributed among populations, particularly for adaptive genetic variation (Chapters 3 and 16).
In brief, recommended sampling regimes involve collecting 10–50
individuals from each of ﬁve separate threatened plant populations,
with 1–20 seeds per individual (Falk & Holsinger 1991). Such sampling
would also be desirable in founding captive populations of animals, but
in practice, the luxury of time or resources is not available.
The emphasis in plants has been on conservation of species of known
or potential commercial value, especially domesticated plants and their
wild relatives. Recently, endangered plants have received increasing
conservation effort (Falk & Holsinger 1991; Bowles & Whelan 1994; Falk
et al. 1996).

Most ex situ conservation of plants
is done by seed storage with
occasional captive propagation to
regenerate seed. Thus, the
emphasis is on collecting
germplasm to maximize genetic
diversity

Reproductive technology and genome resource
banks
Reproductive technologies, developed for use in domestic animals,
promise to have signiﬁcant input to conservation of threatened species.
These techniques include artiﬁcial insemination, cryopreservation and
various cloning techniques.

Reproductive technology and
genome resource banking can
contribute signiﬁcantly to genetic
management, but have only
limited current use

441

442

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

Artiﬁcial insemination (AI)
AI can be used to capture the genetic contribution of individuals that
are unable to breed naturally, and this technique is being applied to
black-footed ferrets, giant pandas and whooping cranes.
Artiﬁcial insemination with frozen semen can be used in transportation of genetic material, rather than animals, with great reductions
in cost. It can also be used to equalize sex-ratios of breeders by inseminating females with semen from males other than the local dominant,
or sole, male.
To our knowledge, artiﬁcial insemination is only being used routinely in the management of four threatened species, the black-footed
ferret, cheetah, giant panda and whooping crane, and its use is just
beginning in elephants. It is proving valuable in these species.

Cryopreservation
Cryopreservation of gametes, embryos, seeds or tissues has many potential beneﬁts for conservation, as it literally deep-freezes tissue, and the
genes they contain, away from deleterious environmental and genetic
inﬂuences.
In threatened species, cryopreservation of sperm or embryos in
genome resource banks provides a valuable means for extending the
generation interval, and slowing inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity (Johnston & Lacy 1995). This is similar to the use of seed banks in
plants. In animals, a live animal population must still be maintained, so
that females are available to be inseminated, or to raise embryos. In a
few cases, related domestic species can act as surrogate mothers. This
has been carried out with an African wildcat and Indian desert cat (into
domestic cats), gaur (into cattle), and mouﬂon sheep (into domestic
sheep) (Lanza et al. 2000). However, most species are unlikely to be able
to be raised in abundant domestic surrogates.
Cryopreservation of germ cells and embryos is currently only applicable to a small proportion of animals, as the technology needs to be
customized for each species, and is available mainly for domestic
mammals and their close relatives. Cryopreservation of seeds and of cultured cells seems to be more generally applicable for plants, and so has
more immediate value to a wide range of species. For example, seed
from 68 of 90 native Western Australian plant taxa germinated after
storage in liquid nitrogen (Touchell & Dixon 1993). The authors suggested that at least 40% of threatened Western Australian plant taxa
could be maintained in this way.

Cloning
Cloning has the potential to aid in conservation of threatened species.
This is easily achieved via cuttings or tissue culture in plants, where

MANAGING INHERITED DISEASES IN ENDANGERED SPECIES

many copies of each individual can be made. This has been carried out
for Wollemi pine in Australia to preserve the genetic material of the last
40 individuals (Woodford 2000).
In animals, nuclear transplanting has been used to clone a variety of
domestic animals, and the endangered gaur (Lanza et al. 2000). Cloning
may contribute to the conservation of endangered animals in the
future. For example, biopsies can be collected from endangered animals
and used to expand numbers rapidly in captivity, whilst retaining the
wild population. The founders could be used to generate the target population size with essentially no loss of genetic diversity.
However, at this stage, cloning of animals is not possible for any but
a few species that are closely related to domestic animals (as with the
gaur), and it is very expensive. Further, the technology requires surrogate mothers and an ample supply of these is unlikely to be available for
threatened species.

Genome resource banks
Cryopreserved animal cells, embryos and gametes stored in genome
resource banks can provide genetic material for future use, as indicated
above. Animal cells provide the potential for regenerating individuals
in the future via cloning, in a similar manner to tissue culture of plant
cells. Gene banking of puriﬁed DNA serves as an invaluable source of
material for research, but is most unlikely to contribute to living populations (Ryder et al. 2000). A number of such DNA banks are already in
existence. They will in the future allow tests to determine whether
genetic diversity has been lost, in a similar manner to studies using
museum specimens.

Managing inherited diseases in endangered
species
Populations derived from small number of founders have a high probability of carrying some genetic disorders at much increased frequencies. This is found in human isolates such as the Amish, Afrikaners and
Finns. Several endangered populations that have originated from few
founders exhibit conditions presumed to be inherited diseases (Ryder
1988; Roelke et al. 1993; Seymour et al. in press). Examples include undescended testes in Florida panthers, dwarﬁsm in California condors,
hernias in golden lion tamarins, hairless offspring in red-ruffed lemurs,
malabsorption of vitamin E in Przewalski’s horse and missing testicles
(aplasia) in koalas.
It may appear initially that inherited defects should be eliminated
from populations of threatened species. However, this comes at the cost
of individuals being eliminated from the breeding population, leading
to loss of genetic diversity and increased rates of inbreeding.
Consequently, detailed cost–beneﬁt analyses must be undertaken. The

Populations of endangered
species, initiated with few
founders, are likely to exhibit
genetic disorders at relatively high
frequencies

443

444

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

management options are to (a) eliminate the deleterious condition, (b)
minimize its phenotypic frequency, or (c) ignore it.
The impact of a program to remove a deleterious allele depends on
the mode of inheritance of the defect. If it is dominant, then it will be
possible to eliminate the defect by simply removing affected individuals
with it. However, most inherited defects are recessive, and most individuals carrying the allele are heterozygotes. Consequently, elimination of
a recessive defect is very difﬁcult as carriers are not phenotypically
detectable and removal of suspected carriers, based on pedigrees, is
likely to eliminate an unacceptably large proportion of the endangered
population, along with their genetic diversity. Management of a recessive genetic disorder is exempliﬁed by chondrodystrophy in California
condors (Box 17.2).
The California condor has had several hatchlings with chondrodystrophy, an autosomal recessive condition with skeletal dwarﬁng
defects (Example 4.5). A detailed comparison of the management
options (a)–(c) above for this lethal allele revealed that there would be an
unacceptably large genetic and demographic cost to eliminating the
condition at this stage. The proportion of the population that will be
homozygous for this recessive defect is low (about 3%) and natural selection will reduce its frequency. Consequently, there is little cost in ignoring the condition and maintaining all founders in the population. The
recommendation in this case was to reduce the frequency of affected
individuals by avoiding matings between potential carriers, and by repairing individuals that have an affected offspring.

Box 17.2 Managing a genetic disease in the California
condor (modiﬁed after Ralls et al. 2000)
We have used the autosomal recessive genetic disorder chondrodystrophy several
times previously. Here we discuss practical genetic management of the condition.
Recall that we estimated the condition had a frequency of 0.17 by assuming
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium (Example 4.5). Ralls et al. (2000) computed the allele
frequency using a gene drop analysis by an alternative method (that only accounted
for alleles in known carriers and their relatives) and obtained an estimate of 0.09. The
true estimate will lie between 0.09 and 0.17, but the difference does not affect the
management conclusions reached. For simplicity, we use the former estimate in frequency computations below.
All affected individuals die, so natural selection is expected to reduce the gene frequency from 17.2% at hatching to 14.7% after selection (Example 6.1). With random
mating, the expected frequency of affected individuals in the next generation is q12 
0.1472 2.2%. If there were 100 hatchings in the next generation, about 2 would be
affected.
However, by avoiding matings between known and suspected carriers, it should be
possible to further reduce the phenotypic frequency. In subsequent generations, it will
eventually be impossible to avoid matings between all individuals that may be carriers.
However, the frequency of affected hatchlings can still be kept low by splitting up pairs

SUMMARY

that have an affected offspring, and pairing them with another individual with a low risk
of being a carrier.
A detailed examination of the pedigree indicated that it would be possible to
reduce the frequency of the gene to zero in the next generation if that was desirable.
However, to exclude all potential carriers would involve removing 77 of 146 condors
from the current reproductive pool, far too high a cost for an endangered species.
The low frequency of affected individuals and the cost of trying to remove the gene
in terms of demography, loss of genetic diversity and increased future inbreeding
meant that it was not considered wise to eliminate the chondrodystrophy allele. The
ﬁgure below shows the impacts of removing suspected carriers on allele frequency
and genetic diversity (after Ralls et al. 2000).

Consequently, the recommendation in this case was to separate the pair that produced the four affected individuals, and to pair them with other individuals presumed
to be totally free of the dw allele (this has been done). In future, pairings should be
made to minimize the risk of producing affected individuals, while at the same time
maximizing retention of genetic diversity by managing by mean kinship.

Summary
1. Many species have to be captive bred to save them from extinction.
2. The genetic goal of such programs is to minimize deleterious
genetic changes that might occur in captivity.
3. Captive populations deteriorate genetically due to inbreeding
depression, loss of genetic diversity, accumulation of deleterious
mutations and genetic adaptation to captivity (leading to reduced
adaptation to the wild environment).
4. Captive populations should be initiated with a minimum of 20
contributing founders to establish an adequate genetic base for the
population. This should be done before the wild population drops
below 1000 individuals.
5. Minimizing kinship is recommended to maximize retention of
genetic variation for endangered species in captivity.
6. Group breeding schemes, based upon maximum avoidance of
group inbreeding, are recommended for group breeding species
where pedigrees are unknown.

445

446

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF CAPTIVE POPULATIONS

7. Technologies such as artiﬁcial insemination, cryopreservation
and cloning have the potential to enhance genetic management of
captive populations in the future, but they have limited current use.
8. By chance, rare deleterious alleles can reach relatively high frequencies in populations derived from few founders. Detailed
cost–beneﬁt analyses are required to determine appropriate management for such conditions.
FURTHER READING

Ballou et al. (1995) Population Management for Survival and Recovery. Advanced
treatment of topics relating to captive breeding and reintroduction; see
especially the chapters by Ballou & Lacy on use of recommendation to minimize kinship in the captive management, and by Princée on genetic management of groups of endangered species.
Botting (1999) Gerald Durrell: The Authorised Biography. An entertaining and informative biography of a highly inﬂuential ﬁgure in leading zoos to be involved
in conservation via captive breeding of endangered species.
Falk & Holsinger (1991) Genetics and Conservation of Rare Plants. Considers issues
relevant to ex-situ conservation of threatened plants.
Kleiman et al. (1996) Wild Mammals in Captivity. Detailed treatment of most
aspects of managing captive populations of mammals in zoos.
Olney et al. (1994) Creative Conservation. Considers many of the issues dealt with
in this chapter and has several case studies.
Tudge (1991) Last Animals at the Zoo. An enjoyable book written for a popular
audience on the role of captive breeding in conservation.
PROBLEMS

17.1 Captive breeding: By what means do captive populations deteriorate genetically?
17.2 Kinship: What is the kinship coefﬁcient between individuals G
and H in the following pedigree?

17.3 Kinship: Compute the kinship between Thelma and Rita in
Example 17.1.
17.4 Kinship: Compute the kinship between Thelma and herself in
Example 17.1.
17.5 Kinship: Compute the mean kinship for Rita in Example 17.2.
17.6 Group breeding schemes: In a group breeding scheme with

PROBLEMS

four populations, show the recommended mating in the ﬁrst two generations and the genetic composition of the resulting populations.
17.7 Cloning: What is the role of cloning in plant conservation?
What is the role of cloning in animal conservation now? What role
might cloning assume in animal conservation 20 years hence?
17.8 Management of genetic diseases: All 125 red-ruffed lemurs in
captivity trace their ancestry to seven individuals, three of whom contribute more than 70% of the genes in the current population. Some
inbred families segregate for a hairless condition due to an autosomal
recessive (Ryder 1988). How would you genetically manage this condition? Assume that the recessive allele occurs at a frequency of about
10% in the captive population.

447

Chapter 18

Genetic management for
reintroduction
Terms:
Reintroduction,
supportive breeding,
translocation

A selection of endangered species
that have been captive bred or
propagated and reintroduced into
the wild: Mauna Kea silversword
(Hawaii), California condor, blackfooted ferret (North America),
Arabian oryx and Przewalski’s
horse (Mongolia).

Captive populations provide a source of individuals for
reintroductions. Reintroductions should establish self-sustaining
populations with high reproductive ﬁtness in the wild environment
and ample genetic diversity

REINTRODUCTIONS

Reintroductions
An important role of the captive population for some conservation programs is to supply animals for reintroduction. Reintroduction is the
process of releasing captive-born animals back into the wild to reestablish or supplement existing wild populations. While reintroduction programs currently exist for many species, conditions are not
suitable for reintroduction for the majority as wild habitat is not available or threats to wild populations still exist (Kleiman et al. 1996).
Nevertheless, many captive breeding programs aim to retain sufﬁcient
levels of genetic diversity and demographic viability over the long term
to eventually reintroduce animals back into the wild – if and when the
situation presents itself (Soulé et al. 1986).
While some reintroductions are carried out after brief periods in
captivity (e.g. black-footed ferrets, Lord Howe Island woodhen), many
may occur after long periods in captivity. The scenario envisaged with
captive breeding and reintroduction is that humans will go through a
demographic transition within 100–200 years, resulting in population
decline that releases wild habitat for the reintroduction of endangered
species. The success of reintroductions is jeopardized by genetic deterioration in captivity.
In the previous chapter, we viewed species-rescue programs as a sixstage process, commencing with recognition of demographic and
genetic deterioration in the wild populations, through foundation,
expansion and maintenance of captive populations, and concluding
with release and management of the species in its natural environment. In that chapter, we discussed issues in the genetic management
of captive species from foundation to maintenance. Here we focus on
ways to limit genetic change during captivity in populations destined
for reintroduction to maximize their long-term viability in the wild.
Further, we consider practical questions in reintroduction; which and
how many individuals should be released, where and how many wild
populations should be re-established, and what management should be
applied to the new populations.
At the outset, we note that the option of release is, regrettably, being
de-emphasized in some programs. This may be considered a ‘policy of
despair’. None the less, we argue that reintroduction must remain the
ultimate goal for the vast majority of captive-bred species. The success
of reintroductions is jeopardized by genetic deterioration in captivity.
We have discussed many of the issues in previous chapters. Here we particularly concentrate on the, often-overlooked, effects of genetic adaptation to captive environments.
There are three genetic scenarios for captive populations (Frankham
et al. 1986). First, the threatening process in the wild may be controlled
with relative ease, for example by the extermination or exclusion of
introduced predators or competitors on an island. In this case, the
endangered species may be reintroduced after only a few generations of
population expansion in captivity (e.g. black-footed ferrets, Lord Howe

Many captive populations of
threatened species are managed
to preserve the option of eventual
reintroduction to the wild

449

450

GENETIC MANAGEMENT FOR REINTRODUCTION

Island woodhen). The only genetic issues are representative sampling
during foundation and avoidance of inbreeding. Any genetic deterioration has already occurred as the wild population declined. A second scenario represents the other extreme. Loss or degradation of habitat may
be so severe that reintroduction is not a realistic proposition. This may
be the case for some species of large, naturally wide-ranging mammals.
Here genetic management may, sadly, be ‘domestication’, deliberate
selection of passive animals, capable of tolerating close proximity to
humans and other animals, and easily maintained on cheap, nonspecialist diets. Non-threatened species kept in zoos for display may also
be managed in this way. The majority of captive endangered species lie
between these extremes and constitute the third scenario. They require
many generations of captive breeding, but release remains a viable
option. The third scenario is the focus of this chapter.
The case of the golden lion tamarin represents, arguably, the most
extensively managed captive breeding and reintroduction program and
illustrates many of the features above (Box 18.1).

Box 18.1 Genetic management of captive, reintroduced
and wild populations of golden lion tamarins
Golden lion tamarins are small, arboreal, monogamous primates from Brazil. Their
habitat in the Atlantic rainforest has been fragmented and reduced to less than 2%
of the original area. Consequently, tamarin numbers have declined to endangerment.
The Golden Lion Tamarin Conservation Program is a collaborative program involving the Smithsonian National Zoological Park, the Golden Lion Tamarin
Conservation Association and the Brazilian Government. It involves the largest global
captive breeding and reintroduction program. The program has developed a multidisciplinary approach to preserving the species and its habitat, by integrating captive
breeding, reintroduction, translocation, studies on the ecology of wild tamarins,
habitat restoration and community conservation education (Kleiman et al. 1991).
The captive population consists of about 500 individuals located in 140 zoos
worldwide. The concept of managing by mean kinship to maximize retention of
genetic diversity was originally developed for genetic management of this complex
population. Although descended from 48 founders, about two-thirds of the genes in
the population had derived from just one proliﬁc breeding pair, prior to genetic management (see pedigree below; after Ballou & Lacy 1995). However, due to subsequent careful genetic management, the level of inbreeding in the population is now
only 1.9%.
The wild population consists of about 600 individuals dispersed among 11 isolated populations (see map), the largest being Poço das Antas Biological Reserve
containing about 350 tamarins. Translocation of animals from the most severely
threatened populations to a newly established reserve is underway. Molecular
genetic analyses are also being used to determine the genetic uniqueness of the isolated populations and the degree of genetic differentiation among wild and captive
populations (Grativol et al. 2001). This information will be used to deﬁne a program
of regular translocations of animals among fragments to keep inbreeding to a
minimum and to maximize the effective size of the entire population. This is impor-

REINTRODUCTIONS

tant, as ecological and behavioural studies of wild groups in the Poço das Antas
Reserve have shown that inbreeding signiﬁcantly reduces juvenile survival in this
species (Fig. 12.1).

A reintroduction program, initiated in 1983, is also being used to re-establish populations in areas of their former range. Since 1984, over 145 tamarins have been
released, and the reintroduced population has ﬂourished, growing at a rate of 25%
per year in recent years. Initially there was high mortality in released animals, associated with lack of foraging ability and orientation. Modiﬁed protocols have solved
many of these early problems and offspring born to reintroduced tamarins have survival comparable to wild tamarins.

451

452

GENETIC MANAGEMENT FOR REINTRODUCTION

The reintroduced population is genetically managed in much the same way as a
zoo population. Weekly monitoring permits tracking of parentage, birth and death
dates, as well as migration events among groups. These are recorded in a studbook
database and used to identify genetic relationships in the population. These data are
also used to select individuals for reintroduction. From pedigrees of both the reintroduced and captive populations, it is possible to avoid reintroducing animals that are
(a) genetically valuable to the captive population, or (b) closely related to the reintroduced animals. Similar approaches are used to select reintroduction candidates for
the black-footed ferret and California condor reintroduction programs.

Genetic changes in captivity that affect
reintroduction success
Inbreeding depression, loss of
genetic diversity, genetic
adaptation to captivity, relaxation
of natural selection and perhaps
accumulation of new deleterious
mutations reduce reintroduction
success

Captive populations typically deteriorate in ways that reduce reintroduction success. The means by which captive populations deteriorate
are:
• Loss of genetic diversity
• Inbreeding depression
• Accumulation of new deleterious mutations
• Genetic adaptation to captivity.
In the previous chapter, we discussed genetic deterioration in captivity
due to the ﬁrst three factors. In this chapter, we will consider the impact
of genetic adaptation to captivity and means for minimizing it.
These factors have different impacts, operate over different timescales, and have different relationships with population size (Fig. 18.1).
Inbreeding depression, loss of genetic diversity and genetic adaptation
to captivity are expected in all closed captive populations. The accumulation of new deleterious mutations is a much longer-term concern and
is of unknown importance.
The effects of inbreeding depression, loss of genetic diversity and
mutational accumulation are all more severe in smaller than in larger
populations. Conversely, genetic adaptation to captivity is more extensive in larger than in smaller populations (Chapter 6). While this is beneﬁcial in captivity, its deleterious effects are only felt when the
population is returned to the wild. All deleterious changes in captivity
are likely to be more deleterious when populations are reintroduced
into harsher wild environmental conditions (Fig. 18.1).

Genetic adaptation to captivity
Genetic adaptations to captivity
typically reduce reproductive
ﬁtness when populations are
returned to the wild

While genetic adaptation to captivity has been recognized since the
time of Darwin (domestication), it has, until recently, been considered
only a minor problem in captive breeding. However, there is now compelling evidence that it can be a major threat to the success of reintroductions. All populations adapt to their local environmental conditions
(Chapter 6). When we compare populations across a range of environ-

GENETIC ADAPTATION TO CAPTIVITY

Fig. 18.1 Genetic deterioration in captivity and its impact on reintroduction success.
Predicted relationships of reproductive ﬁtness with effective population size (Ne) due to
impacts of inbreeding depression, accumulation of deleterious mutations and genetic
adaptation to captivity. Reproductive ﬁtness under captive conditions is shown on the left,
and for captive populations transferred to the wild on the right. The dotted line is the
ﬁtness of a large wild population. The curve labelled ‘Combined’ is the cumulative impact
of inbreeding depression and genetic adaptation to captivity. A long-term time frame is
being considered ( ~ 50 generations). The magnitudes of effects will vary among species
and environments, but the directions of change will be consistent.

ments, we usually observe that they have highest ﬁtness in their own
environment and perform least well in other environments (genotype
environment interactions) (Chapters 5 and 6). Thus, for populations
maintained in captivity for many generations, adaptation to this novel
environment may severely reduce their performance upon return to
natural environments. This is evident in introduced pest species, such
as rabbits and European starlings, where release of captive stock has
often failed, while introductions with wild stock have been more ‘successful’ (Fenner & Ratcliffe 1965; Fyfe 1978). Less anecdotal evidence
comes from reintroductions of captive populations of turkeys, biocontrol insects and, especially, ﬁsh (Hindar et al. 1991; Frankham 1995d).
Genetic adaptation is expected to occur in all species in captivity.
When wild populations are brought into captivity, the forces of
natural selection change. Populations are naturally or inadvertently
selected for their ability to reproduce in the captive environment.
Selection for tameness is favoured by keepers and ﬂighty animals such
as antelope, gazelle, wallabies and kangaroos may kill themselves by
running into fences. Predators are controlled, as are most diseases and
pests. Carnivores are no longer selected for their ability to capture prey.
Further, there is usually no competition with other species in captivity,
and limited competition for mates within species. Natural selection on
all of these characters will be relaxed, or, if there are trade-offs with
other aspects of reproductive ﬁtness, they may actually be selected
against (Bryant & Reed 1999).
Genetic adaptation to captivity has been described in mammals,
ﬁsh, several species of fruit ﬂies, plants and bacteria (see Chapter 6; King
1939; Frankham & Loebel 1992; Arnold 1995; Woodworth 1996; Behr et

Captive populations of threatened
species adapt to reproduce in
their captive environment. This
adaptation is deleterious when
they are returned to the wild

453

454

GENETIC MANAGEMENT FOR REINTRODUCTION

Genetic adaptation to captivity is
more extensive in large than in
small populations

Genetic adaptation to captivity
may be an important determinant
of reintroduction success

al. 1999) and it is likely to occur in all species. The extent of change may
be very large. Wild rats showed about a three-fold increase in reproductive output over 25 generations in captivity (King 1939). Similarly, wild
fruit ﬂy populations kept in large populations under regular laboratory
conditions increased in ﬁtness by over three-fold over 84 generations
(Gilligan 2001).
Response to selection and hence genetic adaptation to captivity is
greater in larger than smaller populations (Fig. 18.1). If genetic adaptation to captivity causes major reductions in ﬁtness when captive populations are reintroduced, then large captive populations will actually
have lower ﬁtness in the wild than smaller ones. When both inbreeding
depression and genetic adaptation to captivity are occurring, we expect
a curvilinear relationship between population size and ﬁtness when
returned to the wild (Fig. 18.1).
It is therefore critical that we experimentally evaluate the combined
impacts of inbreeding depression, genetic adaptation to captivity and
accumulation of deleterious mutation on ﬁtness, both in captivity and
when following reintroduction. At what rate do captive populations
deteriorate genetically? How large an impact does each of the factors
have? To evaluate these issues, Woodworth (1996) maintained captive
populations of fruit ﬂies at effective sizes of 25, 50, 100, 250 and 500 for
50 generations under benign uncrowded conditions designed to minimize genetic adaptation to captivity. After 50 generations, the patterns
of reproductive ﬁtness in the different populations under captive and
‘wild’ conditions (Fig. 18.2) reﬂected those predicted in Fig. 18.1. Under
benign captive conditions, reproductive ﬁtness was related to population size. Smaller populations generally displayed lower ﬁtness and the
large populations had higher ﬁtness. Some larger populations had
evolved greater ﬁtness, under these conditions, than the wild population from which all populations had been founded, i.e. they had
adapted to the captive environment.
However, when the same populations were evaluated under
crowded, competitive conditions, designed to mimic conditions in the
wild, major genetic deterioration in reproductive ﬁtness was observed.
All populations had declined in ﬁtness, under these conditions, by at
least 67%. There was a curvilinear relationship between ‘wild’ ﬁtness
and population size; populations with intermediate size (Ne 100) had
highest ﬁtness in the ‘wild’. This is only expected when genetic adaptation to captivity is causing genetic deterioration at greater rates in
larger populations, and inbreeding depression is causing most deterioration in small populations. The largest populations (Ne 500) had lost
86% of their reproductive ﬁtness over 50 generations, i.e. a decline of
approximately 1.7% per generation. Similar genetic changes in captivity
have been reported in other large fruit ﬂy populations (Shabalina et al.
1997), in ﬁsh and in insect biological control programs. This issue is
emerging as a major concern in captive breeding programs where the
option of reintroduction to the wild is envisaged.

GENETIC ADAPTATION TO CAPTIVITY

Fig. 18.2 Genetic deterioration in captivity (Woodworth 1996). Reproductive ﬁtness
(SE) of fruit ﬂy populations maintained in benign captive conditions for 50 generations
with effective population sizes of 25, 50, 100, 250 and 500. Fitness was measured at
generation 50 under benign captive conditions (captivity), and when the populations were
raised under crowded, competitive ‘wild’ conditions. Genetic deterioration under captive
conditions was due to inbreeding depression, but was lessened by genetic adaptations to
the captive conditions. Genetic deterioration under ‘wild’ conditions was due to
inbreeding depression and to genetic adaptations that had evolved over the 50
generations of benign captive environmental conditions. Genetic adaptation was greatest
in larger populations, while inbreeding depression was most severe in the smaller
populations, yielding a curvilinear relationship between ﬁtness and population size in the
‘wild’. No contribution from accumulation of new deleterious mutations was found in
these populations (Gilligan et al. 1997).

What determines the rate of genetic adaptation to
captivity?
To minimize the deleterious impacts of adaptation to captivity on
reintroduction success, we need to consider what factors determine the
annual rate. These include:
• Number of generations in captivity (years / generation length: y / L)
• Selection differential in captivity (S)
• Additive genetic variation for reproductive ﬁtness (as heritability: h2)
• Effective population size of the captive population (Ne)
• Proportion of the population derived from migrants (m)
• Generation length in years (L).
Rates of genetic adaptation (GA) can be predicted from:
GA ⬃

Sh2
L

y/L

兺 [1 1/(2N )]

y/L

i1

e

(1 mi)

(18.1)

where mi is the proportion of the genetic material from immigrants in
the ith generation.
Selection in captivity is dependent upon the mortality rate and
upon the variance in family sizes. Under conditions of extremely high
density and mortality, captive ﬁtness doubled over eight generations in
a fruit ﬂy population (Frankham & Loebel 1992), while changes were
much less over 50 generations under the benign captive conditions
described above (Fig. 18.2). The extent of the difference between captive

Genetic adaptation to captivity
depends upon genetic diversity,
selection in captivity, the effective
population size, the number of
generations in captivity, and the
difference between the captive
and wild environments

455

456

GENETIC MANAGEMENT FOR REINTRODUCTION

and wild environments drives the adaptive differentiation in captivity.
If the captive environment is very different from the wild, selection in
captivity will be strong and the population will evolve rapidly to adapt.
As selection is more effective in large than in small populations
(Chapters 8 and 14), genetic adaptation to captivity is greater in large
than in small populations. If genetic adaptation causes major genetic
deterioration for released captive populations, then large captive populations will actually display lower ﬁtness in the wild than smaller ones.
This suggests a management strategy to minimize it (see later).
Immigrants, introduced from the wild, will slow the rate of genetic
adaptation. However, for many endangered species wild individuals are
either not available at all (extinct in the wild), or too valuable to use in
augmenting a captive population.
Species with shorter generation lengths show faster genetic adaptation per year than ones with longer generations, e.g. elephants will
adapt more slowly to captivity (per year) than native mice, if all other
factors are the same.

Minimizing genetic adaptation to captivity
Genetic adaptation to captivity
can be minimized by reducing the
number of generations in captivity,
selection and size of captive
populations

We have just discussed the factors that promote adaptation to captivity.
Consequently, adaptation can be reduced by:
• Minimizing number of generations in captivity
• Minimizing selection in captivity
• Minimizing the heritability of reproductive ﬁtness in captivity
• Minimizing the size of captive populations
• Maximizing the proportion of wild immigrants and the recency of
introducing immigrants
• Maximizing generation length.
Minimizing time in captivity has both genetic and non-genetic beneﬁts.
Low numbers of generations in captivity have been utilized for Lord
Howe Island woodhens (about four years in total), black-footed ferrets
and California condors, although, in the latter cases, the wild populations are not yet self-sustaining. Conversely, Père David’s deer has been
in captivity for hundreds of years and Przewalski’s horse for most of the
20th century.
Cryopreservation has the potential to be highly effective in minimizing generations in captivity. However, it is currently only available for a
small number of animal species, mostly those closely related to domestic animals (Chapter 17). Breeding from older animals can also extend
the generation interval, but is not easy to achieve in practice (Chapter
17).
Selection can be minimized by making the captive environment as
similar to the natural habitat as possible. The heritability of ﬁtness is
likely to increase with the difference between the natural and captive
environments (Sgrò & Hoffmann 1998). However, duplicating a natural
environment (habitat, diet, endemic diseases, predators, competitors,

GENETIC ADAPTATION TO CAPTIVITY

etc.) is extremely difﬁcult. It is also difﬁcult to justify in captive breeding of a threatened species as the ﬁrst priority is to establish a secure,
viable population, i.e. to reduce the threatening processes.
Genetic adaptation can also be reduced by managing the population
to ensure equal representation of founder alleles and avoiding preferential breeding of individuals. Managing for equal representation of
founder alleles ensures that some lineages or alleles are not selected in
favour of others. The strategy of breeding to minimize mean kinship is
designed to accomplish this objective as decisions on who should breed
and how many offspring should be produced is based on pedigree information as opposed to reproductive performance or phenotype.
However, selection within families is unavoidable and cannot be compensated for by management using mean kinship. For example, all siblings in a family initially have the same mean kinship, yet they differ in
the alleles they receive from their parents. If sibs carrying a particular
allele show higher survival, selection will not be prevented by mean
kinship. Nevertheless, genetic management using mean kinship can
halve the intensity of selection. This has been veriﬁed in fruit ﬂies under
breeding programs that equalized family sizes (the equilibrium state of
a mean kinship breeding program; Frankham et al. 2000). However, this
type of breeding program is insufﬁcient to prevent substantial genetic
deterioration in captivity, as it was used in the experiment described in
Fig. 18.2.

Minimizing kinship can halve
genetic adaptation to captivity

Population fragmentation as a means for minimizing
genetic adaptation to captivity
The competing requirements to maintain genetic diversity and avoid
severe inbreeding depression, but also to avoid genetic adaptation to
captivity, indicate that neither large nor small populations are ideal for
breeding in captivity, when reintroduction to the wild is envisaged.
Small populations suffer loss of genetic variation and inbreeding
depression, but minimize genetic adaptation to captivity. Large populations retain genetic variation and have only slow inbreeding, but suffer
most from genetic adaptation to captivity.
A compromise could be achieved by maintaining a large overall population, but fragmenting it into partially isolated sub-populations, as
shown in Fig. 18.3. The sub-populations are maintained as separate populations until inbreeding builds to a level where it is of concern. This
will most probably be at an F of 0.1–0.2, although populations should be
monitored for signs of ﬁtness decline. Immigrants are exchanged
among sub-populations at this point. The sub-populations are then
maintained as isolated populations until inbreeding again builds up.
This structure is expected to maintain more genetic diversity than a
single population of the same total size and to exhibit less deleterious
changes due to genetic adaptation to captivity. There might be low
levels of inbreeding depression, but these should be tolerable.

Fragmented populations with
occasional exchanges of
individuals show reduced genetic
adaptation to captivity and retain
more overall genetic diversity than
in a single population of the same
total size

457

458

GENETIC MANAGEMENT FOR REINTRODUCTION

Fig. 18.3 Single large or several
small: alternative genetic
management options for captive
populations. Several partially isolated
fragmented sub-populations, when
pooled, should maintain more genetic
variation, show less genetic adaptation
to captivity and have a lower
inbreeding coefﬁcient than a single
large population with the same total
size.

If all sub-populations are combined (e.g. to produce animals for
reintroduction) the pooled population has a lower level of inbreeding
and more genetic diversity than a single large population of the same
total size (Margan et al. 1998). A critical requirement in the use of fragmentation is that none of the sub-populations becomes extinct due to
inbreeding depression or other reasons. For this reason, this strategy is
not recommended for wild populations in nature, as it is very difﬁcult
to avoid extinctions of sub-populations. Further, we wish to maximize
adaptation to wild environments.
This structure satisﬁes other requirements in captive breeding.
Captive populations are already fragmented. Individual zoos and wildlife parks have limited capacity and endangered species are dispersed
over several institutions to minimize risk from catastrophes (ﬁres, tornadoes, disease, etc.). Currently, individuals are moved among institutions to create, effectively, a single large population. The fragmented
structure will reduce costs and the risk of injury, and reduce disease
transmission.
How would the fragmented structure be implemented? Initially it is
envisaged that movement of animals among institutions for genetic
management will cease, but that populations within institutions will
be managed by mean kinship. When inbreeding levels reach 0.1–0.2,
nearby zoos will exchange animals. This may happen in two generations
for zoos with only one pair. For example, they might exchange all breeding males. The new outbred populations will again be maintained in isolation until inbreeding rises to 0.1–0.2. At this point exchange of
animals will be with zoos that are more distant. This process will be continued in a manner similar to the maximum avoidance of inbreeding
with groups (Box 17.1).
When inbreeding has accumulated and there are no additional
‘unrelated’ populations within regions, transfer of individuals among
captive breeding programs in different regions or countries may be
envisaged. The number of generations between animal transfers will
depend on the Ne of different populations, and will be more frequent for
smaller populations than larger ones.
Does population fragmentation work as a genetic management
strategy? The predicted beneﬁts of fragmentation on ‘wild’ ﬁtness have
been demonstrated in fruit ﬂies, using the populations described in
Fig. 18.2. Populations were maintained under benign captive conditions as either fragmented populations (and pooled after 50 generations), or as single large populations e.g. four populations of size 25
versus two of 50 versus one of 100. These populations were ‘reintroduced’ by placing them in more stressful, crowded, competitive conditions. The fragmented/pooled populations exhibited superior ﬁtness in
the stressful ‘wild’ environment, indicating that the smaller population fragments had adapted to the captive environment to a lesser
extent than the single large populations (Fig. 18.4). The fragmented
populations also had more overall genetic diversity than the single
large populations.

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF REINTRODUCTIONS

This strategy has only recently been advocated and experimentally
validated, and it is not yet the recommended genetic management for
captive populations of endangered species. However, it has much to
commend it.

Fig. 18.4 Experimental
evaluation of population
fragmentation for the captive
management of populations
destined for reintroduction.
Reproductive ﬁtness under
crowded, competitive ‘wild’
conditions for fruit ﬂy populations
previously maintained for 50
generations under benign captive
conditions is shown for single large
populations, compared to several
small pooled populations of
equivalent total size. The several
small populations were pooled
after generation 50 (Margan et al.
1998). In all cases the ﬁtness under
‘wild’ conditions was greater in the
pool formed from the several small
populations, than in the single large
populations.

Genetic management of reintroductions
Reintroductions and introductions are designed to re-establish selfsustaining wild populations. There are many practical considerations
when a reintroduction is contemplated. Genetics may play a relatively
minor role in some decisions (Kleiman et al. 1994). However, genetic considerations should not be ignored, as often occurs, as reintroductions
have a higher probability of success if all issues are considered (see
below). Genetics can contribute to:
• choice of sites for reintroduction
• choice of individuals, and numbers to release
• deciding upon the number of release sites
• genetic management of released populations.
These issues are considered in turn below.

The genetic objective of
reintroduction programs is to reestablish wild populations with
maximum genetic diversity using
individuals predicted to have
maximal reproduction ﬁtness in
the wild habitat

Choosing sites for reintroduction
Sites for reintroduction should maximize the chances of successful reestablishment in the wild. The environment should match, as closely as
possible, the environment to which the population was adapted, prior
to captive breeding. Reintroductions should therefore be carried out
within the previous range of the species and ideally into prime, rather
than marginal, habitat. This minimizes the adaptive evolution required
in the reintroduction site.
For example, in butterﬂy reintroductions it is important that the site

Reintroductions and introductions
should be carried out in sites
where the species has the best
chance of surviving in the wild

459

460

GENETIC MANAGEMENT FOR REINTRODUCTION

Fig. 18.5 Populations adapted to local conditions have higher ﬁtness than those from
distant sites. Mortality in four Nasella pulchra plant populations planted at Winters,
California (Knapp & Dyer 1998).

contains the food-plants to which the species is best adapted. It is important that reintroduced plants be genetically adapted to the soil, day
length and climatic conditions. For example, mortality in the plant
Nasella pulchra was greater in non-local than local populations planted
at Winters, California (Fig. 18.5). Similar results have been found in
several other plant studies (Guerrant 1996; Montalvo & Ellstrand 2000).
Similar principles apply to vertebrates. However, the extent of local
adaptation in vertebrates is generally less than in invertebrates and
plants, and a wider variety of sites may be acceptable.
Reintroduction from populations maintained in captivity for long
periods may face challenges due to changes in the wild habitat. This also
suggests that time in captivity be minimized.

Choosing individuals to reintroduce
Reintroduction programs should
use healthy individuals with as
much reproductive ability and
genetic variation as possible

When choosing animals for
reintroduction, the genetic
impacts of adding them to the
reintroduced population, and of
removing them from the captive
population, must both be
evaluated

Individuals used for reintroductions should maximize the chances of
re-establishing a self-sustaining wild population. Thus, healthy individuals with high reproductive potential, low inbreeding coefﬁcients and
high genetic diversity are ideal. Inbred deer mice, snails and American
kestrels were found to have lower survival than their outbred counterparts when released into the wild (Chen 1993; Jiménez et al. 1994;
Frankham 1995a). Populations of rose clover with higher genetic variation had greater success in colonizing new environments than populations with less genetic variation (Martins & Jain 1979). Similarly, ﬁsh
populations with more genetic diversity had higher population growth
rates than those with lower genetic diversity (Leberg 1990a). The plant
Lysimachia minoricensis lacks genetic diversity for RAPD and allozymes.
Efforts to reintroduce it back into the Balearic Islands (Minorca) have
failed (Calero et al. 1998).
When an individual is transferred to the wild, its genetic diversity is
added to the reintroduced population, but removed from the captive
population. Both these effects must be assessed when evaluating indi-

GENETIC MANAGEMENT OF REINTRODUCTIONS

Fig. 18.6 Changes in genetic diversity in the captive and reintroduced populations
resulting from reintroducing individual golden lion tamarins. Each point shows how
reintroducing that individual will affect the heterozygosity of the reintroduced population
and how its removal will affect the heterozygosity of the captive population.

viduals for reintroduction. Since survival in the natural habitat is
expected to be much lower than in captivity, it is undesirable to deplete
the captive population of genetically valuable animals to beneﬁt the
wild population. This is particularly important at the beginning of a
reintroduction program as mortality is frequently high. Conversely, the
reintroduced population is highly related to its source captive population and an otherwise ideal reintroduction candidate may be closely
related to animals previously released. Its reintroduction may actually
reduce the genetic diversity of the reintroduced population.
Often the interests of the two populations conﬂict, as illustrated for
golden lion tamarins in Fig. 18.6. Individuals (points) in segment A are
those reintroductions that would beneﬁt the reintroduced population,
but be harmful to the captive population. These are genetically valuable captive animals with few relatives in the reintroduced population. Reintroduction of individuals in segment B will beneﬁt both the
reintroduced and the captive population. These are genetically overrepresented captive animals with few reintroduced relatives.
Reintroduction of individuals in quadrant C would be detrimental to
both captive and reintroduced populations (valuable in the captive
population but with lots of reintroduced relatives). Reintroducing
individuals from sector D is beneﬁcial to the captive population, but
detrimental to the reintroduced population (over-represented in both
populations).
Because of the high risks of mortality commonly associated with
reintroduction programs, individuals of type D should be used initially.
This has been practiced in reintroduction programs for golden lion tamarins, California condors, black-footed ferrets and Przewalski’s horses.
When survival and reproduction in the reintroduced population has
improved, more valuable animals may be added until the full range of
genetic diversity in the captive population is represented in the wild.

461

462

GENETIC MANAGEMENT FOR REINTRODUCTION

This can only be done if survival and reproduction of individuals in the
reintroduced population are carefully monitored. All phases of this
process have now occurred for the golden lion tamarin reintroduction
program.

Choice of individuals to reintroduce when several
populations exist
When several captive populations
exist, individuals for reintroduction
may come from a single
population, a pool of populations,
or from crosses among individuals
from different populations

There are genetic and non-genetic
advantages in establishing several
reintroduced populations

Several captive populations may be able to supply individuals for
reintroductions, especially in plants. From which population(s) should
individuals for reintroduction be taken? The options are for individuals
to be taken from:
• a single population
• a combination of populations
• crosses between populations.
The decision rests on evaluating which of these options maximizes the
probability of reintroduction success (Guerrant 1996).
A single population may be selected if the species shows strong local
adaptation and one captive population was derived from the environment where the reintroduction is planned. This presumes that there
are accurate records of the sources of populations, and that the environment has not changed. The latter presumption is often untrue, as the
initial endangerment of the species frequently arises from environmental deterioration. If the environment has changed, reintroduction
success is improved by using individuals that represent a combination
of populations, or ideally, crosses among populations.
If the species is a natural outbreeder and the captive populations are
inbred, then crosses between populations should improve reproductive
ﬁtness and genetic variation and thus improve reintroduction success.
There are suggestions that wild turkeys resulting from crosses among
populations had higher reproductive ﬁtness in the wild than those
from single populations (Leberg 1990b). Reintroduction of individuals
from several small differentiated populations, each with low genetic
diversity, has been used in reintroduction for collared lizards in
Missouri, USA (Templeton 1986). However, care must be taken to avoid
outbreeding depression in such cases. The most prudent approach is to
proceed with reintroductions on an experimental basis, monitoring
survival and reproductive success of pure and hybrid individuals. This
is being undertaken for the Florida panther, following the introduction
of individuals from the Texas sub-species. These data can then be used
to decide upon the best approach for further reintroductions.

How many reintroduced populations should be
established?
Where several suitable reintroduction sites and ample excess captivebred individuals are available, a number of reintroduced populations

HOW SUCCESSFUL ARE REINTRODUCTIONS?

should be established to maximize the numbers of reintroduced individuals (Leberg 1990b). This minimizes loss of genetic diversity and will
minimize inbreeding if individuals are translocated among the different sites. Having several populations reduces the risk of extinction due
to natural hazards and disease and may reduce the risks from environmental stochasticity. For example, at least 10 reintroduced populations
of the black-footed ferret are recommended to minimize extinction risk
(Chapter 16).

Genetic management of reintroduced populations
As the probability of success of the reintroduced population increases,
animals of type B, and then of type A should be added to the wild population (Fig. 18.6), to provide the wild population with all the genetic
diversity available from the captive population. Further, this will serve
to minimize the inbreeding in the population and so should increase its
reproductive ﬁtness. Subsequent genetic management follows that for
wild populations, discussed in Chapter 16.

Once populations are
reintroduced and self-sustaining,
the full range of genetic diversity
should be added to them

How successful are reintroductions?
Reintroduction of threatened species is a relatively recent activity. It is
a complex process that involves considerable understanding of species’
biology and ecology. Even introductions of widespread and successful
pest species, such as rabbits and European starlings, have failed (Fenner
& Ratcliffe 1965; Fyfe 1978). For example, several introductions of
domesticated rabbits into Australia failed before the ‘successful’ introduction of wild rabbits resulted in a serious pest problem.
Surveys of success rates for translocations or reintroductions indicate that they have a relatively low success rate. Wolf et al. (1996)
reported an overall success rate of 67%, but 53% for translocations of
threatened mammal and birds (Table 18.1). Success was deﬁned as producing a self-sustaining wild population. Translocations of native game
species were more successful than those for threatened species. Success
rates increased with the quality of the release habitat and were higher
for releases in the core of the historical habitat than in the periphery or
outside. There was a trend for translocation of wild-caught animals to
be more successful than reintroduction of captive-reared individuals.
Translocations of omnivores were more successful than those of carnivores or herbivores. Successful translocations released more animals
than unsuccessful translocations. Genetic factors were not evaluated in
the survey, as they have rarely been considered in decisions involving
reintroduction.
A second, more restricted, survey was carried out by Beck et al. (1994)
based purely upon reintroductions of captive-born animals into or near
the species’ historical range to establish or augment wild populations.
This survey covered 145 projects involving reintroduction of over 13

Reintroduction is a complex
process that, so far, has a relatively
low success rate

463

464

GENETIC MANAGEMENT FOR REINTRODUCTION

Table 18.1 Success rates of intentional translocations and reintroductions
of native birds and mammals to the wild in Australia, Canada, New Zealand
and the USA as of 1993. Data came from 77 translocations of mammals and
105 translocations of birds; factors associated with success of translocations
are indicated
Variable

Success (%)

Threatened, endangered or sensitive species
Native game
Release area habitat
Excellent
Good
Fair or poor
Location of release
Core of historic range
Periphery or outside
Wild-caught
Captive-reared
Adult food habit
Carnivore
Herbivore
Omnivore
Early breeder, large clutch
Late breeder, small clutch
Potential competitors
Congeneric
Similar
Neither

53
81
79
69
45
75
46
71
50
65
61
80
67
71
71
60
72

Source: After Wolf et al. (1996).

million animals of 126 species; 44% of projects involved threatened
species. Programs were deﬁned as successful if reintroduced populations reached at least 500 individuals, free of human support. Only 11%
of projects were considered successful to that date. The 16 successful
cases were wood bison, plains bison (two projects), Arabian oryx, Alpine
ibex, bald eagle, Harris’ hawk, peregrine falcon, Aleutian goose, bean
goose, lesser white-fronted goose, wood duck, gharial, Galapagos
iguana, pine snake and Galapagos tortoise. Success rates were 11% for
mammals and birds, 17% for reptiles and amphibians and zero for ﬁsh
and invertebrates. Successful projects released animals for longer (11.8
years) than other projects (4.7 years) and released more animals (average
of 726 versus 336). Successful projects more frequently provided local
employment and community education programs than other projects.
Rather surprisingly, successful projects used veterinary screening and
pre-release provisioning less often than other projects.
The relatively low success rates for reintroductions are not surprising
since programs may have had insufﬁcient time to succeed. Further, some
programs have been rather cursory – animals have been reintroduced

SUPPORTIVE BREEDING

and left to fend for themselves without training for coping with the wild.
Reintroduction success should improve substantially as the science
behind it advances.
We are not aware of any surveys of reintroduction success in plants.
However, plant data provide more insights into the probable role of
genetic factors in reintroduction success. The desirability of high
genetic variation in reintroduced populations is widely accepted
(Huenneke 1991). Experiments with sweet vernal grass demonstrated
an advantage of genetically variable (sexual) progeny in survivorship,
fecundity and growth over genetically uniform (asexual) progeny,
under natural ﬁeld conditions (Ellstrand & Antonovics 1985). Further,
genetic uniformity increases the susceptibility of populations to pathogens (Fiedler & Karieva 1998). In a reciprocal transplant experiment
with Guadalupe Island lupine, differences in ﬁtness were found among
three source populations (Helenurm 1998). The poorest success was
with seed from the smallest of three natural populations, a result that
could reﬂect inbreeding depression.

Supportive breeding
Some wild populations that are not self-sustaining are maintained by
regular augmentation from captive populations (supportive breeding).
For example, the wild population of the nene (Hawaiian goose) is not
self-sustaining and is continuously augmented using captive-bred
animals (Black 1995). Restocking began in 1960 and by 1990 2100 individuals had been released. Hatchery ﬁsh stocks are widely used to
augment a large number of wild ﬁsh species, especially those favoured
by anglers.
Such supportive breeding typically has deleterious impacts in the
long term on the genetic composition and reproductive ﬁtness of the
wild stock. It is likely to lead to (a) reduced effective population sizes, (b)
reduced reproductive ﬁtness resulting from genetic adaptations to captivity that are deleterious in the wild, and perhaps to (c) inbreeding
depression. For example, Hindar et al. (1991) concluded that the ﬁtness
of captive stock was inferior to wild stock, when compared in the wild,
in all nine cases they examined.
A reintroduction was proposed in Amur leopards to reinforce a
small remnant population of only about 30 animals. However, the
captive animals to be used descended mostly from two founders and
one of these may have come from a different sub-species (Foose 1991).
Consequently, the reintroduction program could have added animals
that could have actually reduced the genetic diversity of the wild population. The solution proposed was to augment the captive population
with individuals from the wild, to conserve genetic diversity in the
more secure captive environment. Subsequently, this captive population could be used to provide substantial numbers of animals for
reintroduction to the wild. Ryman et al. (1995) urged caution in allowing
continuous gene ﬂow from captive to wild populations, where a wild

Some wild populations are
augmented regularly using captivebred animals

465

466

GENETIC MANAGEMENT FOR REINTRODUCTION

population still exists, due to concerns about genetic adaptation to captivity, and greater inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity.

Case studies in captive breeding and
reintroduction

Arabian oryx
The Arabian oryx was driven to near extinction in the wild because of
hunting with increasingly sophisticated weapons. The species was
saved by capture of the last few wild oryx in 1962, followed by a captive
breeding program. The captive population originated from nine founders. These were bred predominantly at the Phoenix Zoo in Arizona
where there was a steady increase in numbers and implementation of a
genetic management program. With funding and co-operation from
the Sultan of Oman, a successful reintroduction program has been
carried out (Stanley Price 1989). Ten animals were initially introduced
into pens in the oryx’s native range, followed by gradual release. Local
tribesmen were employed to assist in management and tracking of the
oryx. Released animals showed good survival and reproduction, and relatively normal behaviour. They increased substantially in numbers and
by 1995, there were approximately 280 animals in the wild, ranging over
16 000 km2 of desert.
Unfortunately, poaching returned and the wild population was
depleted to 138 individuals in 1998 (Gorman 1999). At that point, 40
individuals were taken back into captivity. After further poaching, just
11 wild females and 85 males remained in Oman. Another reintroduction program is in Saudi Arabia, where poaching is currently less of a
threat.
Genetic analyses of the Arabian oryx using microsatellites have
revealed loss of alleles due to the bottleneck, errors in the pedigrees and
the occurrence of simultaneous inbreeding and outbreeding depression in the species (Marshall et al. 1999; Marshall & Spalton 2000). The
population is polymorphic for a chromosomal translocation that probably explains the outbreeding depression (Benirschke & Kumamoto
1991).

Black-footed ferret
The black-footed ferret was reduced in numbers through habitat loss
and especially from vigorous efforts by cattle ranchers to exterminate
their prairie dog prey (Clark 1994). The last wild population was found in
Wyoming in 1981 and a captive breeding program begun in 1985.
Distemper was then found to be killing individuals and the last wild individuals were captured. The captive breeding program was founded from
18 individuals. These contributed unequally so that by 1993 there were
effectively only 4.1 founders (Russell et al. 1994). The captive population

CASE STUDIES IN CAPTIVE BREEDING AND REINTRODUCTION

has increased to about 250 adults, and has been subject to genetic management based on minimizing kinship.
A reintroduction program commenced in 1991 with surplus
animals from the captive population. Since then, all females in the
captive population are routinely bred to produce animals for reintroductions. Currently reintroduction has established six populations,
Wyoming, Montana (two separate sites), South Dakota, Arizona, and the
Utah/Colorado border, with another planned for South Dakota.
Between 1991 and 1999, about 1185 ferrets have been introduced into
the wild. In 2000, over 85 litters were born in the wild, but only two of
the reintroduced populations have been particularly successful so far.
The objective is to eventually establish 10 populations with a total of at
least 1500 animals.

Przewalski’s horse
Przewalski’s horses have been restricted to captivity for much of the
20th century (Boyd & Houpt 1994). A captive population was founded
from 12 individuals, plus one domestic mare (a different species with
a different chromosome number). Numbers in captivity are now
approximately 1500. The captive population has an average inbreeding coefﬁcient of F  0.20 (Box 11.1). It has been managed to minimize
inbreeding, equalize founder representation, and to reduce the
genetic inputs from the domestic mare. Horses have been reintroduced into Mongolia at the site where the species was last seen in the
wild (Van Dierendonck et al. 1996). As of mid-2000, 47 individuals
existed in the wild. A recent genetic marker analysis has cast serious
doubts on the accuracy of the pedigree, suggesting that more than
one domestic mare contributed (see Chapter 19).

California condor
The California condor was reduced in population size due to habitat
loss, DDT pollution and lead poisoning from eating shot wildlife carcasses (see Ralls et al. 2000). After much controversy, the last birds in the
wild were captured and a captive breeding and reintroduction
program instituted at the San Diego Wild Animal Park and Los Angeles
Zoo. Fourteen founders from three related clans were available for the
program. Captive numbers have steadily increased and a limited
number of releases have occurred. The major initial concern has been
to increase the size of the population as rapidly as possible.
Reintroduction to the wild initially met with limited success. Deaths
occurred from lead poisoning, hitting electricity powerlines and poisoning due to ingestion of antifreeze from vehicle radiators. Recently,
reintroduction to the Grand Canyon has been undertaken to avoid
problems associated with proximity to humans. These birds are provided with supplementary feeding. At the end of 1998, the population

467

468

GENETIC MANAGEMENT FOR REINTRODUCTION

consisted of 146 individuals, 98 captive birds, 26 wild birds in
California and 22 in Arizona (Ralls et al. 2000).

Guam rail
The Guam rail is a ﬂightless omnivorous bird restricted to the island of
Guam in the Paciﬁc. It numbered about 80 000 in the 1960s. However, it
was extinct in the wild by 1986, due to predation from introduced
brown tree snakes. The brown tree snake was introduced inadvertently
during World War II, and drove seven of 11 native forest species to extinction and depleted other species. The Guam rail was saved from extinction by a captive breeding program that was based upon 21 founders
rescued from the wild just prior to extinction. Nine of these did not
breed. Five strategies for selecting breeders to produce young rails for
reintroduction were compared by Haig et al. (1990): random choice,
selecting for ﬁtness, maximizing allozyme diversity by equalizing allele
frequencies, equalization of family sizes and minimizing mean
kinship. They concluded that the last approach was best and this was
implemented. Founder relationships were evaluated using DNA ﬁngerprints and resulted in six individuals being placed in two different sib
groups (Haig et al. 1994). The captive breeding program has been highly
successful. Further, reintroductions have been made onto nearby Rota
Island where the brown tree snake is absent. After initial difﬁculties,
reintroduced birds are now surviving and breeding. From 1989 to the
end of 2000, 384 rails have been released on Rota (S. Medina, personal
communication). Second generation birds have not been observed and
detailed censuses are underway. In 1998, a reintroduction program was
commenced in Guam, where birds were put into an enclosure designed
to exclude the brown tree snake.

Lord Howe Island woodhen
The Lord Howe Island woodhen has been described as a classic case of
captive breeding and reintroduction (Caughley & Gunn 1996). The
endangered population on Lord Howe Island, off the East Coast of
Australia, fell to 20–30 individuals mainly because of predation by introduced pigs (Brook et al. 1997a). The only three known breeding pairs
were captured and bred in enclosures on the island and feral pigs were
exterminated. Following reintroduction of 86 birds over four years, the
population increased to about 200 and stabilized, so that a downgrading of its status has been recommended.
Whilst the ecological side of this program is regarded as a model, the
genetic management was far from optimal. As only three pairs contributed to the captive breeding program, the total population will be much
more inbred than prior to the program, and genetic variation is likely to
be lost due to the distorted contributions of the available individuals. In

FURTHER READING

hindsight, it would have been desirable to enhance the genetic base of
the captive breeding program once it was known to be successful, i.e. by
adding further fertile individuals to the captive breeding program.
Unfortunately, no genetic data on the population have been reported,
no remedial action is planned, and routine monitoring has ceased.

Mauna Kea silversword
A situation similar to that of the Lord Howe Island woodhen occurred
with the reintroduction of the Mauna Kea silversword plant. By the late
1970s, only a small remnant natural population remained, following
grazing pressure by introduced ungulates. Since 1973, 450 plants have
been outplanted to promote recovery of this population. However,
genetic analysis using RAPDs indicates that all outplanted individuals
are derived from only two maternal founder plants, resulting in a
major reduction in genetic variation in the total population
(Robichaux et al. 1997). Since this species is self-incompatible, the
restricted genetic base was affecting mating success for reintroduced
individuals. Natural pollination of these only results in a 20% seed set,
while deliberate outcrosses to the remaining wild individuals increases
it to 60%. A remedial program to outcross the outplanted individuals to
the remaining wild individuals is underway to broaden the genetic
base of the population.

Summary
1. Captive populations provide a source of individuals to reintroduce and supplement wild populations of threatened species.
2. The success of reintroduction is jeopardized by genetic deterioration in captivity due primarily to inbreeding depression, loss of
genetic variation, and genetic adaptation to captivity (leading to
reduced adaptation to the wild environment).
3. Genetic adaptation may pose a serious threat to reintroduction
success.
4. The optimum means for managing captive populations for
reintroduction is to maintain them as small partially isolated subpopulations, with occasional migration. This is also the optimum
means for retaining genetic diversity (but is not currently used). In
addition, this management reduces costs and risk of disease
transfer.
5. Individuals for reintroduction should have maximum genetic
diversity and maximum reproduction ﬁtness in the wild environment.
However, the risks involved dictate that reintroduction programs
should begin with genetically surplus individuals with many relatives
in the captive population, so that the captive population is not compromised.

469

470

GENETIC MANAGEMENT FOR REINTRODUCTION

6. The initial priority with reintroduced populations is to increase
numbers.
7. Once successful, the wild population should be augmented until
the full complement of genetic diversity is represented in the wild.
8. Reintroductions have a relatively low success rate, to date.
FURTHER READING

Ballou et al. (1995) Population Management for Survival and Recovery. Advanced
treatment of topics relating to captive breeding and reintroduction.
Bowles & Whelan (1994) Restoration of Endangered Species. A ﬁne collection of
papers on animal and plant restorations, including discussions of genetic
issues and case studies.
Falk et al. (1996) Restoring Diversity. Wide-ranging coverage of plant reintroductions with several case studies.
Gipps (1991) Beyond Captive Breeding. Proceedings of a conference on reintroductions that encompasses a broad range of issues, and includes case studies.
Leberg (1990b) Discusses genetic considerations in the design of animal introduction and reintroduction programs.
Margan et al. (1998) Model experiment in fruit ﬂies that demonstrates genetic
advantages for a fragmented population strategy for genetic management of
captive populations for reintroductions.
Olney et al. (1994) Creative Conservation. Considers many of the issues dealt with
in this chapter and has case studies for animals.
Serena (1995) Reintroduction Biology of Australian and New Zealand Fauna. A collection of papers on animal reintroductions that covers theoretical concepts,
practical considerations and many case studies.
Stanley Price (1989) Animal Re-Introductions. Provides detail of the classic reintroduction of the Arabian oryx into Oman and a perspective on reintroductions
generally.
PROBLEMS

18.1. Genetic adaptation: What are the reasons for concerns about
genetic adaptation to captivity in captive breeding and reintroduction
programs?
18.2. Genetic adaptation: What determines the rate of genetic adaptation to captivity?
18.3. Reintroductions: What are the genetic issues in reintroduction programs?
18.4. Reintroductions: Why would release of a genetically overrepresented captive animal (one with a high mean kinship) actually
beneﬁt genetic diversity in the captive population? Describe the effect
of the release on mean kinship and heterozygosity in the captive population.

Chapter 19

Use of molecular genetics in
forensics and to understand
species biology
Genetic markers contribute to the conservation of species by aiding
in detection of illegal hunting and by resolving important aspects of
species biology; they have been used to detect bottlenecks and other
demographic events in a population’s history, estimate effective
size, detect selection, determine parentage, sex, mating systems,
population structures, dispersal rates, population sizes, diet, disease
status and to detect introgression. Coalescence and gene tree
analyses provide useful tools for understanding many of these
factors

Terms:
Biparental inbreeding,
clade,
coalescence,
forensics,
gene trees,
haplotype network,
introgression,
selective sweep

Multiple paternity in loggerhead
turtles (tropical and temperate
oceans) revealed using allozyme
electrophoresis (gel from Harry &
Briscoe 1988).

472

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

Forensics: detecting illegal hunting and collecting
PCR-based genetic markers can
be used to detect illegal hunting or
collecting

Poaching and illegal harvest are threats to a wide variety of endangered
species, especially large cats, elephants, bears, rhinoceroses, parrots,
whales and some plants. Most countries have laws to protect threatened
plants and animals. However, it is often difﬁcult to obtain evidence to
convict individuals suspected of illegally taking or trading in threatened species. For example, a person wearing a vest containing eggs suspected of belonging to threatened bird species was apprehended at an
Australian airport. The person simply squashed the eggs so that they
could not be identiﬁed and thus avoided prosecution. Molecular
genetic methods can be used in such cases to identify the origin of the
biological material, including ivory, horns, eggs, turtle shells, meat,
organs, feathers, hair and plant materials.
Molecular genetic techniques have assumed an important and
growing role in the detection of illegal hunting of wildlife. For
example, the US Fish and Wildlife Service has established the Clark
Bevin Forensics Laboratory in Oregon speciﬁcally for the purposes of
providing evidence in cases involving illegal imports, exports and
hunting of endangered species. One of the more fascinating cases of
molecular forensics involved the detection of meat from protected
species of whales on sale in Japan and Korea (Box 19.1). Analyses of
mtDNA established that some of the whale meat was not from minke
whales, for which Japan engages in ‘scientiﬁc’ whaling, but from protected blue, humpback, ﬁn, and Bryde’s whales. In addition, some
‘whale’ meat was from dolphin, porpoise, sheep and horse. Not only
was illegal whaling suspected, but consumers were being misled. In a
related context, PCR-based mtDNA analyses have revealed that 23% of
caviar samples in New York were mislabelled (Birstein et al. 1998). The
sources have conservation implications, as most of the 27 members of
the sturgeon group are endangered due to overﬁshing and habitat degradation. The identity of a poached endangered Arabian oryx was conﬁrmed by microsatellite analyses (Marshall et al. 1999) and
mtDNA-based methods are being developed to detect tiger products in
Asian medicines (Holden 2000).
Forensic DNA methods have been used to determine the source of
poached chimpanzees. Sequencing of mtDNA established that 26 conﬁscated chimpanzees in Uganda belonged to the eastern sub-species
(Goldberg 1997). This identiﬁed the region where poaching was taking
place, and where these animals could be reinstated into the wild.

Box 19.1 Detecting sale of meat from protected whales
(after Baker & Palumbi 1996; Dizon et al. 2000)
Following many years of commercial exploitation, the numbers of most whale
species collapsed. This led the International Whaling Commission (IWC) to institute

FORENSICS: DETECTING ILLEGAL HUNTING AND COLLECTING

a global moratorium on commercial whaling that took effect in 1985/86. Some IWC
members have continued to hunt a few whale species (primarily minke whales) for
‘scientiﬁc’ purposes and the whale meat can be sold for human consumption. There
were suspicions that protected whale species were being marketed as species that
could be taken legally. At the request of Earthtrust, Baker & Palumbi developed a
system for monitoring trade in whale and dolphin products using mtDNA sequencing following PCR. They reliably distinguished a variety of whale species from each
other and from dolphins using mtDNA control region sequences (see ﬁgure
above).
Samples of whale products were subsequently purchased in retail markets in
Japan and Korea. To avoid the possibility of violating laws governing transport of
endangered species, Baker & Palumbi set up a portable PCR laboratory in their hotel
room and ampliﬁed the mtDNA control region from the samples. The ampliﬁed

473

474

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

DNA was taken back to their laboratories in New Zealand and the USA and
sequenced.
Results from the initial 16 purchases are shown in the ﬁgure. They are ﬁtted into
a mtDNA phylogenetic tree along with known whale and dolphin samples. Nine
samples near the top of the tree were indistinguishable from minke whale and could
be attributed to legal ‘scientiﬁc’ whaling. However, samples #19b, 41, 3, 11, and WS4
were from protected species. Sample #19b was from a humpback whale, while
samples #41, 3, 11 and WS4 were from ﬁn whales. Further, samples #16, 13 and 28
were from porpoise and dolphins, so consumers were being misled.
By 1999, 954 samples of ‘whale meat’ had been purchased in Japan and Korea
and analysed by scientiﬁc groups (Dizon et al. 2000); 773 were from whales, approximately 9% coming from protected species whales (including blue, humpback, ﬁn and
Bryde’s whales). The samples that were not from whales included dolphins, porpoises, sheep and horses. Not only were consumers being misled, but there were
questions about the origin of the meat. The possibility that meat from protected
species had been sourced from frozen stores collected prior to bans on whaling
cannot be excluded, but this explanation does not apply to fresh meat. This has led
to stricter controls over the distribution of ‘scientiﬁcally harvested’ whale meat and
demands that legally harvested whales and meat stockpiled prior to whaling bans be
genetically typed to monitor distribution.

An understanding of species biology is critical to
its conservation
Molecular genetic markers and
analyses help resolve many aspects
of species biology that are
important in conservation

An understanding of species biology is critical to effective conservation.
Critical aspects of species biology are often unknown, as details of life
histories are often difﬁcult and time-consuming to determine directly.
For example, paternities are notoriously difﬁcult to assign without
genetic data and genetic population structures cannot be determined
without use of genetic markers. Introgression can only be suspected,
but never veriﬁed from morphology. Dispersal and migration rates are
hard to determine by direct observation and are often unreliable, as
migrants do not necessarily breed.
Analyses of sequence differences among populations and individuals can resolve paternity, deﬁne population structure, detect introgression from another species, evaluate sources of new founders for small
endangered populations, and indicate sites for reintroductions.
Comparisons of DNA sequences may also be used to detect bottlenecks,
migration patterns and the demographic histories of populations. For
example, life history characteristics have been determined and a potential reintroduction site identiﬁed using microsatellites in northern
hairy-nosed wombats (Box 19.2).
The remainder of this chapter examines the methods used, and presents examples of practical issues that have been resolved. More
advanced technical treatments can be found in Smith & Wayne (1996),
Hoelzel (1998) and Avise (2000).

GENE TREES AND COALESCENCE

Box 19.2 Censusing the critically endangered northern
hairy-nosed wombat and inferring aspects of its
biology following non-intrusive sampling of hair
(Taylor et al. 1994, 1997; Beheregaray et al. 2000;
Sloane et al. 2000)
Northern hairy-nosed wombats from Australia are nocturnal, fossorial, and difﬁcult
to study directly. Trapping has been used to estimate population size and sex-ratio,
but is traumatic to the animals, risks possible injury or death, necessitates construction around burrows and is time-consuming and unreliable.
Twenty-eight microsatellite loci have been identiﬁed in the northern hairy-nosed
wombat. Using DNA from hair collected using adhesive tape on frames at the
entrance to wombat burrows, Sloane et al. (2000) were able to genetically characterize the population for up to 20 microsatellite loci. This allowed each individual in
the population to be identiﬁed. Individuals have also been sexed following ampliﬁcation of X and Y chromosome loci. Thus, the population can be routinely censused
without trapping.
Tissue from museum skins was used to characterize an extinct population from
Deniliquin (see Chapter 10 frontispiece for locations). This established that the
Deniliquin population was of the northern species, rather than the southern species
that is currently found nearer to this location. Consequently, Deniliquin should be
suitable for establishing a reintroduced population as a hedge against catastrophes in
the Queensland population.
Microsatellites have been used to infer aspects of the biology of the northern
hairy-nosed wombats. Individuals of the same sex sharing burrows are often relatives,
but males and females sharing burrows are not closely related. Dispersal patterns
have also been inferred. The Ne/N ratio was estimated to be 0.1, based on loss of
genetic diversity compared to the southern species. Parentage analyses based on 8–9
microsatellite loci were not particularly successful due to low genetic variation, but
this will be improved with use of additional loci that have subsequently been developed.

Table 19.1 lists available methodologies and their applicability to the
issues considered here (Chapter 3; Sunnucks 2000b). In general, DNAbased methods such as mtDNA sequence analysis, RAPDs, DNA ﬁngerprints and, especially microsatellites are suitable for most of the
purposes listed in Table 19.1. Further, RAPDs, mtDNA and microsatellites can be analysed using specimens from non-intrusive sampling and
PCR (Chapter 3).

Gene trees and coalescence
Coalescence and gene trees derived from data on sequence differences
among individuals and populations are important tools for exploring
evolutionary processes and demographic events in a species’ past.

Gene trees and coalescence
analyses provide information on
many aspects of species biology
necessary for effective
conservation

475

476

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

Table 19.1 Methods available for genetically characterizing individuals and populations and their applicability
to each issue. Techniques withcan be used for the purpose speciﬁed, with several indicating that the technique
has higher utility, ? are cases where the technique is useful in only some cases, while  indicates that the technique
is not useful in this context
Issue
Non-intrusive sampling
Forensics
Population size
Estimating Ne
Demographic history
Detecting and dating
bottlenecks
Detecting selection
Migration and gene ﬂow
Individual identiﬁcation
and tracking
Population structure
Phylogeography
Source populations to
recover endangered
species
Introgression
Secondary contact
Taxonomic status
Sites for reintroduction
Populations for
reintroduction
Reproductive systems
Paternity
Founder relationships
Sources of new founders
for endangered
populations
Sexing birds
Detecting disease
Diet

DNA
Morphology Chromosomes Allozymes mtDNA RAPD Microsatellites ﬁngerprint
























a

a

















?
?
?
?


?











a














?

?









?



















?













a


























?








?

















?




?












?






?



?



Note:
a
Can detect only female contributions.

Based on the neutral theory, they provide a null hypothesis against
which to test data and to discriminate possible reasons for deviations
(Chapter 9). Moreover, coalescent methods work backwards in time
and allow time dimensions (generations) to be added to the analyses.
Consequently, they are more powerful than conventional analyses
that use only current distributions and patterns of DNA sequence differences.
Coalescence is based on the concept that current allelic sequences in
a population can be traced back through time to a point at which they
coalesce to a single individual sequence (Fig. 19.1). Other alleles, once

GENE TREES AND COALESCENCE

present in the past, have been lost by genetic drift or selection, and new
alleles have been generated through mutation. The evolutionary
pattern of the extant distribution of alleles at a locus can be represented
as the branches of a tree coalescing back to a single ancestral allelic
sequence.
Coalescent patterns are usually depicted using gene trees, which
show the genealogy of the alleles in the current population. The nodes
(coalescence events) and branch lengths in the tree reﬂect the origins
and time frames involved in deriving the observed patterns. Gene trees
trace the evolutionary history of the alleles (e.g., mtDNA haplotypes) in
the same manner as tracing the origin, or loss, of alleles through pedigrees. For example, the sex-linked haemophilia allele in the royal families of Europe can be traced back to Queen Victoria of the United
Kingdom.
The basis of the coalescence method is that DNA sequence differences among alleles at a locus retain information about the evolutionary history of those sequences (Futuyma 1998). For example, two
alleles that differ by two bases are more closely related and diverged
more recently than two alleles that differ by 11 base pairs. In Fig. 3.3,
alcohol dehydrogenase alleles 1-S and 2-S differ by two bases, while 1-S
differs from 7-F by 11 bases. Clearly, we infer that 1-S and 2-S diverged
recently and 1-S and 7-F diverged in the more distant past. An example
of building a gene tree from DNA sequence information was given in
Example 15.2.
Neutral theory allows us to predict the time in generations back to
coalescence, thus adding a time dimension to analyses. Under neutral
theory, two alleles may descend from the same ancestral allele in the
previous generation with a probability 1/Nef for mtDNA, or 1/2Ne for a
nuclear diploid locus. Alternatively, two alleles may derive from two different alleles in the previous generation (or derive from the same allele
many generations ago) with probabilities 1 1/Nef , or 1 1/2Ne. This is
the same reasoning used to determine loss of genetic diversity (Table
10.1). Under this neutral model of genetic drift, the coalescence process
takes a characteristic time. In a diploid population with k alleles at a

Fig. 19.1 Gene trees and
coalescence. A possible history of
descent of DNA sequences in a
population that began at time 0
(top of ﬁgure) with 14 copies,
representing two alleles. Some
sequences leave one or more
copies in the subsequent
generation while others become
extinct. Sequences present at the
bottom are all descended from
(coalesce to) a single ancestral
copy of the A1 allele (this lineage is
shown in the heavier black lines in
the ﬁgure). If the failure of the
ancestral sequences to leave
descendants was random, the ﬁnal
sequences could equally well have
come from any other ancestral
copy at generation 0 (after
Futuyma 1998).

Coalescence is the analysis of the
distribution and differences among
DNA sequences for alleles and
the events and time frames
involved in developing these
sequences

Coalescence provides theory to
model the survival and spread of
alleles over time in the lineages of
a population

477

478

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

Fig. 19.2 Gene trees and
coalescence times. An example of a
gene tree for 5 sampled alleles. The
large circles indicate coalescent
events (after Hedrick 2000). Ti is
the length of time it takes for the i
alleles present to coalesce into i 
1 alleles, and intervals are shown
proportional to their expected
times.

neutral locus, the average time Tk back to the previous coalescent event
(i.e. where there were k 1 alleles) is (Hedrick 2000):
Tk 4Ne / [k (k 1)] generations

(19.1)

Thus, the times during which there are 5, 4, 3 and 2 lineages are 2Ne /10,
2Ne/6, 2Ne/3 and 2Ne generations, respectively. The time for all alleles in
the population to coalesce is 4Ne[1 (1/k)] generations (Fig. 19.2). Thus,
the coalescence is quicker, and gene trees shorter, in smaller than larger
populations.
We can immediately see an application of gene tree analysis. It can
provide details about differences in historical population size for different populations, or species. Example 19.1 illustrates the calculation of
coalescence times in diploid populations with effective size 50 and 100.
Note that the coalescence times increase in direct proportion to population size.

Example 19.1 Estimating coalescence times
In a population of Ne 50 with 3 alleles, the expected time to its previous coalescence (when the population only had 2 alleles) is:
T3 4Ne/ [k (k 1)](4 50) / (3 2) 33 generations.
Thus, 3 alleles coalesce to 2 alleles on average in 33 generations in a
population of size Ne 50.
For Ne 100 coalescence takes:
T3 4Ne/ [k (k 1)](4 100) / (3 2)67 generations.
Thus, the coalescence takes twice a long in a population with twice
the size.

GENE TREES AND COALESCENCE

Fig. 19.3 Gene trees showing
coalescence patterns for (a)
neutrality, (b) balancing selection,
(c) directional selection (selective
sweep), (d) population bottlenecks,
(e) geographic isolation and (f)
migration.

The structure of gene trees and patterns of coalescence are strongly
inﬂuenced by deviations from neutrality and random mating (Fig. 19.3).
For example, different forms of selection affect the coalescence time in
characteristic ways; directional selection reduces the coalescence time,
while balancing selection increases it, compared to the expectation
with genetic drift. Coalescence of alleles in the MHC or SI loci (that are
subject to balancing selection) often extend back prior to speciation
events (trans-species polymorphism) (Chapter 9).
After long periods of isolation and lack of gene ﬂow, populations
show deep divisions among them (Fig. 19.3e). Migration yields characteristic signatures when gene trees are mapped onto geographic location (Fig. 19.3f); alleles characteristic of one geographic region are found
in another, partially isolated, region (Slatkin & Maddison 1989)
Fluctuations in population size or population bottlenecks foreshorten
coalescence time (Fig. 19.3d). Mutations generate sequence differences,
slowing coalescence times.
When patterns are similar, such as those for directional selection to
ﬁxation (selective sweeps) and population bottlenecks, additional
information is required to resolve the cause. For example, information
on multiple unlinked loci allows discrimination of selective sweeps and
bottlenecks (Fig. 19.3c and d); population bottlenecks affect all loci in a
similar manner, while a selective sweep will affect a locus in a different
manner to the behaviour of other loci.
Differences in DNA sequences, gene tree structure and coalescence
rates allow us to infer details about population structure and evolution
that are not easily, or less accurately, found using other techniques.
Analysis of gene trees, using coalescence analysis, have been used to:
• Estimate effective population sizes (using selectively neutral
sequences)

Alterations in coalescence
patterns allow detection of
selection, isolation among
populations, migration, and
changes in population size

479

480

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

• Measure neutral mutation rates
• Infer selection and determine its form
• Determine migration events and measure migration rates
• Determine phylogenetic relationships among geographically separated populations (and make comparisons among species to determine whether patterns are similar)
• Detect secondary contact of diverged populations
• Estimate divergence times among populations
• Infer changes in population size (bottlenecks, exponential growth
versus constant size)
• Detect recombination in disease organisms
• Reconstruct the origins and history of disease epidemics.
To this point, most coalescent analyses have used mtDNA data, as
recombination is essentially absent, inheritance is maternal (in most
species) and mtDNA has a higher mutation rate than nuclear loci.
Nuclear DNA sequences have just begun to be used. Analyses of gene
trees, coalescence and phylogeographic patterns have become a discipline in their own right. Readers are referred to Harvey et al. (1996) and
Avise (2000) for further details.
The following sections provide examples illustrating the diverse
uses of molecular genetic methods to determine aspects of species
biology that are critical in conservation biology. These include applications involving gene trees and coalescence analyses, as well as other
molecular approaches. These are rapidly developing ﬁelds where new
methods are appearing regularly (Luikart & England 1999; Sunnucks
2000b). Consequently, we are only able to describe a sample of the
methods and applications.

Population size and demographic history

Population size
Minimum estimates of population
size can be obtained from the
number of unique genotypes

PCR-based genetic markers can
be used to identify species when
using faeces to estimate
population size

It is difﬁcult to directly estimate population sizes in nocturnal, fossorial, rare and shy animal species. Minimum estimates of their population size can be made by identifying individuals using multilocus DNA
ﬁngerprints or microsatellites. DNA can be ‘remotely’ sampled by collecting hair, skin or faeces, and microsatellites typed following PCR
ampliﬁcation. For example, a minimum population size of one female
and four males was estimated for endangered Pyrenean brown bears
using sex-speciﬁc markers and microsatellites to distinguish unique
genotypes (Taberlet et al. 1997).
Scat (faeces) counts have been used to estimate population sizes for
many species, e.g. bears and coyotes. However, this cannot be applied
where more than one species with similar scats exists in an area. To estimate population sizes for endangered San Joaquin kit foxes in
California, their scats must be distinguished from those of red foxes,

POPULATION SIZE AND DEMOGRAPHIC HISTORY

Fig. 19.4 Distinguishing scats of
endangered San Joaquin kit foxes
from those of other canids using
mtDNA analyses (from Paxinos et
al. 1997). PCR was used to amplify
mtDNA from scats by using canidspeciﬁc primers for the
cytochrome b gene. DNA, cut with
three restriction enzymes (Alu I,
Hinf I and Taq I), revealed patterns
that distinguishes kit foxes from
other canid species, as shown
below. The second lane for each
fox species utilized DNA from a
scat.

gray foxes, coyotes and dogs. This can be achieved using mtDNA analyses (Fig. 19.4). DNA analyses have also been used to authenticate bear
scats in Europe (Höss et al. 1992). Similarly, ﬁve microsatellite markers
and one sex-speciﬁc marker were used on seal faecal samples to identify
species, individuals and sex-ratios at a mixed-species ‘haul-out’ (Reed et
al. 1997).

Demographic history
The distribution of the number of sequence differences between pairs
of alleles (a ‘mismatch’ analysis) has characteristic shapes for populations with different demographic histories. Populations with historically stable population size, exponentially growing populations,
population bottlenecks or populations experiencing secondary contact
leave different signals (Fig. 19.5). Exponential growth is expected to generate a smooth unimodal distribution, while stable populations yield
geometric distributions. Bottlenecks yield either a bimodal distribution, or a distribution close to zero, depending on whether the bottleneck reduced genetic diversity, or completely removed it (so that the

The distribution of sequence
differences between pairs of
alleles can be used to distinguish
between stable, growing and
bottlenecked populations

481

482

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

Fig. 19.5 Distributions of
pairwise sequence differences
between alleles in populations with
different histories (after Avise
2000). (a) Population with stable
size, (b) population showing
exponential growth, (c) population
subject to a recent bottleneck and
(d) secondary contact and fusion.

diversity represents mutations since that point). Humans exhibit a unimodal distribution characteristic of exponential growth, which accords
with known human history.

Characterizing and dating bottlenecks
Signals of past population
bottlenecks can be detected using
molecular genetic analyses

The size and duration of
bottlenecks can be inferred from
loss of genetic diversity

Undocumented past bottlenecks can be detected and their severity
inferred from the loss of genetic diversity. Even when there are no
samples of the pre-bottleneck population, they can often be identiﬁed
using information from multiple microsatellite loci (Luikart & Cornuet
1998).
Koalas exhibit signals of a population bottleneck, together with
isolation-by-distance, in their mtDNA sequences (Fig. 19.6). Most populations from Victoria and South Australia are indistinguishable. These
were established by individuals translocated from island populations
that had experienced bottlenecks (Box 16.3). The patterns of similarities
among other mainland populations suggest isolation-by-distance, with
populations from nearby localities generally being more similar than
those from distant localities.
Bottleneck effects have been measured by comparing microsatellite
genetic diversity from the current populations with that from museum
specimens for Mauritius kestrels and the Illinois population of greater
prairie chickens (Boxes 8.1 and 10.2).
Not only can bottlenecks in population size be detected, but also the
size of the bottleneck can often be inferred from loss of genetic diversity. For example, the size of the population bottleneck experienced by
the northern elephant seal has been inferred from the loss of mtDNA

POPULATION SIZE AND DEMOGRAPHIC HISTORY

Fig. 19.6 Gene tree for koala populations, based on mtDNA sequence divergence
(after Houlden et al. 1998). Populations from Victoria and South Australia (bottom), derived
mainly from bottlenecked island populations, are essentially indistinguishable. The remaining
populations generally show their closest afﬁnities with geographically adjacent populations, as
expected with isolation-by-distance.

genetic diversity (Box 19.3). It can be accounted for by a single generation bottleneck of 10–20 effective females. However, a bottleneck of this
size is not severe enough to account for the complete absence of allozyme variation.
A particularly elegant example of the use of ancient DNA is provided by a study of the nene in Hawaii (Paxinos et al. in press). There is
only a single mtDNA haplotype present in extant birds, largely the
same haplotype in museum specimens and subfossil bones aged
100–500 years, but seven haplotypes occur in subfossil bones aged
850–2540 years. Thus, the major decline in genetic diversity did not
result from Western colonization but from earlier Polynesian settlement. Modelling of the type illustrated in Box 19.3 indicates that the
population probably declined to fewer than 10 females over 50–100
generations.
The 13 species of Darwin’s ﬁnches on the Galapagos Islands were
thought to have diverged from the progeny of a single pair. However,
MHC sequence diversity indicated that they probably diverged from a
founding group of at least 30 individuals (Vincek et al. 1997).

483

484

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

Box 19.3 Estimating bottleneck size in northern elephant
seals (after Hedrick 1995a)
Northern elephant seals underwent a bottleneck due to hunting. The last major hunt
occurred in 1884. Subsequently, the population expanded to 350 in 1922, to 15 000
in 1960 and to well over 100 000 by the year 2000. During this bottleneck, the seals
lost both nuclear and mtDNA genetic diversity. Only two mtDNA haplotypes occur
in post-bottleneck northern elephant seals, while 23 haplotypes are found in related
southern elephant seals. No allozyme variation was found in the northern elephant
seal, while the average heterozygosity is 0.03 in southern elephant seals. The actual
size and duration of the bottleneck is unknown. Since loss of genetic diversity is
related to population size (Chapter 10), we can estimate the bottleneck size and
duration. The expected loss of mtDNA diversity is:
Ht H0

t

 (11 / N
i1

efi

)

where Nef is the effective number of females in generation i and t is the number of
i
generations from the beginning of the bottleneck until the population is censused.
This is similar to Equation 10.2, but 2Ne is replaced with Nef, as mtDNA is maternally
inherited and genetic diversity is lost at a rate of 1/Nef (Table 10.1). The mtDNA
diversity in southern elephant seals is 0.980 (assumed to represent H0), while that in
northern elephants seals is 0.409 (Ht).
Many combinations of bottleneck sizes and durations can ﬁt these data, but only
a limited range will allow realistic growth in population numbers. A single generation
bottleneck would require the effective number of females to be
H1/H0 (1 1/Nef)0.409/0.980 0.417
yielding
Nef 1.7
Thus, the effective number of females would be less than 2. This is not compatible
with the observed population growth, which requires a minimum of about 12
females, unless the ratio of effective number of females to actual number is 0.14.
Further, additional genetic diversity is lost during approximately 14 generations
between the bottleneck and 1960. Hedrick assumed that Nef /Nf ratios lay between
0.25 and 0.125.
The combinations of parameters that best ﬁt both the loss of mtDNA diversity
and the changes in population size were (a) a single generation female bottleneck of
12.4 with Nef /Nf 0.25 (Nef 3.1), or (b) a bottleneck of three generations with 44
females and Nef /Nf 0.125 (Nef 5.5). In both cases population numbers were projected to be close to those observed in 1922 and 1960. Halley & Hoelzel (1996)
reached similar conclusions, based on detailed computer simulations. This bottleneck
is not sufﬁcient to account for complete absence of allozyme variation. Other factors
must have come into play to explain this.

GENE FLOW AND POPULATION STRUCTURE

It has been hypothesized that the cheetah lost substantial genetic diversity due to a population size bottleneck. The presumed bottleneck was
estimated to have occurred about 10 000 years ago, by comparing levels
of genetic variation for allozymes (low mutation rate), with mtDNA,
DNA ﬁngerprints and microsatellites (higher mutation rates) (O’Brien
1994). However, there are alternative interpretations for low allozyme
genetic diversity in this case (Hedrick 1996).

The timing of bottlenecks can be
inferred from genetic data

Estimating evolutionary effective population size
The use of genetic markers to estimate effective population size from
changes in heterozygosity was considered in Chapter 10. Coalescence
theory allows effective size for females to be estimated from mtDNA as
(Futuyma 1998):
Nef PS/2u

Long-term effective population
size can be determined using
coalescence theory if mutation
rates are known

(19.2)

where PS is the average proportion of nucleotide sites that differ
between random pairs of haplotypes and u is the mutation rate. The
effective population size for female red-winged blackbirds in the USA
was estimated by utilizing similar methods (Avise 2000). RFLP analyses
of mtDNA from 127 birds identiﬁed 34 haplotypes. The mutation rate
per base is 108 per generation. From these, an estimate of 36 700 females
was derived, much less than the current number of 20 million breeding
females. The most probable explanation is that numbers were much
lower during Pleistocene glaciation (as recently as 10 000 years ago) and
that numbers have increased markedly since then from a refuge population. Effective sizes in females are typically much less than the current
number of adult females in a wide range of species (Avise 2000).

Gene ﬂow and population structure

Population structure
Genetic management recommendations vary signiﬁcantly depending
on population structure. Populations in different habitat fragments
may be totally isolated, partially isolated, effectively a single population, or a metapopulation, depending on the extent of gene ﬂow and
population extinction rates (Chapters 13 and 16). Small and totally isolated populations may experience severe inbreeding. The delineation of
population structure is usually only possible using genetic data.
The degree of population differentiation can be determined using
FST and related measures for any type of polymorphic genetic marker
(Chapter 13). More powerful and informative analyses are possible using
gene trees. Population structure can be identiﬁed by mapping the
sequences of different alleles onto geographic locations (Templeton

Genetic markers can be used to
determine population structure

485

486

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

1998). The cause of genetic differentiation, restricted gene ﬂow, past
fragmentation or range expansion can then be determined. East
African populations of buffalo and impala show similar FST values of
0.08 and 0.10. However, the distribution of mtDNA haplotypes over geographic locations is entirely different in the two species, as shown in the
haplotype networks in Fig. 19.7. The distribution of Chobe haplotypes
(Chobe is the most isolated location) is random in buffalo, but tightly
clustered in impala. Consequently, buffalo exhibit recurrent maternal
gene ﬂow between Chobe and more northerly populations. Conversely,
impala have restricted female gene ﬂow that either reﬂects isolation-bydistance or isolation of the Chobe population from the northern populations.
Differentiated maternally inherited components of the genome can
be revealed with mtDNA or cpDNA (plants). The vulnerable ghost bat
populations in Australia (Fig. 19.8) illustrate marked differentiation
among colonies, and no haplotypes are shared between colonies. This is

Fig. 19.7 Haplotype networks for mtDNA for buffalo and impala (after Templeton
1998). Each line in the network represents a single mutational change. ‘0’ indicates a node
in the network that was absent in the sample. These nodes are inferred intermediates
between the two nearest neighbour haplotypes in the network that differed by two or
more mutations. Haplotype numbers are those given in the original reference. Chobe
haplotypes, from the most isolated and southerly location, are tightly clustered for impala but
interspersed throughout the buffalo network.

GENE FLOW AND POPULATION STRUCTURE

consistent with mark–release–recapture studies in the ﬁeld. The extent
of sequence differences among colonies suggests that isolation is not
recent (or that effective population sizes are very small). Further, microsatellite analyses also revealed substantial differentiation between populations. Despite the bat’s ﬂying ability, each population now
represents a closed population, at least for females. Consequently,
extinct colonies are unlikely to be recolonized by natural migration.
Moritz et al. (1996) recommended that each colony be managed as a separate management unit for conservation purposes.
In another application, studies in the long-ﬁnned pilot whale
revealed a pod structure consisting of single extended matrilineal

Fig. 19.8 Population structure of ghost bat populations revealed by mtDNA (after
Worthington-Wilmer et al. 1994, Moritz et al. 1996). This species lives in caves and
abandoned mines and was once widespread, but has contracted northward. There is clear
differentiation among populations. No haplotypes are shared between populations.

487

488

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

families, often containing more than 100 individuals (Amos et al. 1993).
Neither sex of offspring disperses. However, there was not signiﬁcant
inbreeding, as determined using nuclear genetic markers. This apparent contradiction was resolved when members of different pods were
observed to mate when they encountered each other.

Dispersal and gene ﬂow
Dispersal rates can be inferred
from genetic differentiation among
populations

Individual immigrants can be
identiﬁed from multilocus
genotypes using assignment tests

Dispersal rates are difﬁcult to study by direct observation, as rates may
be low and long-distance dispersal too rare to measure with precision.
An increasing number of studies use genetic markers to infer dispersal
patterns. With no dispersal, mating will not be at random, and there
will be an overall deﬁciency of heterozygotes (Table 8.2). For example,
mice maintain territories within barns and so do not mate at random,
resulting in overall deﬁciencies of heterozygotes compared to
Hardy–Weinberg expectations (Selander 1970).
Genetic studies often reveal a picture of dispersal differing from
that suggested by direct observations. For example, observations of territorial North American pikas indicated that they rarely dispersed, and
long-distance dispersal was not observed at all. Consequently, they were
thought to regularly mate with close relatives. However, DNA ﬁngerprinting studies revealed that close inbreeding was not common and
that dispersal occurred over short, medium and long distances (Peacock
1997). Mark–release–recapture methods are often inadequate to characterize long-term dispersal.
Dispersal patterns of turtles have been followed using mtDNA
markers. Females frequently return to lay their eggs in the beach where
they hatched. Haplotypes in loggerhead turtles are distinct in populations on nesting beaches in Japan (B and C) and Australia (A), so their
worldwide dispersal can be followed (Fig. 19.9). Populations in the
region of the driftnet ﬁshery in the North Paciﬁc, and in the feeding
grounds near Baja California, were predominantly Japanese stocks,
with a minority of Australian stock. Consequently, females show ﬁdelity
to nesting sites, but not to feeding grounds. Similar studies have traced
movement of endangered humpback whales (Baker & Palumbi 1996).
Y-speciﬁc probes allow male-speciﬁc dispersal and differentiation to
be assessed in a parallel manner (Tucker & Lundrigan 1996). In humans,
the use of mtDNA and Y-speciﬁc probes to estimate female and male dispersal, respectively, revealed that females disperse more effectively
than males. This contrasts with the prevailing view that males spread
their genes more effectively due to movements associated with warfare
(Seielstad et al. 1998).

Detecting immigrants
Dispersal of individuals can be identiﬁed from multilocus microsatellite genotypes (assignment tests) (Luikart & England 1999). Based on its

GENE FLOW AND POPULATION STRUCTURE

Fig. 19.9 Dispersal in loggerhead turtles based on mtDNA haplotypes (after Bowen et
al. 1995). A, B and C are different mtDNA haplotypes.

genotype, an individual is assigned to the population with which it has
the greatest similarity. If it is assigned to a population other than the
one where it was collected, then it is likely to be an immigrant. This represents an advance over FST, which does not distinguish between current
and historical patterns of dispersal. For example, if all individuals in
geographic areas A and B have genotypes A1A1B1B1C1C1D1D1, and
A2A2B2B2C2C2D2D2, respectively, then an individual in region B with the
former genotype must be a migrant. An identical principle applies
when populations differ in frequencies at several loci, but the computations are more complex. Assignment tests can also be used to detect
hybridization and taxonomic relationship, as was done with the red
and Algonquin wolves (Fig. 15.1).

Secondary contact between populations
Secondary contact between and genetic fusion of previously differentiated populations can be inferred when the distribution of pairwise
sequence differences among individuals is bimodal (and other causes of
this pattern can be excluded). For example, two distinct mtDNA haplogroups are present in each surveyed snow goose rookery in the
Canadian Arctic and Russia (Fig. 19.10). Within any rookery, both
mtDNA clades interbreed freely. The rookery sites occur in glaciated
regions that were uninhabitable as recently as 5000–10000 years ago.
Current populations are huge, so this is not a recent drift effect. Thus,
the rookeries have been established by migrants, presumably from two

Secondary contact between
populations gives a bimodal
distribution of pairwise sequence
differences among individuals

489

490

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

Fig. 19.10 Bimodal distribution
of pairwise differences in mtDNA
RFLPs for snow geese indicating
secondary contact (after Avise
2000).

separate, diverged populations. Heterozygote advantage can be
excluded as an explanation as it cannot operate on haploid mtDNA.

Identiﬁcation of populations to use in recovery of
endangered sub-species
Genetic markers can be used to
identify the most closely related
sub-species to use for crossing to
recover a sub-species that has
declined to a single individual

A sub-species that has declined to a single individual can only be recovered by crossing it to a related taxon. This was done unsuccessfully in
the case of the dusky seaside sparrow. Subsequent genetic analyses
revealed that the sub-species chosen to use in the cross (selected because
of morphological similarity) was actually only distantly related to the
dusky seaside sparrow. Other more closely related sub-species had been
available (Avise 1996). In the parallel case of the Norfolk Island boobook
owl, crosses of the one remaining female to a male from a related New
Zealand sub-species has yielded 16 F1 offspring. Subsequent mtDNA
analyses conﬁrmed that the population chosen for crossing was the
most closely related one available (Example 15.2) and were concordant
with morphological information.

Phylogeographic patterns across species
Past geological or climatic events
may affect multiple diverse species
in a similar manner

Phylogeographic patterns of sequence divergence across geographic
regions are concordant for multiple species in a surprising number of
cases (Avise 2000). For example, black sea bass, seaside sparrow, horseshoe crab, American oyster and tiger beetle in the southeastern USA all
show distinctive mtDNA haplotypes in Gulf of Mexico, versus Atlantic
coast, areas separated by the Florida peninsula (Avise 2000). These separations were not previously recognized, or predicted from current
landforms. Such patterns seem to reﬂect separation of populations by
major geological events, past climatic events, or a change in habitat
resulting from climatic change. Many other cases of concordant phylogeographic patterns in distinct taxa have been found in the USA, including freshwater ﬁsh in east- versus west-ﬂowing rivers in the southeast,

REINTRODUCTION AND TRANSLOCATION

and terrestrial and freshwater tetrapods between southeast and northwest. Similarly, four species of birds and a reptile display major genetic
differences between the rainforest regions north and south of Cairns in
northeastern Australia. While this region currently has essentially continuous rainforest habitat, the differentiation is presumed to reﬂect
past rainforest contractions and expansions that led to long periods of
isolation between the two areas (Joseph et al. 1995). Concordant patterns
across distantly related species strengthen inferences that may be only
weakly supported for an individual species.

Reintroduction and translocation

Sites for reintroductions and translocations
Reintroduction is a hazardous and expensive undertaking whose
success is increased by selecting sites within the historical range of the
species (Chapter 18). Characterization of an extinct population as
belonging to an endangered species requiring reintroduction or translocation can suggest a suitable site (Box 19.2). Cooper et al. (1996) used
DNA from subfossil bones to conﬁrm that Laysan ducks recently existed
on a Hawaiian island where they are now extinct. This island may therefore be a suitable site for re-establishment.

Potential reintroduction sites can
be identiﬁed by PCR analyses on
museum specimens collected
from populations that are now
extinct

Populations for reintroductions
Populations for re-stocking species should be those with the highest
reproductive ﬁtness in the wild habitat and the highest genetic diversity to optimize chances of survival. In the endangered topminnow ﬁsh,
the population being used for re-stocking had lower allozyme variation
and poorer ﬁtness in the laboratory than an alternative population
(Vrijenhoek 1994). This information led to the use of a more genetically
diverse population for re-stocking, although analyses in another laboratory have cast doubts on some aspects of the story (Hedrick &
Kalinowski 2000).
The French Island population of koalas in Victoria, Australia has
been used widely for introductions and translocations but had few
founders and low genetic diversity (Chapter 16). This population is an
unsuitable source for re-stocking. Other populations, with normal
levels of genetic variation, should be used in the future.
A reintroduction program for the endangered shrub Zieria prostrata
from a restricted area on the East Coast of Australia was abandoned following genetic analyses (Hogbin et al. 2000). An apparently unique
plant, thought to have originated from an extinct population at a location distant from the remainder of the species, was destined to be the
subject of a re-establishment program. However, it was found to be

Choice among candidate
populations for reintroduction can
be made by identifying the
population with the highest
genetic diversity

491

492

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

closely related to individuals from one of the extant populations, so the
reintroduction plan was cancelled.

Reproduction, parentage, founder relationships
and sexing
Genetic analyses can provide
critical information on breeding
systems, parentage, sex and
founder relationships

Species with different forms of reproduction (asexual versus sexual,
inbreeding versus outbreeding, etc.) require different management,
and it is vital to distinguish them. Knowledge of parentage is critical to
detect inbreeding, and to verify the accuracy of pedigrees used in
genetic management. Correct assignment of sex is essential so that two
individuals of the same sex are not paired and so that distorted sexratios can be recognized. Founder relationships are important in managing captive populations so that loss of genetic diversity and
inbreeding can be minimized. Genetic marker analyses can provide
much of this critical information.

Reproduction systems
Methods of reproduction and
mating patterns can be resolved
by typing mothers and offspring
for multiple genetic loci

Plants have a diversity of mating systems from outbreeding to selffertilization and clonal reproduction and some small plant populations
may switch from outcrossing to selﬁng. Further, some species of ﬁsh,
lizards and insects are parthenogenetic or self-fertilizing. As species
with different mating systems typically require different management
strategies for conservation purposes, it is crucial that the mating system
for each threatened species be deﬁned.
Breeding systems can be determined by genotyping mothers and offspring (Table 19.2). If all offspring contain the same genotype as the
mother then reproduction is asexual (including ameiotic parthenogenesis). Conversely, if offspring contain only alleles present in the mother,

Table 19.2

Determination of reproduction and mating systems using
genetic markers

Breeding systems

Parent genotypes

Asexual

AB

⇒

AB

Selﬁng

AB AB

⇒

AA, AB, BB

Outbreeding

AB CD

⇒

AC, AD, BC, BD

Mixed selﬁng and outcrossing
ABAB
ABCD

Offspring genotypes

⇒
AA, AB, BB
⇒
AC, AD, BC, BD
heterozygote deﬁciency
compared to outbreeding

REPRODUCTION, PARENTAGE, FOUNDER RELATIONSHIPS AND SEXING

Fig. 19.11 Clonal reproduction
in the endangered Santa Cruz bush
mallow (from Fritsch & Rieseberg
1996). RAPD analyses on 18
different plants from the NS(II)
population (lanes 2–19) and one
individual from the NS(I)
population (arrow). Lane 1 is a
DNA size marker (M). All 18 bushes
from the NS(II) population are
identical (clones) and different from
the NS(I) plant.

but have a diversity of genotypes then they are the result of self-fertilization. Offspring containing alleles not found in the mother are the result
of outcrossing.
All individuals in one of two populations of the endangered Santa
Cruz bush mallow plant on Santa Cruz Island, California, were identical
(indicating clonal reproduction) and different from individuals in the
second population (Fig. 19.11). The endangered shrub Haloragodendron
lucasii exists in a very restricted range in Sydney, Australia and comprises
of only seven clones among 53 plants, based on allozyme and RAPD genotypes (Hogbin et al. 2000).
The amount of selﬁng in plants with mixed mating systems (some
selﬁng and some outcrossing) can be estimated directly by typing maternal plants and their offspring (Hedrick 2000). Selﬁng of homozygous
maternal plants results only in homozygous progeny, while outcrossing
yields heterozygotes (H) at a rate dependent upon the combined frequency of alleles not found in the homozygote (q) (Table 19.3). Thus, the
frequency of selﬁng (S) is
S 1H / q

(19.3)

Heterozygous maternal plants can also be used to obtain estimates of
selﬁng rates (Brown 1989; Hedrick 2000).
The level of inbreeding can be determined indirectly from deviations from Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium (Chapter 11). For example,
H0/He 0.68 in endangered round-leaf honeysuckle plants from

Table 19.3 The proportion of progeny genotypes expected from a
homozygous maternal genotype (A1A1) and a heterozygous maternal
genotypes (A1A2) as a result of self-fertilization (S) and outcrossing (T). p and q
are the frequencies of alleles A1 and A2 in the population
Progeny genotypes
Maternal genotype

Frequency of matings

A1A1 A1A2 A2A2

A1A1

S
T
S
T

S
Tp
1
⁄4 S
1
⁄2 Tp

A1A2
Source: Hedrick (2000).

In plants with mixed selﬁng and
outcrossing, selﬁng rates can be
determined directly by typing
maternal parents and progeny
using genetic markers

Tq
1
⁄2 S
1
⁄2 T

1

⁄4 S
⁄2 Tq

1

Selﬁng rates can be determined
indirectly from the reduction in
heterozygosity compared to
Hardy–Weinberg expectations

493

494

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

Western Australia (Coates & Hamley 1999). Using Equation 11.7, the
effective inbreeding coefﬁcient
Fe 1 (Ho / He) 10.680.32.
The selﬁng rate can be determined from the inbreeding coefﬁcient.
If S is the proportion of self-fertilized progeny in a partial selfer, then
inbreeding coefﬁcients of the parents F and progeny F (before any selection), are related as follows (Barrett & Kohn 1991):
F S (1 F) / 2
In the absence of inbreeding depression, equilibrium is reached when
F S / (2 S)

(19.4)

Consequently, with 40% selﬁng, the equilibrium inbreeding coefﬁcient
is 0.4 / (2 0.4) 0.25. When Equation 19.4 is rearranged, we obtain
S 2F / (1 F)

(19.5)

For round-leaf honeysuckle, the selﬁng rate is S 20.32 / (1 0.32) 
0.48.
Genetic markers such as allozymes have been used widely to estimate F and S. F is calculated from allele and genotype frequencies using
Equation 11.7. The most commonly used model to estimate selﬁng and
outcrossing is the mixed mating model (Barrett & Kohn 1991). It
assumes that there are only two types of matings, self-fertilization and
random mating. However, matings among related individuals also
occur (biparental inbreeding, such as full-sib, half-sib or cousin
matings). Consequently, the estimate of S is a measure of what the
selﬁng rate would be, if all inbreeding was due to selﬁng.
Multilocus data provide more accurate estimates of true selﬁng
rates. Further, in self-compatible plants, the difference between the
mean of single locus estimates and the multilocus estimate provides an
estimate of biparental inbreeding. For example, male-sterile individuals in seven populations of Bidens ssp. in Hawaii had average ‘selﬁng’
rates of 15%, and all of this must be due to biparental inbreeding (Sun
& Ganders 1988). Similarly, the Paciﬁc yew, the source of the anticancer
compound taxol, is dioecious (separate sexes), but has an F of 47%.
Again, all of this must be due to biparental inbreeding (El-Kassaby &
Yanchuk 1994). Barrett & Kohn (1991) and Hedrick (2000) provide
further details of methodology for estimating selﬁng and biparental
inbreeding rates.

Parentage
Multiple DNA markers can be
used to assign paternity and
maternity

Information on parentage is essential to study the impact of inbreeding, to verify pedigrees used in genetic management of threatened
species, and to determine the effective size of populations (Chapter 10).
Often parentage cannot be determined from direct behavioural observations. For example, chimpanzee females copulate with many males

REPRODUCTION, PARENTAGE, FOUNDER RELATIONSHIPS AND SEXING

Table 19.4 Parentage determinations in snow geese: genotypes at 14
nuclear RFLP loci for putative parents and goslings in a family of snow geese.
Gosling 4 does not match its putative parents. Alleles that cannot be inherited
from its putative parents are shown in bold and genotypes that cannot be
derived from putative parents are underlined
RFLP locus

Putative father
Putative mother
Gosling 1
Gosling 2
Gosling 3
Gosling 4

A B C D E F

G H I

J

K L M N

22
22
22
22
22
23

14
13
11
34
13
12

12
11
11
12
11
11

12
11
12
12
11
11

22
22
22
22
22
22

23
22
22
22
22
11

12
11
12
11
12
11

11
11
11
11
11
11

11
11
11
11
11
11

22
12
12
22
22
12

12
22
12
22
12
12

12
12
11
12
22
11

22
12
12
22
22
11

22
12
12
22
22
11

Source: Avise (1994).

during their fertile periods. Genetic marker information from mother,
offspring and putative fathers can be used to resolve these uncertainties (Fleischer 1996).
If a paternally derived allele in the offspring is not present in the suspected father, then that male can be excluded as a potential father
(unless a new mutation has occurred). If many loci are used, positive
paternity assignments can be made with high probabilities. DNA ﬁngerprints and multilocus microsatellites provide the most suitable
markers. Table 19.4 illustrates parentage determinations in snow geese,
based on 14 nuclear RFLP loci. At several loci, the genotype of gosling 4
cannot be derived from those of its putative (candidate) parents by
Mendelian inheritance. Possession of allele 3 at locus A excludes one or
other putative parent as they are both 22 homozygotes. Similarly,
gosling 4 possesses allele 2 at locus G and this allele is absent in both
putative parents. Loci M and N exclude the putative father as he lacks
the 1 allele. C excludes both parents as gosling 4 carries alleles not
present in either putative parent.
Paternity determinations using microsatellites in captive chimpanzees revealed that the dominant male in the colony was responsible for
siring most, but not all, of the offspring (Houlden et al. 1997).
Consequently, the need to move animals among zoos to minimize
inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity is greater than if many males
contributed to paternity, but it is less than if the dominant male
fathered all offspring. As turtles mate at sea, and swimming individuals
are very difﬁcult to identify, their mating pattern is impossible to
observe directly. Allozyme analyses of loggerhead turtle clutches established that females mated with several males (Harry & Briscoe 1988).
Further, more than two paternal microsatellite alleles were present in
the progeny of a female (Bollmer et al. 1999).
Even in species where extensive behavioural observations have been

495

496

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

made, genetic marker analyses have often revealed unexpected mating
patterns. For example, splendid fairy wrens in Western Australia were
reputed to have high rates of inbreeding, and no inbreeding depression
(Ralls et al. 1986). Subsequent paternity analyses using allozymes
revealed that 65% or more of progeny were fathered by males from
outside the group (Rowley et al. 1993). Many birds with presumed
monogamous mating systems have been shown to participate in extrapair copulations (see Fleischer 1996). Even in humans, genetic markers
have revealed that 10% or more of children are not the offspring of their
registered father (Dunbar 1998).
Pedigrees are used extensively in genetic management of captive
populations, so it is important to verify their accuracy. DNA ﬁngerprinting in the critically endangered Waldrapp ibis identiﬁed ﬁve of 33 offspring whose pedigrees were incorrect (Signer et al. 1994). The study also
identiﬁed an additional unrelated founder, but indicated that three of
the six previously known founders were probably siblings. There also
appear to be errors in the Bali starling and Arabian oryx studbooks
(Ashworth & Parkin 1992; Marshall et al. 1999), and genetic marker analyses have cast serious doubts about the accuracy of the Przewalski’s
horse pedigree (O. A. Ryder personal communication). More than one
domestic horse appears to have contributed and parentage is questionable in other parts of the pedigree. Pedigree inaccuracies can be important in domestic animals. Thoroughbred horse registration in many
countries requires that parentage be veriﬁed using genetic markers.
The above cases may reﬂect a wider problem with inaccuracies in the
pedigrees of threatened species. This issue warrants further investigation, especially in species with small numbers of founders where pedigree inaccuracies may have serious consequences.

Determining founder relationships
Multilocus DNA markers can be
used to delineate founder
relationships

Where founder numbers are
small, other potential founders can
be examined, using genetic
markers, to ensure that they
belong to the correct species and
are not affected by introgression

Small numbers of founders are frequently all that remain to initiate
breeding programs of endangered species. Usually the relationships
among founders are unknown. However, identifying related individuals is important for managing inbreeding and genetic diversity in the
population. Genetic analyses using many loci (e.g. DNA ﬁngerprinting
or multiple microsatellite loci) can identify relationships in such cases.
Studies in the California condor revealed three related groups of individuals amongst the 14 founders (Geyer at al. 1993). Similar studies have
been conducted on Bali starling, Guam rails, Micronesian kingﬁshers,
Mauritius pink pigeons and Arabian oryx (Ashworth & Parkin 1992;
Haig et al. 1994, 1995; Mace et al. 1996; Marshall et al. 1999).

Sources of new founders
All potential founders should be used to establish captive breeding colonies. However, there may be uncertainties about the identity of some
potential founders. These questions can be resolved using genetic

REPRODUCTION, PARENTAGE, FOUNDER RELATIONSHIPS AND SEXING

analyses. For example, the Mexican wolf is extinct in the wild and the
only Certiﬁed population was founded by only three or four animals.
Two other populations existed, but it was unclear whether they had
been subject to introgression from dogs, gray wolves, or coyotes.
Molecular genetic analyses (based on allozymes, mtDNA, DNA ﬁngerprints and particularly microsatellites) established that all three populations of Mexican wolves were similar, with no detectable
introgression from dogs, gray wolves, or coyotes (Fig. 19.12). These three
populations are now being combined. The study also determined that
the Certiﬁed population had three, not four founders. In a similar
manner, two potentially new founders for the US captive population of
Speke’s gazelle were shown to be unrelated to US animals (Butler et al.
1994). Since the US population was based on only four founders, these
two animals have been added to the captive population.

Fig. 19.12 Are uncertiﬁed
populations ‘pure’ Mexican wolves?
Multidimensional scaling of allele
frequency data from 20
microsatellite loci typed on
populations of Mexican wolves,
coyotes, dogs and gray wolves
(Hedrick et al. 1997). The Certiﬁed
population is known to consist of
‘pure’ Mexican wolves, while the
Aragon and Ghost Ranch
populations were of questionable
status. Different coyote and gray
wolf populations are indicated by
state or province. The Aragon and
Ghost Ranch populations cluster with
Certiﬁed as a group distinct from the
other canids, indicating that all are
‘pure’ Mexican wolves.

Sexing of birds and mammals
Males and females of many bird species are morphologically indistinguishable. Birds must be sexed prior to pairing, as several cases of ‘infertile’ pairs in zoos have turned out to be two birds of the same sex.
Some mammals are also difﬁcult to sex, especially cetaceans (whales
and dolphins) and secretive species, as it may not be possible to sex individuals when collecting samples by skin biopsies, hair, etc. The sex of
stored DNA samples may not be known.
Birds have ZZ male and ZW female sex-determination. Consequently, PCR primers for W chromosome speciﬁc sequences have been
developed to distinguish males from females (Lambert & Millar 1995;
Smith & Wayne 1996). W-speciﬁc fragments will amplify from the DNA
of a ZW female, but not from a ZZ male (Fig. 19.13).
Molecular sexing is an important component in the program to
recover the Norfolk Island boobook owl (Chapters 11 and 15). While the
program had produced 12–13 individuals, of which seven were F2, only
two pairs were breeding. It was unclear whether this was due to hybrid
sterility, unequal sex-ratio, or individuals of one sex being immature. As

Birds and mammals can be sexed
using genetic markers on the
heterogametic sex chromosome

Birds can be sexed using genetic
markers on the W sex
chromosome

497

498

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

Fig. 19.13 Sexing the critically endangered Taita thrush using a W-speciﬁc probe (from
Lens et al. 1998). PCR was used to amplify two loci, one on the W chromosome and one
autosomal, using speciﬁc primers. DNA ampliﬁed for all 11 birds, showing that the PCR
reactions had worked. Results after digestion with the restriction enzyme Hae III are
shown; this digests the autosomal fragment, but not the W fragment, so a fragment is
found for ZW females, but not for ZZ males.

Mammals can be sexed using
genetic markers on the Y
chromosome

females and males could not be distinguished by external morphology,
a PCR-based technique was used to sex the birds (Double & Olsen 1997).
The population was found to consist of six females and ﬁve males. A scarcity of mature males was the main factor slowing the recovery effort.
The critically endangered black stilt in New Zealand (Millar et al. 1997)
had declined to about 70 birds with only 12 breeding pairs. Molecular
sexing was used to avoid single sex pairings in their recovery program.
Molecular sexing in the critically endangered Taita thrush from Kenya
has revealed a strongly distorted sex-ratio in one of three populations
(only 10% females) (Fig. 19.13). Further, this study led to the identiﬁcation of a morphological trait that can be used to sex individuals visually.
Since mammals typically have XX females and XY males, sex can be
determined using molecular methods that detect Y chromosome speciﬁc loci. For example, Taberlet et al. (1997) sexed free-ranging Pyrenean
brown bears from hair and faecal samples found in the ﬁeld using a PCR
ampliﬁcation of a Y-speciﬁc locus (SRY). Similarly, molecular methods
have been developed to sex cetacean skin biopsy samples using PCR
ampliﬁcation of X and Y chromosome speciﬁc loci (SRX and SRY) (Bérubé
& Pasbøll 1996). This method has been applied to samples from humpback, ﬁn, blue and minke whales, and narwhals and harbour porpoises.

Disease
Molecular methods provide rapid,
reliable and highly sensitive means
for detecting and investigating the
biology of disease organisms, and
delineating the source of new
diseases

The disease status of animals is critical in identifying causes of population decline, and for checking candidates for translocation or reintroduction. PCR-based methods provide rapid, reliable and highly sensitive
means for detecting disease organisms. For example, PCR has been used
to study avian malaria in Hawaii, one of two diseases thought to have
been major factors in the decline of Hawaiian birds. Higher-elevation
habitats, considered safe from malaria-carrying mosquitoes, have been

SUMMARY

preserved for endangered forest birds. However, Cann et al. (1996) identiﬁed malaria in blood of birds from high-elevation habitats on Maui
and Hawaii, indicating that these areas are not as safe as previously
thought. Reservoirs of the disease were also found in introduced bird
species in low-elevation habitats.
Gene trees based upon DNA sequences have been employed to determine the source of new diseases. HIV–1, one of the viruses that cause
AIDS in humans, has been found to be most closely related to SIV from
chimpanzees, while HIV–2 originated from sooty mangabeys (Sharp et
al. 1996). Similarly, an epidemic causing high mortality in African lions
in the Serengeti in 1994 was shown to be due to canine distemper, presumed to have switched species from local dogs (Roelke-Parker et al.
1996). Recommendations were made to vaccinate local dogs against distemper to minimize the risk of repeat epidemics in lions and, especially,
in other rarer carnivores. Molecular genetic analyses have also been
used to identify the source of introduced plant diseases in Australia and
elsewhere (Gillings & Fahy 1994).

Diet
Diet is difﬁcult to determine by direct observation in nocturnal and
secretive species. Food items can be identiﬁed from faeces by using PCR
with primers speciﬁc to suspected food items. This has been demonstrated in bears, where the plant Photinia was identiﬁed as a food item
(Höss et al. 1992).
The role of predators in causing the decline of a threatened species
has also been assessed using PCR-based ampliﬁcation. Microsatellite
typing on stomach contents of glaucous gulls in Alaska revealed that
they were preying on emperor geese, but not on threatened spectacled
eiders (Scribner & Bowman 1998). Since gull numbers have increased,
gull predation appears to be a major factor in the decline in emperor
geese numbers and their inability to recover. Gull removal has resulted
in improved gosling survival.

Summary
1. Molecular genetic analyses are invaluable in forensics and in
resolving many aspects of species biology that are important in conservation.
2. Gene trees and coalescence methods have added greatly to the
analytical methods available to infer population processes of interest
in the life histories of threatened species.
3 Molecular genetic analyses have been used to determine population size, infer demographic history, detect population bottlenecks,
measure effective population size, determine reproductive and
mating systems, establish parentage, sex individuals, determine
founder relationships, identify the source of new founders, measure

PCR with primers speciﬁc to
suspected food items can be used
to determine dietary items from
gut contents or faeces

499

500

MOLECULAR GENETICS IN FORENSICS AND SPECIES BIOLOGY

migration and gene ﬂow, infer population structures, identify populations to use to alleviate inbreeding depression, detect introgression,
identify sites and populations suitable for reintroduction, document
disease status and the source of new diseases, and to identify dietary
items.
FURTHER READING

Avise (1994) Molecular Markers, Natural History and Evolution. Has a lucid treatment of the use of molecular genetic techniques to understand species
biology.
Avise (2000) Phylogeography. An excellent textbook on coalescence and phylogeography by the founder of the ﬁeld.
Avise & Hamrick (1996) Conservation Genetics. Scientiﬁc reviews containing
examples of the use of genetic markers to understand species biology.
Goldstein & Schlotterer (1999) Microsatellites. An edited volume devoted to
microsatellite techniques, the marker of choice for many genetic analyses in
conservation biology, and the information gained from such analyses.
Harvey et al. (1996) New Uses for New Phylogenies. A series of chapters by different
authors on gene trees and coalescence. Advanced.
Hoelzel (1998) Molecular Genetic Analysis. An edited book with technical details
and case studies on the use of molecular genetic methods to illuminate
aspects of species biology.
Luikart & England (1999) A review of new methods for statistical analysis of
microsatellite DNA data, along with list of relevant computer software.
Smith & Wayne (1996) Molecular Genetic Approaches in Conservation. This book contains much technical detail and many examples of the use of molecular
genetic analyses to understand species biology.
Sunnucks (2000b) Recent review on the use of molecular genetic methods in
population biology and conservation.
PROBLEMS

19.1 Coalescence time: What is the mean time to complete coalescence for four alleles in a population of Ne 50? In a population of
Ne 10?
19.2 Bottleneck: What proportion of the autosomal genetic variation is expected to remain in the Isle Royale population of gray wolves,
compared to the mainland wolves, if it was founded from (a) one
female mated to a single male? (b) one female mated to four males?
(c) two mated pairs? (d) ﬁve pairs? Explain the basis of your calculations.
19.3 Bottleneck: What proportion of the mainland mtDNA variation is expected in Isle Royale gray wolves with one, two or ﬁve female
founders?
19.4 Bottleneck: If northern elephant seals declined to one male/10
females and remained at this size for seven generations (this is likely
to exaggerate the duration of the bottleneck), what proportion of their
initial nuclear heterozygosity would be retained? Can this bottleneck
account for complete loss of allozyme genetic diversity?
19.5 Bottleneck: Model the decline in mtDNA genetic diversity in
the nene to explain a drop in initial diversity from H0 0.80 to H75 

PROBLEMS

0.067 (Paxinos et al. in press). Find a population size that will explain
this with constant size.
19.6 Reproduction systems: What are the methods of reproduction
in the following cases?
(a) Mother A1A2, seven offspring A1A2
(b) Mother A1A2, offspring 5 A1A1, 13 A1A2, and 6 A2A2
(c) Mother A1A1, offspring A1A2 and A1A3
(d) Mother A1A1, offspring A1A2, A1A3, A1A4 and A1A5
(e) Mother A1A2, female offspring A1A3, A2A3, male offspring A1 and
A2 .
19.7 Reproduction systems: What are all the possible explanations
for the Wollemi pine having no genetic diversity at several hundred
loci?
19.8 Parentage determinations: Determine whether each of the
goslings in the snow goose family shown below is compatible with
their putative parents. Diploid genotypes at 14 nuclear RFLP loci are as
follows (after Avise 1994). For example, the putative father has alleles 1
and 2 at locus A, 2 and 2 at locus B, etc.

RFLP locus

Putative father
Putative mother
Gosling 1
Gosling 2
Gosling 3
Gosling 4
Gosling 5

A B C D E F

G H I

J

K L M N

12
22
22
22
12
23
12

11
12
11
12
11
22
12

11
11
12
11
11
11
11

11
11
11
11
11
11
11

22
22
22
22
22
22
22

24
12
12
24
24
22
22

11
11
11
11
11
11
11

11
22
12
12
11
11
12

11
11
11
11
11
11
11

12
12
22
11
12
11
22

11
22
12
12
22
12
12

12
11
11
11
11
11
12

11
22
12
22
11
11
12

12
12
12
11
11
22
12

501

Chapter 20

The broader context:
population viability analysis
(PVA)
Terms:
Demographic stochasticity,
environmental stochasticity,
genetic stochasticity,
population viability analysis (PVA),
sensitivity analysis

‘It’s a hard world out there’:
stylized scenario of the myriad
risks faced by species in natural
habitats.

Wild populations face threats from both deterministic factors
(habitat loss, over-exploitation, pollution and introduced species)
and stochastic events associated with small population size.
Population viability analysis is used to assess the combined impacts
of all these factors on extinction risk, and to evaluate alternative
management options to recover species

WHAT CAUSES ENDANGERMENT AND EXTINCTION?

What causes endangerment and extinction?
Genetic threats are only a part of the endangering processes faced by
species in the wild. Consequently, it is important to place genetic concerns in the broader conservation context. This chapter provides a connection between conservation genetics and the broader ﬁeld of
conservation biology. It is concerned with assessing extinction risk due
to all deterministic and stochastic threats. Further, it considers means
for evaluating options for restoring threatened and endangered species.
Assessments of extinction risk are required so that populations can
be categorized according to relative risk, and conservation priorities
set. High risk species are accorded legal protection under endangered
species legislation in most countries. Further, trade or movement of
endangered species is restricted by countries that are signatories to the
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES). Until
the 1990s, risk assessment was rather subjective, with listing of species
as endangered being based largely on the persuasive powers of individuals. Recently, there has been an appreciation that designation of
degree of endangerment must be based on objective, quantitative
guidelines (Mace & Lande 1991; IUCN 1996). Objective and quantitative
evaluation of risks faced by species can be provided through population
viability analysis (PVA). In this chapter, we present an introduction to
the ﬁeld of population viability analysis; we discuss the factors important to population viability, how viability is assessed, and what has been
learned using this approach.
Wild populations face a range of threats from deterministic and stochastic factors that may act, and interact, to drive populations to extinction.

Population decline and extinction
are due to a range of deterministic
and stochastic factors, with
genetic factors being only one of
many components

Deterministic factors
Deterministic factors are those threats that have a consistent direction
and relatively consistent magnitude. The deterministic factors that
cause the decline and extinction of species are directly, or indirectly
associated with human actions, namely:
• loss of habitat
• over-exploitation
• pollution
• introduced species
• cascades of extinction
• combinations of the above factors.
While habitat loss is the most important documented factor in endangerment and extinction, in most cases, several of the factors combine to
drive species to extinction (WCMC 1992). Further, these deterministic
factors reduce population sizes to the point where additional stochastic
factors may become signiﬁcant, and deliver the ﬁnal blow.

A large and increasing number of
species have had their numbers
reduced by deterministic factors
associated directly or indirectly
with human actions

503

504

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Stochastic factors
Small populations face additional
stochastic threats: demographic
stochasticity, environmental
stochasticity, catastrophes and
genetic stochasticity

Stochastic factors are chance factors that come into play in small populations. They differ from deterministic ones in that they have large
random components, with effects varying in direction and magnitude
by chance. There are four forms of stochasticity relevant to extinction
risk in small populations:
Demographic stochasticity
Birth and death rates and sex-ratios ﬂuctuate naturally and with time
(May 1973). This is due both to chance and to responses to external
factors like weather, food availability, etc. (see ‘Environmental stochasticity’ below). The component of this variation that is independent of external factors and due simply to chance is demographic
stochasticity. The smaller the population, the more likely it is to vary
randomly in reproduction and survival rates and in sex-ratio. In very
small populations, these may be the ﬁnal cause of extinction. For
example, the last six dusky seaside sparrows were all males (Avise &
Nelson 1989).
Environmental stochasticity
Variation in birth and death rates is affected by variation in the environment due to ﬂuctuations in rainfall, temperature, density of competitors and predators, food sources, etc. Environmental ﬂuctuations are a
regular feature of all natural environments. Some ﬂuctuations are associated with climatic cycles, such as the El Niño–Southern Oscillation.
Plant growth varies with rainfall and temperature. Thus, food supply for
herbivores ﬂuctuates and carnivore numbers track prey numbers. For
example, birth and death rates follow climatic conditions in many
species, including red kangaroos (Caughley & Gunn 1996). Cycles in lynx
populations in Canada appear to be driven by the North Atlantic
Oscillation, a meteorological ﬂuctuation similar to El Niño (Stenseth et
al. 1999). Environmental variation inﬂuences all individuals in the population in a similar way.
Catastrophes
Extreme environmental events such as cyclones, severe winters, ﬁres,
ﬂoods and disease epidemics have major impacts on many species, and
may lead to declines and extinctions. For example, a hurricane caused a
signiﬁcant decline in population numbers of the endangered Puerto
Rican parrot (Lacy et al. 1990). African lions in the Serengeti recently suffered signiﬁcant mortality due to canine distemper (Roelke-Parker et al.
1996). Young (1994) listed 92 natural die-offs (with 70%–90% mortality)
in large mammals due to starvation, severe winters, droughts and
disease. An extreme catastrophe due to the impact of an extraterrestrial
body led to a mass extinction 65 million years ago, including that of the
dinosaurs (Raup 1991). Single catastrophes can affect populations,
multiple populations, or entire ecological communities.

WHAT CAUSES ENDANGERMENT AND EXTINCTION?

Genetic stochasticity
This encompasses inbreeding depression, loss of genetic variation and
accumulation of new deleterious mutations. The magnitude of genetic
stochasticity depends on mating system, population structure,
numbers, and the severity of environmental effects (Chapters 2 and
10–13). Inbreeding depression is a stochastic factor as it occurs in small
populations through unavoidable matings between relatives. However,
it has predictably deleterious impacts on reproduction and survival.
The impacts of genetic factors are dependent on effective population
sizes, while demographic stochasticity is dependent on the census population size. The occurrence of environmental stochasticity is essentially independent of population size, but its impact is not.

Interactions of stochastic factors
The combined impacts of stochastic factors are more damaging than
the sum of their individual effects. Human pressures typically lead to
small population sizes. This promotes inbreeding and consequent
reductions in birth and survival rates. In turn, this causes further reductions in population size, increased demographic instability and a downward cycle to extinction. These feedback loops are termed ‘extinction
vortices’ (Fig. 20.1; Gilpin & Soulé 1986). For example, the greater prairie
chicken population in Illinois initially declined due to habitat loss and
fragmentation, but later decline involved genetic stochasticity in a feedback cycle (Westemeier et al. 1998). Genetic diversity was lost and the
population became inbred resulting in reduced fertility and hatchability. The population size continued to decline despite habitat restoration, leading to further inbreeding depression and further declines in
reproductive rate. The Illinois population only began to recover after
unrelated birds introduced genetic diversity from other populations

Stochastic factors operate in a
feedback cycle termed the
‘extinction vortex’

Fig. 20.1

The extinction vortex

505

506

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Variation in population size due to
demographic and environmental
stochasticity and catastrophes
reduces the effective population
size and increases the rate of
inbreeding

(Fig. 12.10). Addressing the original cause of decline – habitat deterioration – was insufﬁcient to recover the population.
Demographic and environmental stochasticity and catastrophes
increase ﬂuctuations in population size. Consequently, they reduce the
effective population size (Chapter 10) and thus make the impacts of
inbreeding even more severe. For example, ﬂuctuations in population
size alone reduce the effective size of a bay checkerspot butterﬂy population in the USA to 25% of its mean population size (using data from
Problem 20.1). It becomes inbred at four times the rate expected from its
mean population size (assuming no immigration). Thus, demographic
and environmental stochasticity and catastrophes interact with
inbreeding. Their combined impacts reduce reproduction and survival
more than expected from their individual effects, resulting in elevated
extinction risk (van Noordwijk 1994; Tanaka 2000; B. Brook et al., unpublished data).

Cumulative impacts
Extinction risk reﬂects the
cumulative impacts, and
interactions of all deterministic
and stochastic factors

The total threat experienced by a population is the cumulative effects of
deterministic factors, and demographic, environmental and genetic
stochasticity, plus the occasional catastrophe. Consequently, actions to
recover threatened species must not only address the original causes of
decline (usually deterministic factors), but also cope with the additional stochastic threats. Identifying the most important factors determining extinction risk can help identify possible remedial action for
threatened populations.

Predicting extinction probabilities: population
viability analysis (PVA)
Population viability analysis is used
to predict the probability of
extinction due to the combined
effects of deterministic and
stochastic threats

Risk analyses for threatened species should be based on principles of
population biology, involving demography, ecology and population
genetics. The outcomes have a large stochastic element and involve
probabilities rather than certainties. The process of combining these
risk factors to project the future fate of populations is called population
viability analysis (Fig. 20.2). PVA is deﬁned as the process of evaluating
the combined effects of threats faced by populations or species on their
risks of extinction, or decline, and their chances of recovery within
deﬁned time frames.
This process arose out of the concept of minimum viable population
size (Chapter 14). Shaffer (1981) and Gilpin & Soulé (1986) were largely
responsible for developing the concept to combine deterministic risk
factors with the stochastic ones.
PVAs are usually carried out by inputting, to a computer program,
information on birth and survival rates and their variances, number of

PREDICTING EXTINCTION PROBABILITIES: POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Small population

Fig. 20.2 Population viability analysis (PVA) models the effects of different life history,
environmental and threat factors on the population size and extinction risk of populations
or species.

populations, population sizes, habitat capacities, frequencies and
effects of threats (e.g. catastrophes, hunting, etc.), and other details
about species life history (e.g. susceptibility to inbreeding depression,
migration rates between populations, etc.) and then projecting forward
in time (Fig. 20.3). The algorithms, formulae and concepts used in the
computer simulations programs are based upon the accumulated
knowledge of more than 100 years of research into population demography, ecology and genetics (where applicable). An example of the kind
of input information required to run a PVA for the generic software
package VORTEX (Miller & Lacy 1999) is given for the golden lion
tamarin in Fig. 20.4.
Fig. 20.3 Cycle of events in a
typical PVA run as it progresses
through generations (after Miller &
Lacy 1999).

Many replicate runs (typically 500–1000) are conducted for a given set
of input data, as individual population projections will produce different results as these are stochastic simulations. For example, the variability among replicate runs for the Capricorn silvereye (all using identical
input data) is shown in Fig. 20.5. Results are usually summarized over all
simulations. PVAs usually report population sizes, population growth

Replicate runs of PVA software
using the same inputs give widely
varying population trajectories
due to stochastic variation

507

508

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Fig. 20.4 Example of input
information for a population
viability analysis run using the
VORTEX software package for the
golden lion tamarin (after Ballou et
al. 1998). This is only for one of
several populations of this species.
EV is the environmental variation
for the parameter. Input variables
are explained in Miller & Lacy
(1999).

PVAs may be done by a variety of
means including generic software
packages, species-speciﬁc
programs, or simple r-models

TAMARIN.OUT ***Output Filename
N ***Graphing Files?***
1000 ***Simulations
100 ***Years***
1 ***Reporting Interval***
0 ***Deﬁnition of Extinction***
1 ***Populations***
Y ***Inbreeding Depression?***
3.14 ***Lethal equivalents***
0.5 ***Prop. genetic load lethals***
N ***EV concordance repro – surv?***
4 ***Types Of Catastrophes***
M ***Monogamous, Polygynous, or
Hermaphroditic***
4 ***Female Breeding Age***
4 ***Male Breeding Age***
16 ***Maximum Age***
50 ***Sex Ratio***
5 ***Max Litter Size (0N distribn) *****
N ***Density Dependent Breeding?***
75.7 ***breeding***
3.82 ***EV—Reproduction***
20.77 ***Population 1: % Litter Size 1***
57.94 ***Population 1: % Litter Size 2***
5.42 ***Population 1: % Litter Size 3***
15.21 ***Population 1: % Litter Size 4***
32.8 ***FMort age 0***
8.7 ***EV—FemaleMortality***
19.6 ***FMort age 1***
13.3 ***EV—FemaleMortality***
24.6 ***FMort age 2***
7.6 ***EV—FemaleMortality***
21.0 ***FMort age 3***
5.0 ***EV—FemaleMortality***

12.5 ***Adult Fmort***
6.7 ***EV—AdultFemaleMortality***
29.8 ***MMort age 0
7.0 ***EV—MaleMortality***
19.7 ***MMort age 1***
9.9 ***EV—MaleMortality***
23.9 ***MMort age 2***
5.0 ***EV—MaleMortality***
17.2 ***MMort age 3***
7.5 ***EV—MaleMortality***
16.0 ***Adult Mmort***
8.2 ***EV—AdultMaleMortality***
7.0 ***Prob. of Catastrophe 1***
1.0 ***Severity—Reproduction***
0.9 ***Severity—Survival***
1.0 ***Prob. of Catastrophe 2***
1.0 ***Severity—Reproduction***
0.5 ***Severity—Survival***
33.33 ***Probability Of Catastrophe 3***
1.0 ***Severity—Reproduction***
0.99 ***Severity—Survival***
5.0 ***Probability Of Catastrophe 4***
1.0 ***Severity—Reproduction***
0.95 ***Severity—Survival***
Y ***All Males Breeders?***
Y ***Start At Stable Age Distribution?***
350 ***Initial Population Size***
350 ***K***
0.0 ***EV—K***
N ***Trend In K?***
N ***Harvest?***
N ***Supplement?***
N ***AnotherSimulation?***

rate, and proportion of simulations extinct, and some report proportion
of heterozygosity retained.
PVAs may be carried out using generic, off-the-shelf, software packages (such as GAPPS, RAMAS Metapop, RAMAS Stage, or VORTEX; Brook
et al. 2000), or customized programs written for a speciﬁc species. The
generic packages differ in their characteristics. All include demographic and environmental stochasticity. GAPPS and VORTEX are individual-based programs (i.e. they track the life of each individual in the
population), while the RAMAS packages are matrix-based programs
(that only track number of individuals). RAMAS Metapop and VORTEX
are able to handle fragmented populations. Only GAPPS and VORTEX
include genetic factors, but functions can be included in RAMAS Stage
to include inbreeding effects.
Several hundred PVAs have been completed for threatened species
(Lindenmayer & Possingham 1994; Menges 2000). The Conservation

PREDICTING EXTINCTION PROBABILITIES: POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Breeding Specialist Group of IUCN alone has performed over 150 using
VORTEX (Seal et al. 1998) and many have been done using the RAMAS
packages (Akçakaya 2000). Many PVAs have also been done using customized software, including ones on matchstick banksia, northern
spotted owl, Isle Royale gray wolf and red-cockaded woodpecker
(Burgman et al. 1993; Boyce 1994; Vucetich et al. 1997; Letcher et al. 1998).
Detailed case histories for several PVAs are given later in the chapter.
Limited life history data exist for most threatened species, so full
population viability analyses may not be possible. A simpliﬁed version
of PVA can be performed using stochastic r-models. These require only a
time series of population size data to estimate the rate of population
growth (r) and its variance. Simple stochastic simulations can predict
the future population size trajectory and provide reasonable projections (see below). Example 20.1 illustrates a population trajectory in the
bay checkerspot butterﬂy, the estimation of r and its variance and the
projection from stochastic r-model simulations.

Example 20.1 Use of an r-model to project the future size of Bay
checkerspot butterﬂy population in California (data
from Foley 1994)
The ﬁgure below shows the population size trajectory for a bay checkerspot butterﬂy populations from 1960 to 1986. There are two populations, so we will consider one here and leave the other for you to do as
Problem 20.1.
The rate of population growth r, was obtained from the data as
follows:
Nt Nt1 er
Thus
Nt / Nt1 er

Fig. 20.5 Stochastic variability
among replicate PVA runs in the
projections for the Capricorn
silvereye population from Heron
Island in the Great Barrier Reef,
Australia (from Brook & Kikkawa
1998). Input data are identical for
all runs; the variability among runs
results from the computer
program using random number
generators to mimic the
demographic, environmental and
catastrophic stochasticity natural
to populations. How much
variability is added by the random
number generator depends on the
population size, sampling theory,
and the variance of rates provided
by the input data. The bold line is
the observed size of the
population.

A major limitation of PVA is that
insufﬁcient life history data exist
for most species

509

510

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

and
ln (Nt /Nt1) r
For example, the numbers in the ﬁrst two years were 90 and 175. From
these, we obtain our ﬁrst estimate of r, as follows:
rln (175/90)0.665
In year 3, the numbers were 40, so for the year 2 to year 3 transition r
is as follows:
rln (40/175)1.476
A stationary population has r0, while positive r indicates a growing
population and negative r a declining population. The mean r for this
bay checkerspot butterﬂy population was 0.002 (essentially stationary) and its variance 1.456.
The stochastic projection for this population, obtained using rmodel software, is shown in the ﬁgure below. Projections were done
both to compare with the actual population trajectory for 1960–86,
and to project forwards for an additional 25 years. Only three replicates are shown to avoid cluttering the ﬁgure.

PREDICTING EXTINCTION PROBABILITIES: POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Even simpler methods may be used in predicting the future fate of populations when data are scarce. Some rely on surveying the opinions of
experts. For example, Ralls & Starﬁeld (1995) used methods from business management to evaluate the best strategy for management of
endangered Hawaiian monk seals, where males on occasion mob and
kill females. This led to the decision to remove males when the sex-ratio
became distorted by excess males. The IUCN categorization system
using criteria A–D also represents a simple means of predicting extinction risk (Chapter 1).

Genetics and PVA
Inbreeding depression is the only genetic threat that has been incorporated into PVAs. For this incorporation, we need to know:
• Susceptibility of the species to inbreeding depression. If not known,
the median lethal equivalents (3.14) for captive mammals from Ralls
et al. (1988) is typically used.
• What ﬁtness components are affected by inbreeding.
• Is inbreeding depression linearly, or curvilinearly, related to F?
Linearity is assumed for the default in VORTEX, while INMAT models
a curvilinear (synergistic interaction) relationship.
• The genetic mechanism responsible for inbreeding depression, overdominance or dominance. This determines the extent of purging.
Perhaps the best default is to assume that 50% of deleterious alleles
are lethal and the rest are alleles of small effect, as occurs in fruit
ﬂies (Simmons & Crow 1977). This is possible in VORTEX, but not in
other packages.
• The extent of isolation among fragments, i.e. the migration rates, as
these affect the inbreeding coefﬁcient.
• The breeding system (outbreeding versus selﬁng, monogamous
versus polygamous versus hermaphrodite, etc.). This affects Ne.
• The relationship between catastrophes and inbreeding/genetic
diversity. While the impacts of inbreeding are typically greater in
stressful environments (Chapter 12), it is typically assumed in PVAs
that there is no interaction between catastrophes and inbreeding.
• Population size.
Most PVAs ignore genetic issues, and are likely to underestimate extinction risk (Chapters 2, 12 and 16). Even when genetic factors are included
(typically using VORTEX), inbreeding depression is normally only
imposed on juvenile survival, even though it is clear that inbreeding
depression affects reproduction, survival, mating ability, parental care
and longevity (Chapter 12). It is possible to incorporate inbreeding
depression for other components of ﬁtness using GAPPS and INMAT,
and with recent versions of VORTEX. The levels of inbreeding depression assumed are typically those from captive mammals, so impacts are
underestimated as inbreeding depression is much greater in the wild
than in captivity (Crnokrak & Roff 1999).

PVAs show that inbreeding
depression often increases the risk
of extinction in threatened species

PVAs typically do not encompass
the full genetic impacts on
population viability

511

512

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

All current PVA packages typically can not model all the details of
a species breeding system and usually underestimate the impacts of
variation in family sizes in reducing effective population sizes. For
example, VORTEX can specify mating system (monogamy, polygamy, or
hermaphrodite), variation in litter sizes and proportion of males participating in breeding. However, it assumes random mating within these
constraints. From year to year, the probability of an individual having a
given number of offspring is random within the constraints. In real populations individuals contributing above (or below) average numbers of
offspring are likely to do this in successive years, i.e. the variance in
family size is often underestimated in PVAs and Ne are higher than
observed in real populations. Consequently, PVAs will often underestimate levels of inbreeding and inbreeding depression.
There is no contribution of loss of genetic diversity to ﬁtness modelled, apart from that associated with inbreeding depression (i.e. evolutionary potential is ignored), although heterozygosity can be tracked
using VORTEX. Further, new mutations are ignored in all PVAs.
Despite underestimating inbreeding impacts, PVAs have revealed
that inbreeding depression substantially increases extinction risk for a
range of species in single populations (Fig. 2.5 and Chapter 12). Further,
it elevated extinction risk in two isolated black rhinoceros populations
(Box 16.2). Genetic factors were important in the PVA on the Florida
panther (see below). It predicted that the population was in danger of
extinction within a short time and recommended action to alleviate
inbreeding problems. Daniels et al. (2000) found important reductions
in ﬁtness in small populations using stochastic simulations for redcockaded woodpeckers.
The main reason for small impacts of inbreeding depression is
that short time frames are considered, or that the species has a long
generation interval, so that there are few generations for inbreeding
to accumulate (B. Brook et al., unpublished data). Large populations are,
not surprisingly, less susceptible than small populations to the impacts
of inbreeding.

Insights into the causes of extinction from PVA
Demographic, environmental and
genetic stochasticity reduce
population growth and increase
extinction risk

PVA is a tool that can be used to investigate the relative contributions
of different factors, and to improve understanding of the causes of
extinction. In this way, it complements results from simple analytical theory and from laboratory and ﬁeld studies. The combination of
these approaches is much more powerful than any one alone.
Analytical theory involves simplistic models whose assumptions may
be suspect. Simulations allow inclusion of more factors and greater
reality. Laboratory studies involve real organisms and replication,
but in simpliﬁed environments. Field studies involve the full complexity of real populations in real environments, but have limited

PREDICTING EXTINCTION PROBABILITIES: POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

replication and their results may apply only to a speciﬁc species in a
speciﬁc environment.
The impacts of demographic, environmental and genetic stochasticity and catastrophes in reducing population growth and increasing
extinction risk have been demonstrated in PVA simulations. The
impacts can be evaluated by doing PVA simulations both with and
without a factor and comparing the impacts on population growth and
extinction risk. For example, we saw that inclusion, versus exclusion, of
inbreeding depression increased extinction risk in models for a range of
endangered species (Fig. 2.5 and Box 16.2).
The relationship between population size and extinction risk is predicted by theory and supported by extensive empirical data (Chapter 2).
Extinction risk is greater in smaller than in otherwise equivalent larger
populations of the same species. For example, Fig. 20.6 shows extinction
probabilities of populations of Eld’s deer with different carrying capacities. Extinction levels are highest in the smallest population and lowest
in the largest, and increase with time. Similar relationships are evident
in ﬁeld data, including those on bighorn sheep (Fig. 2.5), on the relationships between island area and number of species (Terborgh & Winter
1980; Diamond 1984) and on extinctions in both National Parks and
mountaintops in North America (Chapter 14).

Small populations have higher
extinction risks than equivalent
large populations of the same
species

Fig. 20.6 Relationship between
extinction risk and population size.
Cumulative extinction risks of
endangered Eld’s deer (from
Myanmar) over time in four
populations of different sizes
(based on data from Wemmer et al.
2000). Population sizes are limited
by the carrying capacity of their
environments (K). Extinction risk is
greater in smaller than in larger
populations and increases with time.

Demographic stochasticity substantially increases extinction risk in
very small populations, but its impact becomes small once populations
are above 50–100 individuals (Fig. 20.7). In the plant Astrocaryum mexicanum, extinction risk over 100 years due to demographic stochasticity is
very high in populations of 10, but zero above population sizes of 50. A
wide range of other evidence indicates that demographic stochasticity
has minor impact in populations of over 100.
Natural variation in climate and other environmental variables
affect entire populations and may drive small populations to extinction. For example, Fig. 20.8 shows the ﬂuctuations in population size
due to environmental factors in both a large and a small population. The
large population persists, but a similar amount of environmental stochasticity drives the smaller population to extinction. Environmental

Demographic stochasticity
increases extinction risk, but it has
little impact in populations with
sizes of greater than 100

Environmental stochasticity
increases extinction risk at much
larger population sizes than
demographic stochasticity

513

514

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Fig. 20.7 Extinction probabilities
plotted against initial population
sizes for the plant Astrocaryum
mexicanum for models with
demographic stochasticity (DS)
alone, or two levels of
environmental stochasticity (ES
10 and ES25). Population sizes
required to limit extinction
probabilities to 5% over 100 years
(MVP) are given for each case.
‘Extinction’ was deﬁned as 10 or
fewer individuals (quasi-extinction)
(after Menges 1992).

Fig. 20.8 Impact of
environmental stochasticity on
hypothetical large and small
populations. While the ﬂuctuations
are similar in both, the large
population persists but the small
population goes extinct.

Catastrophes increase extinction
risk, with their impact depending
upon their frequency and severity

stochasticity has impacts over a much wider range of population sizes
than demographic stochasticity (Fig. 20.7). For this plant, populations
have to be above 140 before the extinction risks from environmental
stochasticity over 100 years is restricted to 5%, while population of only
size 50 are required with demographic stochasticity.
The impact of demographic and environmental stochasticity on
population size is illustrated in Fig. 20.9. In populations beginning at
size 200, environmental stochasticity markedly depresses population
growth, compared to the deterministic case, while demographic stochasticity has no obvious effect.
This translates into differences in extinction risk (Fig. 20.7). Further,
extinction risks are increased as the level of environmental variation
increases. For example, in Astrocaryum mexicanum, the population size
required to limit extinction probabilities to less than 5% over 100 years
was 140 with low environmental variation (ES10) and 380 with high
environmental variation (ES25) (Fig. 20.7).
Catastrophes, such as cyclones, severe winters, ﬁres and disease epi-

PREDICTING EXTINCTION PROBABILITIES: POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Fig. 20.9 Impact of
environmental stochasticity (ES)
and demographic stochasticity
(DS) on population growth in the
plant Astrocaryum mexicanum
compared to deterministic growth
(after Menges 1992). With this initial
size, environmental stochasticity
depresses population growth, but
demographic stochasticity does not.

demics are more likely to drive smaller populations to extinction.
Catastrophes are extreme forms of environmental variation, and their
impact is similar in direction to that of environmental stochasticity
(Soulé 1987). For example, a PVA on the Puerto Rican parrot (Box 20.1)
identiﬁed catastrophes in the form of hurricanes as a major risk. Shortly
after the PVA was completed, a hurricane hit the island and reduced the
bird’s population. The black-footed ferret was sent to extinction in the
wild in 1987, primarily through a catastrophic canine distemper outbreak (Clark 1994).

Box 20.1 Population viability analysis for the Puerto Rican
parrot
The endangered Puerto Rican parrot declined to 13–14 birds in the wild because of
deforestation, poaching for the pet trade, predation and cyclones. A captive population was established by removing eggs from wild nests. At the time the PVA was
done, the wild population had about 40 birds (Lacy et al. 1990). The PVA predicted
a probability of extinction of over 30% over 100 years. The primary risk identiﬁed
was from a catastrophe, especially in the form of hurricanes. The PVA recommended
stockpiling of food for the parrots at the remote breeding centre, so that birds could
be fed if a hurricane cut access roads. Since both the wild and the captive populations
were on the island, it was recommended that a population be established elsewhere.
The long-range plan called for the establishment of ﬁve independent wild parrot populations in Puerto Rico.
The recommendations were prescient! Soon after, the population suffered a
serious set-back from a hurricane that devastated the forest habitat (Seal 1991). The
stockpiled food allowed captive birds to be fed whilst the Centre was isolated and
prevented their extinction. Careful genetic management was recommended for this
small population as it is showing evidence of inbreeding depression (Brock & White
1992). The management plan has subsequently been criticized on the basis of the
undesirability of fragmenting the population and on the disease risk posed by returning captive-bred birds to the wild (Wilson et al. 1994).

515

516

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Species with low reproductive
rates are generally more sensitive
to stochastic factors than species
with high reproductive rates
Immigration may ‘rescue’
populations and thus allow small
populations to persist

The sensitivity of populations to demographic and genetic stochasticity is greatest in species with low reproductive rates, and least in
species with high reproductive rates (Menges 1992; Mills & Smouse
1994). However, environmental ﬂuctuations may have greater impacts
on reproduction and survival in species with higher reproductive rates.
Many natural populations are fragmented, but maintain some
migration among fragments. Populations that are too small to persist
on their own may be ‘rescued’ by immigration from other small populations that are experiencing relatively independent ﬂuctuations in
population size. This occurs in the acorn woodpecker in the American
southwest (Stacey & Taper 1992). A population with a carrying capacity
of 52 was predicted to have a median persistence time of only 16 years
(and a maximum of 48 years), although the real population had persisted for more than 70 years. When immigration was included in the
model, persistence times increased; with ﬁve immigrants per generation, the probability of extinction over 1000 years dropped to zero. The
real population was found to receive about 10 immigrants per year. In
general, the ‘rescue effect’ of immigration will usually be even greater
when inbreeding depression is included in models (Box 16.2; Richards
2000).

Recovering threatened populations
Population viability analysis is
widely used as a management tool
to compare options to recover
species

A wide range of different procedures have been suggested to recover
threatened populations, including legal restraints on exploitation,
removing predators, improving habitat, reserving habitat, captive
breeding, etc. PVA is frequently used to evaluate and compare these
options. Typically, these commence with sensitivity analyses, followed
by detailed PVAs that compare a range of speciﬁc management options.

Sensitivity analyses
Sensitivity analyses involve
determining the relative impact of
variation in parameters on
extinction risk

Sensitivity analyses provide a highly useful tool in evaluating recovery
programs for threatened species (Wisdom & Mills 1997; Mills & Lindberg
2000). These analyses involve varying input parameters by increments
in either direction around the mean and evaluating their effects on
extinction risk or population trajectories. In this way, the input parameters whose values most inﬂuence the output can be identiﬁed, i.e. is the
outcome most sensitive to varying juvenile survival, or adult reproductive rate, or predation level, etc. Alternative management options can be
compared, as can various causes of population decline. For example,
sensitivity analyses identiﬁed ﬁrst-year survival as the parameter whose
variation had most impact on population growth rate in the greater
prairie chicken (Wisdom & Mills 1997). Consequently, they recommended that management should focus on ﬁnding ways to improve
nest success, brood survival and post-brood survival to one year of age.
Sensitivity analyses have altered our perceptions about the most

RECOVERING THREATENED POPULATIONS

important factors threatening cheetahs and loggerhead sea turtles.
Predation on cheetah cubs by lions and hyenas had been viewed as the
major threat to the cheetah’s viability (Caro & Laurenson 1994).
However, a sensitivity analysis revealed that populations were much
more sensitive to adult than to juvenile survivorship (Crooks et al. 1998).
In loggerhead turtles, many years of management focused on the seemingly obvious notion that increasing hatchling survival should reverse
population decline. However, sensitivity analysis showed that the most
efﬁcient way to stop decline of the species was to reduce mortality of life
stages that were being killed in shrimp nets (see Mills & Lindberg 2000).

Use of PVA in evaluating management options: case
studies
The following gives a selection of case studies chosen to represent a
diversity of PVA analyses where threats and management options differ.
Black-footed ferret
The ferret black-footed ferret once occupied an area of 40 million hectares, but its numbers were drastically reduced by control of prairie
dogs (its prey) on agricultural lands. By the late 1970s, they were
thought to be extinct (Seal et al. 1989; Clark 1994). In 1981, a small population of about 80 individuals was found in Wyoming, USA. Initial recovery efforts concentrated on maximizing the number of wild ferrets, and
maximizing the number of prairie dog prey. An initial risk analysis
identiﬁed stochastic factors (genetic, environmental and demographic
stochasticity plus catastrophes) as potential problems. Several studies
recommended captive breeding and reintroductions, but this was not
implemented until after the catastrophic decline of the ferrets in 1985,
due to bubonic plague among the prairie dogs and an epidemic of
canine distemper in the ferrets. The initial program was bedevilled by
bureaucratic and political problems. By 1986, only a handful of ferrets
were left in the wild. All animals remaining in the wild were taken into
captivity by 1987. This resulted in 18 individuals surviving to found the
captive population.
A PVA in 1989 indicated that about 120 animals were required for a
wild population to show greater than 95% probability of persisting for
100 years. Multiple independent populations were considered to
provide the best insurance against overall loss of the species from
chance extinctions (e.g. from disease in the ferrets, or their prey). There
were additional serious genetic concerns about the population that this
model did not include (i.e. loss of genetic diversity and inbreeding
depression). The goals of the US Fish and Wildlife Service black-footed
ferret recovery plan in 1987 were to increase the captive population to
an effective size of 200 breeding adults by 1991, and to establish wild
populations of 1500 adults in 10 or more populations by 2010 (a metapopulation).
The captive population has increased in size to about 300 adults and

517

518

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

six wild populations have been established, but only two of the reintroduced populations have been particularly successful so far (Chapter 18).
Florida panther
The Florida panther population in Florida, USA has dropped from 500
at the turn of the century to fewer than 50 individuals by the later 1980s.
Loss and fragmentation of habitat and unregulated killing were the
main causes of decline. Causes of high mortality at that time include car
kills, some illegal killing and possibly disease, and the population
showed evidence of inbreeding depression (cryptorchidism, high frequency of sperm defects and kinked tail). A PVA on the Florida panther
predicted that it would decline at 6%–10% per year in the wild and go
extinct in 25–40 years due to inbreeding depression and demographic
factors (Seal & Lacy 1989). Immediate extinction due to disease was a
real risk. Recommendations to save the population from extinction
were that (a) habitat be preserved, (b) a captive population be started
using about 20 founders, followed subsequently by reintroductions,
and (c) a male be transferred to an area that contained only females.
Genetic research into the sub-population structure of the Florida population and its relationship to the rest of the species plus continuous
monitoring and management of the wild population was also recommended.
Subsequently, genetic analyses revealed extremely low levels of
genetic diversity in Florida panther compared to other panthers/
cougars. Further, a portion of the population was found to have hybridized with a South American sub-species (O’Brien et al. 1990).
Subsequent genetic workshops resulted in a decision to augment this
population with individuals from the Texas sub-species to overcome
inbreeding depression (Hedrick 1995b). Eight females from Texas were
introduced into the Florida panther population in 1995. Thirty-six
intercross animals are known to have been produced, and 25 of these
may still be surviving (Land & Lacy 2000). Current representation of
Texas puma genes is 15%–29%. The F1 hybrid kittens do not have cowlicks, or kinked tails and they appear more robust than ‘pure’ Florida
panthers (Box 16.1). A subsequent PVA in 1999 concluded that the
Florida panther no longer had a high risk of extinction (Maehr et al.
2001). Mortality rates due to collisions with cars were now lower, as culverts had been inserted under roads. Further, more extensive life history
data indicated less threat than initial data.
Lord Howe Island woodhen
The Lord Howe Island woodhen population on the island of Lord Howe
off the east coast of Australia declined to 20–30 individuals in the 1970s,
because of combined impacts of past human exploitation and especially
from predation and habitat destruction by introduced pigs. The
woodhen recovered following extermination of pigs and a captive
breeding and reintroduction program where 86 captive bred individuals were released over four years (Chapter 18). A retrospective analysis of

RECOVERING THREATENED POPULATIONS

the Lord Howe Island woodhen recovery program indicated that both
control of pigs and captive breeding and release were necessary to
recover the population (B. W. Brook & R. Frankham unpublished data).
Extinction probabilities over 100 years were 100% for no management,
44% for pig control alone, 99% for captive breeding of four years duration alone and 2% for the combination of pig control and captive breeding (the program actually implemented). The problem with pig control
alone was that while it removed the main threatening process, it did not
ensure that the population reached numbers high enough to avoid
extinction from stochastic factors.
The woodhen now has a relatively stable population of about 200 on
the island, and it has been downgraded from endangered to vulnerable
and routine monitoring terminated. However, a prospective PVA on the
woodhen concluded that the population is acutely sensitive to minor
changes in mortality and fecundity, and to catastrophes due to exotic
species, inbreeding or disease (Brook et al. 1997a). The establishment of
a second, remote population on another island was recommended to
minimize these risks, but this has not been implemented.
Chinook salmon
Chinook salmon in Oregon, USA have declined dramatically since early
this century, due primarily to habitat degradation associated with siltation from road building and forestry. Ratner et al. (1997) conducted a
PVA on the spring chinook population in the South Umpqua River that
currently averages fewer than 300 spawners per year. Projected extinction risks over 100 and 200 years were very low, assuming no further
habitat degradation. However, this conclusion was highly sensitive to
uncertainty about density dependence. The projected extinction risk
was 100% assuming continuing habitat degradation at a rate similar to
that in the past.
Furbish’s lousewort
This endangered herbaceous perennial plant was once thought to be
extinct, but about 5000 individuals exist in 28 colonies along a 230-km
stretch of a single river in Maine and New Brunswick in northeastern
North America. The species is limited to periodically disturbed, northfacing riverbanks. It is an early successional hemiparasite that cannot
invade disturbed riverbanks for at least three years, but is later crowded
out by taller competitors, leading to regular rounds of colonization
and population extinction. Thus, the species exists as a metapopulation. A PVA demonstrated that individual populations had 87% probabilities of extinction within 100 years, so that the survival of the
species is critically dependent on the balance between colonization
and extinction (Menges 1990). As extinctions currently exceed colonization, the long-term viability of this species is tenuous. Further, the
long-term ability of the population to adapt is questionable as four populations of the species lack genetic diversity at 22 allozyme loci (Waller
et al. 1987).

519

520

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Matchstick banksia
The vulnerable matchstick banksia is a large shrub native to the
southwestern part of Western Australia. There are about 340 plants
conﬁned to seven populations over a range of 60 km. The important
factors affecting the dynamics of this species are variation in rainfall,
the frequency of prescribed (controlled) ﬁres and wildﬁres. Burgman
& Lamont (1992) carried out a PVA incorporating demographic, environmental and genetic factors. Management options to maximize
population size and to minimize the risk of extinction are different.
The mean size is increased by a moderate frequency of prescribed ﬁres
at intervals of 11–25 years. However, this results in a risk of extinction
of about 50% over 50 years, as intensive ﬁres can destroy populations.
The risk of extinction is minimized if the frequency of ﬁres is kept as
low as possible. However, this leads to a substantial decline in population size as recruitment occurs mainly after ﬁres when the canopystored seed is released and existing plants are killed. If rainfall
declines over the next 50 years due, say, to global climate change, the
species has a low probability of persistence, even in the absence of prescribed ﬁres. The only way to ensure a reasonable chance of persistence of the species is to intervene by watering seedlings whenever
there is severe drought following a ﬁre. Inbreeding depression has
limited impact on this species over 50 years as it is long-lived (a mean
generation time of 23 years). Predicted mean population sizes after 50
years were 171 without inbreeding depression and 161 with its effects
included.

How useful are the predictions of PVA?

The PVA process may be more important to
conservation than the PVA output
PVA often has its greatest value as
a heuristic tool to assist planning
for the recovery of threatened
species, to allow iterative planning,
to determine sensitivities and to
compare recovery options, rather
than in providing accurate
predictions of extinction risk

A major beneﬁt of PVA is that it
typically involves meetings of all
the experts on a species so that
deﬁciencies in knowledge are
identiﬁed and co-operation in
recovery efforts is encouraged

The most important contributions of risk assessments using PVA do not
necessarily come from the quantitative assessments of extinction risk
themselves. Rather, the process of conducting a PVA involves:
• Summarizing information about the life history of the species
• Identifying all the threatening processes impacting upon it
• Assessing their likely importance
• Identifying potential recovery strategies and evaluating their relative impacts.
Thus, considerable beneﬁts may be gained by the PVA process, even if
the quantitative predictions are not particularly accurate. PVA provides a transparent planning process that should have internal consistency. Further, the recovery process can operate in an iterative manner.
PVA projections can be updated as more information on the species is
gathered.
A PVA is best conducted in a workshop environment, involving all
the experts on a given threatened species. This approach is typically

HOW USEFUL ARE THE PREDICTIONS OF PVA?

used by the CBSG. This process is highly beneﬁcial as it focuses attention
on what is, and is not, known about the species. Deﬁciencies in knowledge about the species are identiﬁed, often leading to the formulation
of research proposals to remedy the deﬁciencies. Unpublished results
and expert knowledge may become available for inclusion in the PVA.
Endangered species conservation often involves individuals or groups
with strongly divergent views and agencies with competing interests.
Warring parties can be ‘encouraged’ to co-operate at workshops.
Further, the PVA process increases the probability that funds for recovery programs or research will be made available.

How accurate are the predictions of PVA?
PVA packages are complex models akin to climate or economic models.
Like those models, feedback is required between conception of the
models, writing software and evaluation against real data, for improvement in predictive accuracy to occur. As PVA is a relatively new tool, its
predictive powers have received only very limited evaluation, based on
retrospective analyses utilizing well-studied species. The predictive
accuracy of PVA is extremely important as serious inaccuracies may lead
to inappropriate listing of species when they are not endangered, not
listing truly endangered species, or inappropriate recovery options that
impede rather than enhance recovery. Wide-ranging scepticism exists
about the accuracy of PVA predictions, based on questions about insufﬁcient data, ignoring threatening factors, adequacy of models, lack of
empirical tests of predictive powers, etc. (see Caughley & Gunn 1996;
Ludwig 1999). Further, evidence from PVA has been rejected in law
courts (Talbot 1994).
The predictive accuracy of PVA was evaluated in a retrospective
study involving 21 species with records extending over at least 10 years.
Models were parameterized using data from the ﬁrst half of the
records and used to predict the second half for which the real-world
trajectory was known (Brook et al. 2000). Overall, the predictive accuracy was surprisingly good. Predicted probabilities of population
decline (quasi-extinction risk) closely matched observed values (Fig.
20.10) and there were no signiﬁcant biases. In general, predicted population size did not differ from those actually observed. Further, predictions from different software packages were highly correlated with
each other and with predictions from simple stochastic r-models. A
subsequent study of the predictive accuracy of stochastic r-models,
based on retrospective studies on 195 populations, indicated that they
had good predictive accuracy. Further, accuracy was consistently good
for mammals, birds, reptiles, invertebrates and plants (B. Brook et al.,
unpublished data).
The above PVA evaluation tested the average predictions over 21 populations. Since the fate of populations has large stochastic elements,
predictions for individual populations may be quite uncertain. This

An evaluation of the predictive
accuracy of PVA indicates that it
provides reliable average
predictions of the future fate of
populations, but that predictions
for individual populations may be
uncertain

521

522

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Fig. 20.10 Predictive accuracy of ﬁve PVA software packages (Brook et al. 2000). (a)
Plot of predicted versus observed risks of population size decline in retrospective studies
on 21 well-studied species. Data from the ﬁrst half of each study were used to predict
numbers in the second half. A perfect ﬁt to reality lies on the 45° line. Predictive accuracy
was surprisingly good. (b) Differences between projected and observed population size
show no signiﬁcant directional bias.

does not mean that they are not valuable. PVA predictions should be
compared with daily weather forecasting, long-term weather forecasting and economic projections. These are all readily accepted by society,
which also recognizes their less than perfect predictive abilities.
PVA therefore appears to be suitable for the conservation purposes
for which it is being used, provided there are sufficient data. To be reliable, PVA models must adequately reﬂect important aspects of species
biology. For example, the poorest projection in the above study was for
the Soay sheep using INMAT. This package could not realistically model

LESSONS LEARNED

the over-compensatory density-dependent population cycle shown by
the sheep (Chapman et al. 2001). Subjective assessment by humans is the
main alternative to PVA, and this is notoriously inaccurate (Zeckhauser
& Viscusi 1990).

Lessons learned
Shaffer et al. (2001) have provided an excellent overview of the lessons
learned from PVA, but not acted upon: (a) the major limitation of PVA is
lack of detailed population data, (b) there is a consensus that populations of less than a few thousand individuals are of questionable viability, but recovery goals for many threatened populations are less than
this, and (c) there is no agreed and workable deﬁnition of population
viability. In the sections below, we elaborate upon these issues.

Limitations of PVA
The PVA examples we have quoted are predominantly well-studied
species with extensive data, i.e. the input parameters for PVA are reasonably accurate. This is rarely the case. For most threatened species, there
is little information on numbers, even less on age-speciﬁc mortality and
fecundity, and very rarely reliable estimates of variances for parameters.
Often the primary cause(s) of species decline are unknown (Caughley &
Gunn 1996). An accurate PVA requires sound data. However, PVAs may
still have planning value, even if they are not particularly accurate, as
we discussed above. In some cases, simple stochastic r-models can be
used to project the population’s fate. However, these do not usually lend
themselves to evaluating management options, as sensitivity analyses
are not possible.
We are surprisingly depauperate in our basic knowledge of the
biology and ecology of endangered species. Consequently, long-term
ﬁeld studies need to be developed (Shaffer et al. 2001)

A major limitation of PVA is that
there is usually limited information
available on the biology of
threatened species

What is a viable population?
A viable population is one with a high probability of surviving for a long
time. How high? How long? These are undeﬁned quantities. However,
99% or 95% survival probability is most frequently used for the former,
and time spans of 100 to 1000 years are normally considered for the
latter (Shaffer 1981; Soulé 1987). IUCN (1996) deﬁnes lower-risk populations as having greater than a 90% probability of surviving for 100 years.
Shaffer (1981) deﬁned a viable population as ‘the smallest isolated
population having a 99% chance of remaining extant for 1000 years
despite the foreseeable effects of demographic, environmental and
genetic stochasticity and natural catastrophes’. Soulé (1987) deﬁned it

There is no objective deﬁnition of
a viable population

523

524

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

as the ‘minimum conditions for the long-term persistence and adaptation of species or populations in a given place’. By this, he meant the
capacity of the group to maintain itself for the foreseeable future
(usually centuries) with an agreed probability, say 95%.
These deﬁnitions all use years as their time frames. However, genetic
concerns (inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity) accumulate over generations, rather than years. Demographic and ecological threats may
also be more closely tied to generations than to years, as the major risks
during lifetimes are typically associated with the reproductive transition from one generation to the next. PVAs on 30 species demonstrated
that population viability scales to generations, rather than to chronological time (J. O’Grady et al., unpublished data). Consequently, viable
populations would more appropriately be deﬁned in terms of persistence for a deﬁned number of generations.

Minimum viable population sizes (MVP)
There is a consensus that the size
required for a population to be
viable in the long term is at least
thousands to tens of thousands

As habitat and ﬁnancial resources are limited, it is important to determine the minimum sizes required to maintain viable populations in the
long term, and to determine their minimum habitat areas. MVP is the
minimum number required for a population or species to be viable in
the long term. PVA was originally devised to determine minimum viable
population sizes and habitat areas for grizzly bears (Shaffer 1981).
Different estimates of the size required, based on a variety of theoretical arguments and on empirical data, are given in Table 20.1. Based
on empirical evidence, Thomas (1990) suggested that 10 is far too small,
100 is usually inadequate, 1000 is adequate for species of normal variability in population sizes, while 10 000 should permit medium- to longterm persistence of birds and mammals that show strong ﬂuctuations
in population size. The required size is not universal, but depends on
details of the biology and environment of the species.
Soulé (1987) also estimated that the size of populations required to
attain a 95% expectation of persistence over several centuries would be
in the low thousands. His estimates were based both on theory and on
comparisons of population sizes of extinct and extant populations in US
National Parks. Similarly, Belovsky (1987) inferred from extinction rates
for cold-adapted mammals on mountaintops in southwestern USA over
the last 8000 years that the required sizes were related to body size; 95%
persistence for 100 years required populations of about 100000 for
mammals the size of shrews, while populations of around 400 were sufﬁcient for animals the size of elephants, with intermediate-sized
mammals lying between these values. The corresponding population
sizes required for 95% persistence for 1000 years were 1 million and
5000, respectively. Species with higher variation in population size were
predicted to require larger sizes and ones with low variation in population size needed smaller population sizes.
The importance of population size on probability of population survival is also demonstrated by the extensive data showing relationships

MINIMUM VIABLE POPULATION SIZES (MVP)

Table 20.1 Sizes required for long-term viability of populations to cope
with different threats (see Chapter 14); variation refers to the propensity for
population sizes to fluctuate.
Threat
1. Loss of genetic diversity
2. Mutational accumulation
3. Demographic stochasticity
4. Environmental stochasticity
5. Catastrophes
6. Combined empirical data
(Thomas 1990)
birds and mammals
average variation
high variation
insects
average variation
high variation

Ne

N

500–5000
1000

5000–50000
10000
10s100
1000
1000 

1000
10000
10000
100000

Source: Nunney & Campbell (1993); Thomas (1990).

between island area and number of species, indicating higher extinction rates on smaller islands (see Diamond 1984).

Minimum habitat area
In practice, the desired information for species conservation in nature
may be the minimum habitat area required for a high probability of persistence for a long time. This information allows intelligent decisions to
be made about the size of reserves and national parks. Minimum
habitat area can be estimated from minimum viable population sizes
and habitat requirements for the species. Example 20.2 illustrates the
estimation of minimum habitat area for the golden lion tamarin; a
minimum area of 24 km2 is required for the tamarins to have a 90%
chance of persistence for 100 years.

Example 20.2

Minimum habitat area for golden lion tamarins

The minimum viable population size required for a 90% probability
of persistence for 100 years in golden lion tamarins has been estimated as 175 tamarins, based on PVA analyses (J. J. O’Grady unpublished data). The minimum habitat area is estimated by multiplying
this number by the habitat requirement per tamarin. The observed
density of tamarins in Poço das Antas Biological Reserve in Brazil is
one tamarin per 13.9 hectares (Ballou et al. 1998). Thus, the minimum
habitat area (MHA) is

Minimum habitat areas for longterm population persistence can
be determined from MVP and the
habitat required per individual for
the species

525

526

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

MHAMVP habitat requirement17513.9 ha 2433 ha
24.3 km2
The two existing reserves for golden lion tamarins encompass 79 km2,
about 50% of which is forested.
(The actual goal of the golden lion tamarin program is a 98% probability of persistence for 100 years, and a larger area is required for
this; Ballou et al. 1998.)

Population sizes used to list and
de-list threatened species are
usually less than those
recommended above

From the above it is clear that populations must have sizes at least in the
order of a few thousand to be viable in the long term. Both the population size at the time species are recognized as threatened (listed), and
the recovery targets under the USA Endangered Species Act are typically
too small (Shaffer et al. 2001). The median size at listing is about 1000
individuals for animals and 100 for plants. Further, the median population size for a taxon to be considered recovered was about 1550.
A worrying implication of these numbers is that even the largest
reserves (apart from the Arctic and Antarctic) are too small to maintain
adequate population sizes for long-term survival of large herbivores and
especially large carnivores (Shaffer 1987).
While major advances have been made in the science underlying
conservation of threatened species, it is not always matched by appropriate action.

Summary
1. Wild populations face threats both from deterministic factors
(habitat loss, over-exploitation, pollution and introduced species), and
stochastic threats associated with small population size.
2. Small populations face threats due to demographic stochasticity,
environmental stochasticity, catastrophes and genetic stochasticity.
Genetic stochasticity encompasses inbreeding depression, loss of
genetic variation and the accumulation of new deleterious mutations.
3. Extinction risk can be predicted using population viability analysis. Typically values of reproductive and survival parameters, population size, carrying capacity, along with information on environment
and its variation, inbreeding depression, habitat quality and loss, etc.,
are input to computer packages and stochastic projections made.
4. Population viability analysis is widely used as a management
tool to compare different options to recover a species.
5. Recovery of small threatened populations involves reversing
both the original cause of decline and addressing stochastic threats.
FURTHER READING

Beissinger & McCullough (2001) Population Viability Analysis. Proceedings of a
conference on PVA. See especially papers by Mills & Lindberg, Ralls et al., and
Shaffer et al.

PRACTICAL EXERCISES

Ecological Bulletin (2000) Special Issue on PVA. See especially papers by Akçakaya
& Sjögren-Gulve, Akçakaya, and Lacy.
Ferson & Burgman (2000) Quantitative Methods in Conservation Biology. A collection of reviews, many on risk assessment in conservation biology.
Soulé (1987) Viable Populations for Conservation. A comprehensive collection of
papers covering all major issues related to the viability of small populations.
Wilcove (1994) The Condor’s Shadow. An enjoyable and informative book written
for a popular audience on the decline and recovery of wildlife in America.
PROBLEMS

20.1 Computing r and its variance: For a second population of Bay
checkerspot butterﬂies (data from Foley 1994), determine for each generation transition λ and r, and so calculate the mean r and the variance of r.

Year

N

Year

N

Year

N

1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969

70
350
750
750
1400
2000
1750
900
576
871

1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979

820
235
1149
370
177
317
1001
190
341
135

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986

125
316
109
122
31
48
18

20.2 Management for recovery of endangered species: What action
would you suggest to recover the northern hairy-nosed wombat (see
Boxes 10.3 and 19.2)?
20.3 Management for recovery of endangered species: What action
would you suggest to recover a species of endangered Partula snail
from Tahiti? It is being predated by an introduced carnivorous snail.
20.4 Management for recovery of endangered species: What action
would you take to recover the Sumatran tiger? All tigers are threatened by habitat loss and harvesting for the Asian medicinal market.
The Sumatran tiger has six isolated populations in reserves, plus a few
other populations.
PR ACTIC AL EXERCISES:

POPUL ATION

VIABILIT Y ANALYSES

Population viability analyses can be carried out on any threatened
species where you can ﬁnd adequate data. The following are suggestions. The VORTEX PVA package can be downloaded from the web free of
charge at:
http://www2.netcom.com/~rlacy/vortex.html
(Note: Input ﬁles for VORTEX have changed slightly with versions.)
1. Stochastic r-model: For the population of bay checkerspot butterﬂies described in Problem 20.1, use the mean r and variance of r to
project the population forward for 50 years using r-model software.

527

528

POPULATION VIABILITY ANALYSIS (PVA)

Run 50 replicates to evaluate the variance in outcomes. Begin runs
with the average population size. Further, options that can be tried are
(a) vary the starting population size and examine the extinction probability, (b) examine the fate of populations with positive, zero and negative r values, and (c) evaluate the effects of increasing and decreasing
the variance of r.
2. Comparing management options using PVA: For the Lord Howe
Island woodhen, compare the following options for recovery of the
population when it was at a size of 20. (a) No action, (b) pig control
alone (increase the carrying capacity from 20 to 200), and (c) captive
breeding program with three pairs of founders (supplement the population with 30 individuals in each of years 1, 2 and 3), and (d) captive
breeding plus pig control. Compare the probabilities of persistence
with these scenarios. Information for input ﬁles is given in Brook et al.
(1997b).

Take home messages from this
book

1. The biological diversity of the planet is being rapidly depleted
due to direct and indirect consequences of human activities (habitat
destruction and fragmentation, over-exploitation, pollution and
movement of species into new locations).
2. The major genetic concerns in conservation biology are inbreeding depression, loss of genetic diversity, genetic drift overriding
natural selection, population fragmentation, genetic adaptation to
captivity and taxonomic uncertainties.
3. Inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity are inevitable in all small
closed populations.
4. Inbreeding has deleterious effects on reproduction and survival
(inbreeding depression) in almost every species that has been adequately investigated.
5. Loss of genetic diversity reduces the ability of populations to
adapt in response to environmental change (evolutionary potential).
Quantitative genetic variation for reproductive ﬁtness is the primary
component of genetic diversity involved in adaptive changes.
6. Genetic factors generally contribute to extinction risk, sometimes having major impacts on persistence.
7. Ignoring genetic issues in the management of threatened species
will often lead to sub-optimal management and in some cases to disastrous decisions.
8. The objective of genetic management is to preserve threatened
species as dynamic entities capable of adapting to environmental
change.
9. The ﬁrst step in genetic management of a threatened species is to
resolve any taxonomic uncertainties and to delineate any management units within species. Studies using genetic markers can typically
aid in resolving these issues.
10. Genetic management of wild populations is in its infancy and is
not generally adequate or optimal to ensure long-term viability
(largely because genetic issues are often ignored).
11. The greatest unmet challenge in conservation genetics is to
manage fragmented populations to minimize inbreeding depression
and loss of genetic diversity. Translocations among isolated fragments

530

TAKE HOME MESSAGES FROM THIS BOOK

or creation of corridors for migration are required to minimize extinction risks, but they are being implemented in very few cases. Concerns
about possible outbreeding depression (often exaggerated) have discouraged translocations to address the impacts of population fragmentation.
12. Captive breeding provides a means for conserving species that
are incapable of surviving in their natural habitats. Captive populations of threatened species are typically managed to retain 90% of
their genetic diversity for 100 years, using minimization of kinship.
13. Genetic deterioration in captivity resulting from inbreeding
depression, loss of genetic diversity and genetic adaptation to captivity, reduces the probability of successfully reintroducing species to the
wild.
14. Population sizes of Ne much greater than 50 (N500) are
required to avoid inbreeding depression and Ne 500–5000
(N5000–50000) are required to retain evolutionary potential. Many
wild and captive populations are too small to avoid inbreeding depression and loss of genetic diversity in the medium term.
15. Molecular genetic analyses contribute to conservation by aiding
detection of illegal hunting and trade, and by providing essential
information on unknown aspects of species biology.
16. Genetic factors represent only one component of extinction
risk. Wild populations face threats from both deterministic factors
(habitat loss, over-exploitation, introduced species and pollution) that
contribute to population declines, and stochastic factors (demographic and environmental stochasticity, catastrophes and genetic
stochasticity) that become increasingly important in small populations. Genetic factors typically interact with other factors.
17. The combined impacts of all ‘non-genetic’ and genetic threats
faced by populations can be assessed using population viability analysis (PVA). PVA is also used to evaluate alternative management options
to recover threatened species.
We trust that you have found this book informative, thought-provoking
and interesting and that it will assist in your future conservation activities. The Earth’s biodiversity is being lost at a frightening rate, and we
must act now to conserve our life support system. We encourage you to
participate in this wide-ranging activity, as an enormous task lies
ahead.

Revision problems
1R.1 IUCN categories: In what category would you place the Lord
Howe Island woodhen? It has a stable population of about 200
and is restricted to Lord Howe Island (about 25 km2).
1R.2 Allele frequencies: What are the Hardy–Weinberg expected
genotype frequencies at a locus with three alleles A, B and C at
frequencies of 0.1, 0.3 and 0.6?
AA

AB

BB

AC BC CC

Total

1R.3 Linkage disequilibrium: Is the population with the following
gametic frequencies in linkage equilibrium?
A1B1 A1B2

A 2 B1

A 2 B2

0.1

0.2

0.1

0.6

1R.4 Heritability: What is the heritability of shell breadth in the
snail Arianta arbustorum given the following data on 119 pairs of
parents and their offspring (after Hartl & Clarke 1997)?

Number of families

Mean of parents (mm)

Offspring mean (mm)

22
31
48
11
4
3

16.25
18.75
21.25
23.75
26.25
28.75

17.73
19.15
20.73
22.84
23.75
25.42

1R.5 (The covariance between mid-parent and offspring is 5.183, and
the variances for offspring and mid-parents are 3.311 and 8.180.)
1R.5 Mutation–selection equilibrium: What is the expected equilibrium frequency for the dominant D allele with a mutation rate
of 4106 and the following relative ﬁtnesses?
DD

Dd dd

0.8

0.8 1.0

1R.6 Time taken to regenerate genetic diversity by mutation: How
many generations would it take for a microsatellite allele that
had been lost from euros on Barrow Island, Western Australia to
regenerate its previous frequency of 0.25, given a mutation rate
of 104 per gamete per generation?
1R.7 Heterozygote advantage: What is the equilibrium frequency for
the A allele, given the following survival values for the three
genotypes (all genotypes have the same fertility)?
AA Aa

aa

0.8 0.85 0.83

532

REVISION PROBLEMS

1R.8 Loss of genetic diversity in small populations: How much of the
original heterozygosity would have been retained over 150 years
in an outbreeding population of Diprotodon (extinct, cow-sized
marsupial) with an effective size of 20 and a generation length
of 15 years?
1R.9 Effective population size: What is the effective size of an insect
population that ﬂuctuates in size over three generations
100 000, 10 and 1000?
R.10 Inbreeding: What is the inbreeding coefﬁcient for individual X
in the pedigree in the margin?
R.11 Genetics of fragmented populations: What is FST?
R.12 Genetic distance: What is the genetic distance between a mainland and an island population with the following allele frequencies?

A1
Mainland population
Island population

A2

A3

0.2 0.3 0.5
0
0
1.0

R.13 Taxonomic uncertainties: Would you classify the two populations in Problem R.12 as separate species? Why?
R.14 Genetic management: How do you go about genetically managing a clonally reproducing plant species?
R.15 Genetic management: How are captive populations of threatened species managed using mean kinship?
R.16 Genetic management: How large should a captive population be
for the endangered okapi to maintain 90% of heterozygosity for
100 years, if the generation length is 8 years?

Glossary
Additive: Locus where the heterozygote has a mean phenotype exactly
intermediate between the two homozygotes. For example, if the mean
enzyme levels for the genotypes FF FS and SS at the Adh locus are 100, 90 and
80 units of activity, then the locus is showing additive gene action. Also
referred to as additivity.
Additive variance: That proportion of the genetic variation for a quantitative
character due to variation in the average effects of alleles.
Allele: An alternative form of a gene locus, e.g. wild-type versus mutant, Fast
versus Slow electrophoretic mobility, copies of a microsatellite locus with
different numbers of repeats of the AC sequence.
Allelic diversity: A measure of genetic diversity within a population,
computed as the average number of alleles per locus. For example, if the
number of alleles at 6 loci are 1, 2, 3, 2, 1 and 1, then allelic diversity
(1 23 2 1 1) / 61.67.
Allopatric: Populations, or species, whose geographical distributions do not
overlap.
Allopolyploid: A species whose chromosomal complement derives from two
(or more) separate species (compare autopolyploid), e.g. tobacco with 48
chromosomes is an allotetraploid derived from two diploid species, each
with 24 chromosomes. Many plant species have evolved in this manner. A
form of instantaneous speciation.
Allozygote: An individual that is homozygous for two alleles that are not
recent copies of the same allele, i.e. not identical by descent. For example,
the alleles may have the same electrophoretic mobility (or number of
microsatellite repeats), but differ in DNA base sequence.
Allozymes: Alternative forms of a protein detected by electrophoresis that are
due to alternative alleles at a single locus. Often referred to as isozymes.
Amino acid: The building blocks of a protein.
Amphidiploid: An allopolyploid species that shows chromosomal segregation
as if it were a diploid, e.g. bread wheat has 42 chromosomes (an
allohexaploid), but produces gametes with 21 chromosomes.
Ampliﬁed DNA: Many duplicated copies of a segment of DNA.
Associative overdominance: Heterozygote advantage due to linked loci that
are exhibiting linkage disequilibrium. Heterozygote advantage due to a
locus itself is referred to as intrinsic overdominance.
Assortive (assortative) mating: Preferential mating of individuals with similar
phenotypes, e.g. by height.
Autopolyploid: A species derived by combining the two or more sets of
chromosomes from the same species (compare allopolyploid).
Autoradiography: Detection of radioactively labelled molecules by their
effects in exposing photographic ﬁlm in the dark.
Autozygote: An individual that is homozygous for two alleles that are recent
copies of the same allele and have identical (or near identical) DNA
sequences. Having alleles that are identical by descent.
Average heterozygosity: A measure of genetic diversity within a population.
Computed as the sum of proportion heterozygous at all loci / total number of
loci sampled. For example, if the heterozygosities at 5 loci are 0, 0.10, 0.20,
0.05 and 0, then average heterozygosity(00.10 0.200.050) / 50.07.
Backcross: The cross of ﬁrst generation progeny to one of the parent
populations, or genotypes used to generate the F1 progeny.

534

GLOSSARY

Balancing selection: Selection that maintains genetic variation in a
population, encompassing heterozygote advantage (overdominance),
frequency-dependent selection favouring rare genotypes, and forms of
selection that vary over space or time in a way that favours some genotypes
in some patch or season and others in other patches or seasons.
Binomial distribution: The distribution describing the number of occurrences
of two (or more) events in a sample of size n, e.g. the number of heads and
tails in 50 tosses of a coin.
Biodiversity: Biological diversity; the variety of ecosystems, species and
populations within species and genetic variation within living organisms.
Biparental inbreeding: Inbreeding due to mating of relatives more remote
than self (full-sibs, half-sibs, cousins, etc.).
Bottleneck: A sudden restriction in population size, used variously to refer to a
population size bottleneck of one or a few generations, or to one of much
longer duration.
Catastrophe: An extreme environmental ﬂuctuation, due to a cyclone,
drought, extremely cold winter, disease epidemic, etc. that has a devastating
impact on a population.
CBSG: Conservation Breeding Specialist Group of the Species Survival
Commission of IUCN.
Chloroplast DNA (cpDNA): Circular DNA molecules found in the chloroplasts
of plants. They are usually maternally inherited.
Clade: A sub-group of organisms from among a larger group sharing common
ancestry, not shared by the other organisms in the larger group.
Cline: Change in genetic composition of a population over a region of habitat,
such as a latitudinal cline, or an altitudinal cline. For example, the
frequency of alleles at the Adh locus in Drosophila melanogaster changes with
latitude in both Australia and North America, while the frequency of
glaucous leaves in several species of eucalypts changes with altitude in
several mountains in the State of Tasmania in Australia. Clines may be due
either to historical events (e.g. B blood group cline in humans) or to the
balance between differential natural selection in different regions and
migration between them.
Clone: Individuals with identical genotypes, e.g. cuttings deriving from a
single plant, or several individual animals derived from a single animal by
nuclear transplantation.
Coalesce: If two DNA sequence lineages converge at a common ancestral
sequence, they are said to coalesce.
Coalescent theory: Investigations of the mathematical and statistical
properties of genealogies (gene trees).
Coancestry: The coancestry to two individuals is the probability that two
alleles, one from each individual, are identical by descent. Synonymous with
kinship.
Coefﬁcient of linkage disequilibrium (D): A measure of the non-random
association of alleles at different loci. If the gametic types and frequencies
are as follows:

A1B1 A1B2 A2B1 A2B2
r
s
t
u
then D ru st.
Co-dominance: The condition where the heterozygotes are distinguishable
from homozygotes. For example, electrophoretically separated alleles at the
Adh locus show a single band of fast mobility for the FF genotype, a single
slow mobility band for the SS genotype, and a double-banded phenotype for

GLOSSARY

the FS heterozygote (with one band corresponding to that in FF and another
to that in SS).
Common ancestor: An individual that is an ancestor of both the mother and
the father of a particular individual.
Conspeciﬁc: Belonging to the same species.
Convergent evolution: Evolution of similar phenotypes in distinct species
subjected to similar environmental conditions, e.g. similar adaptations to
marine environments in ﬁsh, marine mammals and reptiles.
cpDNA: See chloroplast DNA.
Critically endangered: A species with a very high probability of extinction
within a short time, deﬁned by IUCN as a 50% probability of extinction
within 10 years, or three generations, whichever is longer.
Demographic stochasticity: Fluctuations in birth and death rates and sexratio due to chance alone. These may drive a small population to extinction
through the chance ﬂuctuations in very small populations. For example, the
last 6 dusky seaside sparrows were, by chance, males.
Dioecious: Having separate sexes, especially applied to plants.
Directional selection: Selection in which the most extreme high (or low)
individuals from a population are chosen as parents of the next generation.
For example, animal breeders choose the most rapidly growing broiler
chickens each generation, while swine are often selected for lowered fatness.
Reproductive ﬁtness is subjected to directional natural selection.
Disruptive selection: Selection of varying direction in different niches within
the range of a species. For example, selection favoured melanic peppered
moths in polluted areas of Britain, but non-melanic peppered forms in nonpolluted areas.
DNA ﬁngerprint: The ‘bar code’ produced by probing for minisatellites on the
DNA of an individual. Also called variable number tandem repeats (VNTR).
Dominance: Deviation of heterozygote phenotype from the mean of
homozygotes at a locus, say in the direction of the wild-type homozygote
compared to the mutant homozygote.
Dominance variance: That proportion of the quantitative genetic variation for
a character due to the deviation of heterozygotes from the average effects of
the two homozygotes.
Ecosystem services: Essential functions supplied free of charge by living
organisms, including oxygen production from green plants, nutrient
recycling, pest control and pollination of crop plants.
Ecotype: Populations within a plant species that are genetically adapted to
different ecological conditions, often of soil and climate.
Effective number of alleles (ne): The number of alleles that if equally frequent
would result in the observed homozygosity. Computed as ne 1/兺pi2, where
pi is the frequency of the ith allele. Less than the actual number of alleles,
unless all alleles have the same frequencies.
Effective population size (Ne): The number of individuals that would result in
the same inbreeding, or genetic drift if they behaved in the manner of an
idealized population. These are respectively, the inbreeding and drift
effective size.
Effectively neutral: The situation where the selective forces on an allele are so
weak that it behaves as if it is not subject to natural selection. Occurs when
the selection coefﬁcient is less than about 1/(2Ne), where Ne is the effective
population size.
Electrophoresis: A method for separating proteins or DNA fragments in a gel
according to their net charges, shape and size.
Endangered: A species or population with a high probability of extinction

535

536

GLOSSARY

within a short time, deﬁned by IUCN as a 20% probability of extinction
within 20 years, or 10 generations, whichever is longer.
Endemic: A population or species found in only one region or country; native
to a region.
Environmental stochasticity: Natural ﬂuctuations in environmental
conditions, such as rainfall, food supply, competitors, winter temperatures,
etc. These may drive a small population to extinction through chance
ﬂuctuations.
Epistasis: Interactions among gene loci in their effects on phenotype.
Epistatic variance: That proportion of the quantitative genetic variation due
to the deviation of genotypic effects from the average effects of the
constituent loci. Synonymous with Interaction variance.
ESU: See Evolutionarily signiﬁcant unit.
Evolution: Change in the genetic composition of a population.
Evolutionary potential: The ability of a population to evolve to cope with
environmental changes, such as those due to climate change or changed
disease organisms. Usually equated with genetic diversity, as this is required
for evolution to occur.
Evolutionarily signiﬁcant units (ESU): Partially genetically differentiated
populations that are considered to require management as separate units.
ESUs have recently been deﬁned as reciprocally monophyletic for mtDNA
alleles and also signiﬁcantly different in frequencies at nuclear loci.
Exon: Region of a functional locus that is transcribed and translated, e.g. that
speciﬁes amino acids in a protein.
Expected heterozygosity (He): The heterozygosity expected for a random
mating population with the given allele frequencies according to the
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium. Calculated as 2pq for loci with two alleles, and
1 兺pi2 for loci with any number of alleles. For example, if the allelic
frequencies at a locus are 0.2 and 0.8, the expected heterozygosity is 20.2
0.80.32.
Ex situ: Away from its normal habitat, such as an endangered species being
conserved in captivity, an endangered plant being preserved in a seed store,
or cryopreserved.
Extinction: Permanent disappearance of a population or species.
Extinction vortex: The likely interaction between human impacts, inbreeding,
and demographic ﬂuctuation in a downward spiral towards extinction.
Typically habitat loss, introduced species and over-exploitation reduce the
numbers of a species to where demographic instability and inbreeding lead
to further declines in numbers that feedback into further declines towards
extinction.
F: Wright’s inbreeding coefﬁcient. Fixation index.
FIS: That proportion of the total inbreeding within a population due to
inbreeding within sub-populations.
FIT: The total inbreeding in a population, due to both inbreeding within subpopulations, and differentiation among sub-populations.
Fitness: Reproductive ﬁtness, the number of fertile offspring surviving to
reproductive age contributed by an individual.
Fixation: All individuals in a population being identically homozygous for a
locus, e.g. all A1A1.
Fixation index: FST.
Forensics: Application of science to the law, including detection of illegal
activities by scientiﬁc means. For example, DNA-based methods are being
developed to test for tiger material in Asian medicines following PCR
ampliﬁcation.

GLOSSARY

Founder effect: Change in the genetic composition of a population due to
origin from a small sample of individuals. A single generation bottleneck.
Founder effects usually result in loss of genetic diversity, extinction of
alleles, genetic drift and an increase in inbreeding.
Frequency-dependent selection: A form of natural selection where the relative
ﬁtnesses of genotypes vary with their frequencies. The form where
genotypes have highest ﬁtnesses when they are rarest retains genetic
variation in the population, and is a form of balancing selection.
F statistics: Measures of total inbreeding in a population (FIT), partitioned into
that due to inbreeding within sub-populations (FIS) and that due to
differentiation among sub-populations (FST).
FST: The proportion of the total inbreeding in a population due to
differentiation among sub-populations.
Full-sibs: Individuals sharing the same two parents. A full-sib mating is
between a brother and a sister and is the most rapid form of inbreeding
possible in species where self-mating is not possible.
Gene diversity: See Expected heterozygosity.
Gene dropping: Predicting the likely fate of alleles due to Mendelian
segregation in small populations; usually done using many replicate
computer simulations to predict the likely fate of ancestral alleles.
Gene genealogies: Trees showing the relationships between different copies of
a single locus (gene trees).
Genetic distance: A measure of the genetic difference between allele
frequencies in two populations, or species. The most commonly used form is
Nei’s genetic distance.
Genetic diversity: The extent of genetic variation in a population, or species,
or across a group of species e.g. heterozygosity, or allelic diversity, or
heritability.
Genetic drift: Changes in the genetic composition of a population due to
random sampling in small populations. Results in loss of genetic diversity,
random changes in allele frequencies, and diversiﬁcation among replicate
populations. Also referred to as random genetic drift.
Genetic load: The load of deleterious alleles in a population, some due to the
balance between deleterious mutation and selection (mutation load) and
some due to heterozygote advantage and other forms of balancing selection
(balanced load).
Genetic stochasticity: Genetic effects in small populations due to inbreeding,
loss of genetic diversity and mutational accumulation, that may drive a
population or species to extinction.
Gene trees: Phylogenetic trees showing the relationships between different
copies of a single locus (gene genealogies). The trees are usually devised on
the basis of DNA sequences (e.g. for mtDNA).
Genome resource bank: The storage of genetic material for one or more
species, including seed stores, cryopreserved gametes, embryos, or somatic
cells, or a collection of DNA samples.
Genome uniqueness: The probability that an allele chosen at random from
that individual is unique in the population (i.e. no other copies of the alleles
exist).
Genotype environment interaction: Differential performance of different
genotypes in diverse environments. For example, many plants have
populations (ecotypes) that grow and survive better in their home
environment than in other environments.
Haplotype: Allelic composition for several different loci on a chromosome, e.g.
A1B3C2.

537

538

GLOSSARY

Haplotype network: A diagram showing different haplotypes joined by lines to
show relationships, typically with a line joining each haplotype differing by
a single base in DNA sequence.
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium: The equilibrium genotype frequencies
achieved in a random mating population with no perturbing forces from
mutation, migration, selection, or chance. If two alleles A1 and A2 have
frequencies of p and q, the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium frequencies for the
A1A1, A1A2 and A2A2 genotypes are p2, 2pq and q2, respectively.
Harmonic mean: Reciprocal of the arithmetic mean of reciprocalsn / 兺(1/Xi)
The harmonic mean of effective population sizes in different generations
describes the impact of population size ﬂuctuations on the overall effective
population size.
Hemizygous: Present in one copy, as for sex-linked loci in males.
Heritability (h2): Proportion of the variation for a quantitative character due to
genetic causes. The narrow sense heritability is the proportion of the
variation due to additive genetic effects (variation in breeding value), while
the broad sense heritability is the proportion due to total genetic effects. The
heritability is speciﬁc to a particular population in a particular environment.
Hermaphrodite: An animal or plant with both sexes present in single
individuals. Found in many plants and some animals, such as snails. Also
known as monoecious.
Heterosis: Hybrid vigour. Superior performance of hybrid genotypes, usually
indicating superiority to both parental genotypes. The converse of
inbreeding depression.
Heterozygosity: The number of individuals heterozygous for a locus divided by
total number of individuals sampled.
Heterozygote: An individual with two different alleles at a locus, e.g. A1A2 .
Heterozygote advantage: A form of selection where the heterozygote has a
higher ﬁtness than the homozygotes. This results in active maintenance of
genetic variation in very large populations. Also referred to as
overdominance. One form of balancing selection.
Hitchhiking: Alleles at linked loci whose frequencies are changed due to
selection at a nearby locus.
Homozygote: An individual with two copies of the same allele at a gene locus
e.g. A1A1.
Idealized population: A conceptual random mating population with equal
numbers of hermaphrodite individuals breeding in each generation, Poisson
variation in family sizes (mean variance2). Used as a standard to which
other populations are equated when deﬁning effective population sizes.
Identical by descent: Alleles that are identical copies of an allele present in a
common ancestor.
Inbreeding: The mating of individuals related by descent, e.g. self-fertilization,
brothersister, or cousins matings.
Inbreeding coefﬁcient (F): The most commonly used measure of the extent of
inbreeding; the probability that two alleles at a locus in an individual are
identical by descent. Ranges from 0 to 1.
Inbreeding depression: Reduction in reproduction, survival, or related
characters due to inbreeding.
In situ conservation: Conservation of a species or population in its normal wild
habitat.
Interaction variance: That proportion of the quantitative genetic variation for
a quantitative character in a population due to the deviation of genotypic
effects from the average effects of the constituent loci. Synonymous with
Epistatic variance.
Introgression: Introduction of genetic material from another species or sub-

GLOSSARY

species into a population. A threat to the genetic integrity to a range of
canid, ﬁsh, plant, etc. species.
Intron: Region of a locus that is transcribed, but not translated.
Inversion: A chromosome aberration in which a region of chromosome has
been turned through 180 degrees, such that gene order is changed, say from
ABCDE to ADCBE. Results in ‘suppression’ of recombination, such that the
combinations of alleles at different loci in the inversion are selected as a
unit, rather than individually.
Isozymes: Alternative forms of a protein detected by electrophoresis. Often
used interchangeably with allozyme, but isozymes may be due to protein
differences speciﬁed by alleles at a single locus, or from different loci, while
allozymes are differences due to alleles at a single locus.
IUCN: The World Conservation Union. The initials originally stood for the
International Union for Conservation of Nature, later expanded to included
‘and Nature Reserves’, but the organization now refers to itself by the ﬁrst
mentioned name.
Kinship (kij): The kinship of two individuals is the probability that two alleles,
one from each individual, are identical by descent. Synonymous with
coancestry. Equivalent to the inbreeding coefﬁcient of an offspring of the
two individuals, if they had one.
Lethal: Inconsistent with survival, as in a recessive lethal allele that results in
death when homozygous.
Lethal equivalents (B): A measure for comparing the extent of inbreeding
depression in different populations. A group of detrimental alleles that
would cause death if homozygous, e.g. one lethal allele, two alleles each
with a 50% probability of causing death, etc. Determined as the slope of the
regression of ln (survival) on the inbreeding coefﬁcient F.
Lineage sorting: Random loss of genetic variants in different lineages deriving
from a polymorphic common ancestral species (or population). Obscures
patterns of phylogenetic relationship among populations, or species.
Linkage disequilibrium: Non-random association of alleles at different loci.
Usually measured as the coefﬁcient of linkage disequilibrium D.
Locus: A segment of DNA on a chromosome. The DNA may code for a gene
product, or have a regulatory function, or it may be the DNA deﬁned by a
molecular method, e.g. microsatellite. Often called a gene locus.
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC): A large family of loci that play an
important role in the vertebrate immune system and in ﬁghting disease.
These loci show extraordinarily high levels of genetic diversity.
Mean kinship (mk): The average kinship of an individual with all individuals in
a population, including itself. Minimizing kinship is the current
recommended method for genetically managing endangered species in
captivity.
Meta-analysis: A statistical analysis that uses the combined information from
several different studies, or several different species.
Metapopulation: A group of partially isolated populations of the same species
that undergo local extinction and recolonizations.
MHC: See major histocompatibility complex.
Microsatellite: A locus with a short tandem repeat DNA sequence, such as the
AC sequence repeated 10 times. Such repeats are found in many regions
across the genome of most species. Microsatellites typically show variable
number of repeats and high heterozygosities in populations. Consequently,
they are highly informative genetic markers.
Minimum viable population size (MVP): The minimum size of population that
will be viable in the long term, meaning a probability of extinction of say 1%
in 1000 years, or 10% for 100 years. The initial sizes were derived from genetic

539

540

GLOSSARY

considerations, but it rapidly became clear that demographic and
environmental stochasticity and catastrophes must be considered as well.
Minisatellite: A region of DNA, usually in the 10s to 100s of bases in length that
show variation in number of repeats. Also known as variable number
tandem repeats (VNTR). When several such loci are probed they result in a
DNA ﬁngerprint that looks like a bar code.
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA): The circular DNA molecule contained within
mitochondria. Usually maternally inherited.
Monomorphic: The presence of only one allele at a locus, generally taken to
mean the most common allele is at a frequency of greater than 99%, or 95%.
Lack of genetic diversity. Contrast with polymorphic.
Monophyletic: A group of species (or DNA sequences) that derive from the
same common ancestral species (or DNA sequence). Converse is
polyphyletic.
mtDNA: See Mitochondrial DNA.
Mutation: A sudden genetic change, i.e. parents lack the condition, but it
appears in one or more offspring.
Mutation load: Deleterious mutations carried in a population. Homozygosity
for such mutations is considered to be the main cause of inbreeding
depression.
Mutational meltdown: The decline in reproductive rate and downward spiral
towards extinction due to chance ﬁxation of new mildly deleterious
mutations in small populations. The process has two phases, the ﬁrst where
ﬁtness drops, but populations are still able to more than replace themselves,
and the second where the ﬁtness is less than required for replacement and
the population declines towards extinction; mutational meltdown strictly
refers to the second phase.
Mutation–selection balance: The equilibrium due to the occurrence of
deleterious mutations and the forces of natural selection removing them,
resulting in low frequencies of deleterious mutations (mutation load).
MVP: See Minimum viable population size.
Natural selection: Mortality or differential reproduction due to natural
environmental processes, as opposed to artiﬁcial selection due to human
choice.
Nei’s genetic distance (DN): The most widely used measure of the genetic
difference between allele frequencies in two populations, or species, devised
by Masatoshi Nei. Calculated as the natural logarithm of Nei’s genetic
similarity (IN).
Nei’s genetic similarity (IN): The most widely used measure of the genetic
similarity between allele frequencies in two populations, or species, devised
by Masatoshi Nei.
Neutral mutation: A mutation that is equivalent in effects on reproductive
ﬁtness to the existing allele, such that its fate is determined by chance
effects associated with population size (random genetic drift).
Non-synonymous substitution: A base substitution at a locus that results in a
change in amino acid composition of a protein speciﬁed by the locus.
Contrast with synonymous substitution.
Normal distribution: A symmetrical bell shaped distribution with a
characteristic mean and variance as shown in the margin. 95% of values lie
within 1.96 standard deviations of the mean. Many quantitative characters
show approximately normal distributions. Also referred to as a Gaussian
distribution.
Observed heterozygosity: The actual level of heterozygosity measured in a
population, i.e. if there are two alleles at a locus, F and S, and a sample of

GLOSSARY

individuals contain 60 FF, 30 FS and 10 SS, the observed heterozygosity is
30%. It is typically averaged across several loci, say 20–50 allozyme loci.
Compare with expected heterozygosity.
Outbred: An individual whose parents are unrelated.
Outbreeding: Not inbreeding. A population that is not undergoing deliberate
inbreeding. Approximately random mating.
Outbreeding depression: A reduction in reproductive ﬁtness due to crossing
of two populations (or sub-species, or species). The importance of
outbreeding depression is a matter of controversy.
Overdominance: Heterozygote advantage; a form of selection where
heterozygotes have a higher ﬁtness than homozygotes, as found for sickle
cell anaemia in malarial areas. This results in active maintenance of genetic
variation in very large populations. A form of balancing selection.
Panmictic: Random mating.
Partial dominance: The condition where the heterozygote has a phenotype
closer to one homozygote than the other, i.e. not completely dominant,
additive, or completely recessive. For example, heterozygotes for most
deleterious alleles are nearly, but not completely normal.
PCR: See polymerase chain reaction.
Pedigree: A chart specifying lines of descent and relationship of individuals.
Percentage of loci polymorphic (P): A measure of genetic diversity within a
population, computed as (number of polymorphic loci / total number of loci
sampled) 100. For example if three loci are polymorphic, and seven are
monomorphic,

P (3/10) 100 30%
Peripheral character: A character with limited relationship to reproductive
ﬁtness, e.g. bristle number in fruit ﬂies, or tail length in rodents.
Phylogeography: The ﬁeld of study concerned with the geographical
distribution of genealogical lineages, especially within species. Typically
DNA sequence trees are related to geographic origins of haplotypes.
Pleiotropy: The condition where an allele at a locus affects more than one
character. For example, the hal allele in pigs results in sensitivity to
halothane anaesthetic in homozygotes, as well as increased muscling,
poorer meat quality and an increased risk of mortality when stressed.
Poisson distribution: A statistical distribution with variance equal to the
mean. Used to predict the number of occurrences of rare events, such as the
number of individuals carrying 0, 1, 2, etc. new mutations, or the
distribution of families of sizes 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . assumed to occur in the
idealized population. The probability of x occurrencesmx em/ x!, where m
is the mean and x takes the values 0, 1, 2, . . . . Similar to a binomial distribution when n is large and p (probability of an event occurring) is small.
Polyandry: A mating system in which females produce offspring from several
males.
Polygamy: A mating system in which individuals mate with more than one of
the opposite sex.
Polygene: More commonly referred to as a quantitative trait locus.
Polygyny: A mating system in which males mate with several females, e.g.
harems.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR): Method used to make replicate copies
(amplify) of speciﬁc segments of DNA. The DNA is heated, primers (short
segments of DNA ﬂanking the segment of interest) added and the
intervening DNA copied using thermostable Taq polymerase enzyme.
Usually 30–40 cycles of ampliﬁcation are performed in a thermocycler, each

541

542

GLOSSARY

consisting of separation of complementary DNA strands, annealing of
primers and extension at temperatures of 94°C, 50–60°C depending on
primer sequences, and 72°C, respectively.
Polymorphic: The presence of more than one allele at a locus, generally taken
to mean the most common allele is at a frequency of less than 99%, or 95%.
Existence of genetic diversity. Compare monomorphic.
Polyphyletic: A group of species (or DNA sequences) that derives from more
than one ancestral species (or DNA sequence).
Population viability analysis (PVA): The process of predicting the fate of a
population (including risk of extinction) due to the combined effects of all
deterministic and stochastic threats faced by that population. Typically
population size and structure, means and standard deviation of birth and
death rates, plus risks and severity of catastrophes, levels of inbreeding
depression, rate of habitat loss, levels of harvest, etc. are input into software
packages and many replicates over several generations projected using
Monte Carlo simulation. PVA is also used as a management tool to examine
the impacts of different management options to recover threatened species.
Primer: A short nucleotide sequence that pairs with one strand of DNA and
provides a free end at which DNA polymerase enzyme begins synthesis of a
complementary segment of DNA.
Probe: DNA from a known locus used to hybridize with other DNA via
complementary base pairing to identify similar sequences in the other DNA.
The probe is usually radioactively labelled (e.g. with 32P) so that fragments of
DNA showing homology are detected using autoradiography.
Pseudogene: A non-functional copy of a locus. It may be related to a locus that
codes for a protein, but this locus has mutations that make it nonfunctional, e.g. stop mutations part way through it.
Purging: Elimination of deleterious alleles from populations due to natural
selection, especially that associated with populations subject to inbreeding.
PVA: See Population viability analysis.
Quantitative genetic variation: Genetic variation affecting a quantitative
character, such as size, reproductive rate, behaviour or chemical
composition. Presumed to be due to the cumulative effects at many loci
(QTL). Also referred to as polygenic variation.
Quantitative trait locus (QTL): A locus affecting a quantitative character. Also
referred to as polygene, but this term is going out of use.
QTL: See Quantitative trait locus.
Random genetic drift: Changes in the genetic composition of a population
due to random sampling in small populations. Results in loss of genetic
diversity, random changes in allele frequencies, and diversiﬁcation among
replicate populations. Frequently referred to as genetic drift.
Random mating: A pattern of mating where the chances of two genotypes, or
phenotypes breeding is determined by their frequencies in the population;
e.g. if AA and aa have frequencies of P and Q, respectively, the probability of
the mating of AA femalesaa males is PQ. Also known as random breeding.
Random ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA (RAPD): Genetic diversity detected
following PCR ampliﬁcation using random primers of DNA (usually 10 or
more bases in length) to amplify random segments of DNA. Polymorphisms
are detected as presence versus absence of bands and presence/absence is
typically inherited as dominant/recessive.
RAPD: See Random ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA.
Realized heritability: The proportion of genetic variation due to additive
genetic causes, estimated as the observed response to selection divided by
the selection differential applied.

GLOSSARY

Reintroduction: Returning a species or population to part of its former range
using individuals from captive populations.
Relative ﬁtness: The ﬁtness of a genotype, compared to another genotype,
usually at the same locus; e.g. if survival rates of genotypes at a locus
conferring warfarin resistance are 30%, 80% and 54% for RR RS and SS, then
their relative ﬁtnesses are 30/800.375, 80/80 1 and 54/80 0.68,
respectively.
Reproductive ﬁtness: The number of fertile offspring surviving to
reproductive age contributed by an individual. Characters that contribute to
ﬁtness include male fertility, female fecundity, parental care, offspring
survival and offspring fertility. Often referred to as ﬁtness.
Restriction enzyme: An enzyme that cuts DNA at points determined by
speciﬁc DNA recognition sequences of various lengths, e.g. 4, 6 or 8 bases.
Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP): This is genetic diversity
detected by cutting DNA with restriction enzymes. These enzymes cut
speciﬁc 4, 6 or 8 base sequences of DNA. If the sequence is mutated from the
recognition sequence they do not cut, so the polymorphism is cut DNA
versus not-cut DNA resulting in different sized fragments of DNA from
different alleles.
RFLP: See Restriction fragment length polymorphism.
Selection coefﬁcient (s): The difference in relative ﬁtness between a genotype
at a locus and the one with the highest ﬁtness, e.g. if three genotypes A1A1,
A1A2 and A2A2 have relative ﬁtnesses of 1, 1 and 0.9, the selection coefﬁcient
for the A2A2 genotypes is s 1 0.90.1.
Selection differential (S): A measure of the intensity of selection on a
quantitative character – the difference in mean between the selected
parents and the mean of the total population from which they derived. This
takes positive or negative values according to the direction of selection.
Selective sweep: Action of natural selection driving a single allele to ﬁxation,
at the same time reducing genetic diversity at linked loci, or DNA bases
(probably neutral to selection themselves), e.g. selection acting on one or a
few bases in mtDNA resulting in ﬁxation of a single mtDNA haplotype.
Selectively neutral: An allele whose fate is determined by chance sampling in a
small population as the selective forces on it are weak in relation to the
effects of chance, deﬁned as s 1/2Ne, i.e. both strictly neutral alleles and
alleles subject to weak selection are selectively neutral in small populations.
Self-incompatibility: The inability of an individual (usually plant) to produce
offspring following attempted self-fertilization. Many plant species have
loci, typically with many alleles, that control self-incompatibility. It has
probably evolved to avoid the deleterious effects of inbreeding.
Selﬁng: Self-fertilizing.
Self-sterility: See Self-incompatibility.
Sensitivity analysis: The set of analytical and simulation-based tools that
evaluate how changes in speciﬁc life history attributes, habitat quality,
predation, etc. affect population growth or extinction risk for a species.
Typically life history attributes are varied and their relative impacts on
population growth and extinction probability are evaluated.
Sex-linked: A locus found on the sex chromosomes (X in mammals, Z in birds
and Lepidoptera), such that there is unequal transmission from the two
sexes of parents to offspring of different sexes.
Sibling species: Two or more closely related species that are morphologically
similar; e.g. the fruit ﬂy species Drosophila melanogaster and D. simulans are
essentially morphologically indistinguishable in females and can only be
distinguished by male genitalia.

543

544

GLOSSARY

Silent substitution: A DNA base substitution that does not alter the amino
acid composition of a polypeptide chain, such that it is probably not
inﬂuenced by natural selection.
Single large or several small (SLOSS): The concept that compares the
consequences of a single large population versus several small populations
of equivalent total size, especially in terms of their extinction proneness.
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP): A position in the DNA of a species at
which two or more alternative bases occur at appreciable frequency (1%).
SLOSS: See Single large or several small.
SNP: See Single nucleotide polymorphism.
Source–sink: A population structure where one population, the source, is
permanent and supplies individuals to restart one or more transient
populations (sinks).
Southern blot: Transfer of DNA from a gel to a membrane by blotting,
originally with a wad of paper towels such that liquid is drawn from the gel
through the membrane to the paper towel, with the DNA transferred at the
same time from the gel to the membrane. Named after Ed Southern who
invented the technique.
Speciation: The processes by which populations diverge and become
reproductively isolated so that they develop into different species.
Species: Mayr deﬁned species as ‘groups of actually or potentially
interbreeding natural populations which are reproductively isolated from
other such groups’ according to the biological species concept, i.e. there is
potential or actual gene ﬂow within, but not between species. Other
deﬁnitions are used but are not always amenable to genetic interpretation.
Stabilizing selection: Selection favouring phenotypic intermediates at the
expense of phenotypic extremes. Thought to occur on most quantitative
characters (apart from ﬁtness) in populations in stable environments.
Stable equilibrium: Allele frequency to which the population returns no
matter in what direction the frequency is perturbed. Occurs with
mutation–selection balance, heterozygote advantage, or other forms of
balancing selection.
Stochastic: Having a chance element. Having variable outcomes described by a
probability distribution, e.g. environmental and demographic stochasticity,
genetic drift.
Supportive breeding: Regular augmentation of a wild population with
individuals from a captive population maintained for that purpose.
Sympatric: Populations that share the same or overlapping geographical
distributions.
Synonymous substitution: A base substitution at a locus that does not result
in a change in amino acid composition of a protein speciﬁed by the locus.
Thought to be neutral, or subject to weak selection. Contrast with nonsynonymous substitutions.
Tandem repeats: Multiple copies of the same sequence lying one after another
in a series, as in microsatellite repeats, or minisatellite repeats.
Taxa: Several populations belonging to a taxonomic unit, e.g. several species,
or several sub-species, etc. Singular taxon.
Taxon: A taxonomic unit, such as a species, sub-species, genus, etc. Plural taxa.
Threatened: A population or species that has a ﬁnite risk of extinction within a
relatively short time frame, say a greater than 10% risk of extinction within
100 years. Under the IUCN system the combination of critically endangered,
endangered and vulnerable categories are threatened.
Transient polymorphism: The temporary state in which a locus is

GLOSSARY

polymorphic, as when a favourable mutation rises in frequency towards
eventual ﬁxation, or neutral alleles drift in a population.
Translocation: The movement of an individual from one location to another as
a result of human actions.
Transposons: Mobile genetic elements found in species from bacteria to
mammals. Sequences of DNA that are able to move from one chromosomal
location to another, often by replicating themselves. P elements in Drosophila
are one well-studied example. Some have very similar structures to
retroviruses, but do not exist outside the host cell. They are a major cause of
mutations in Drosophila and probably all other species. Best understood as
DNA parasites.
Trans-species polymorphism: An ancient polymorphism where related species
share similar polymorphic alleles at a locus; e.g. these exist at MHC and selfincompatibility loci and are maintained by balancing selection.
Variance: The most commonly used measure of dispersion among quantitative
measurements. The square of the standard deviation. The average of the
squared deviation from the mean, computed as
n

V

兺 (X  X)
i

i

2

/ (n 1)

where Xi is the ith observation, X is the mean, and n is the total number of
observations.
Vicariance: Separation of related populations or taxa, that previously had
more-or-less continuous range, by an environmental event, such as rise of a
mountain range, or break-up of a continent.
VNTR: Variable number tandem repeats; see DNA ﬁngerprint.
Vulnerable: A species or population with a tangible risk of extinction within a
moderate time, deﬁned by IUCN as a 10% probability within 100 years.
Wahlund effect: Reduction in heterozygosity, compared to Hardy–Weinberg
expectations, in a population split into partially isolated sub-populations.
Named after its discoverer.

545

Answers to problems

Chapter 1
11.1 1⁄4 A1A1: 1⁄2 A1A2: 1⁄4 A2A2.
11.2 1/16 A1A1B1B1: 1/8 A1A1B1B2: 1/16 A1A1B2B2: 1/8 A1A2B1B1:
1/4 A1A2B1B2: 1/8 A1A2B2B2: 1/16 A2A2B1B1: 1/8 A2A2B1B2: 1/16 A2A2B2B2.
11.3 The two loci are located on different chromosomes.
11.4 Complementary DNA ATG AAA CCC TAA
Coding DNA strand
TAC TTT GGG AT T
mRNA
AUG AAA CCC UAA
tRNA anticodon
UAC UUU GGG AUU
Amino acids
met lys pro stop
(note that the code is read from mRNA)
11.5 Expected numbers are 65 males and 65 females. χ2 6.92, df1,
probability0.0085. Since the probability is less than 0.05, this
represents a signiﬁcant deviation from the 1:1 expectation.
11.6 Possible families: 4 females: 3 females and 1 male: 2 females and
2 males: 1 female and 3 males: and 4 males, with probabilities of
1/16: 1/4: 3/8: 1/4: 1/16, respectively.
11.7 The expected numbers are 90: 30: 30: 10, χ2 7.778, df3, probability 0.051. Thus the observed numbers do not differ from
the expectations.
11.8 Mean1.556 offspring and standard deviation 1.13.
11.9 IUCN category Critically endangered under category D: number
of mature individuals 50 adults.
1.10 IUCN category Vulnerable under category A: numbers dropped
by 90% in 30 years, or about 30% in 10 years.
1.11 IUCN category Extinct.
1.12 IUCN category Endangered; a decline of 5% per year, i.e. about
50% in 10 years.

Chapter 2
2.1 Inbreeding is the production of offspring from mating of individuals that are related by descent.
2.2 Inbreeding is of conservation concern because it leads to reduced
reproductive rates and survival (inbreeding depression) in essentially all well-studied naturally outbreeding species and in many
inbreeding species as well, i.e. it increases the risk of extinction.
2.3 The association between extinction rates and population size in
bighorn sheep could be due to demographic stochasticity (ﬂuctuations), environmental stochasticity, catastrophes, inbreeding
depression, loss of genetic diversity or to combinations of these.
Spread of disease from domestic sheep (this could be termed
environmental stochasticity, or a catastrophe, depending upon
severity) and inbreeding depression were favoured by the author.

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

Chapter 3
13.1 Genetic diversity is of importance in conservation biology as it is
required for species to evolve to cope with environmental
change. Further, loss of genetic diversity is associated with
inbreeding and this reduces reproduction and survival rates.
13.2 Electrophoresis separates proteins according to their charge and
molecular weight. Some DNA base differences result in different
amino acids in proteins. Some amino acids are basic, some
neutral and some acidic, so some of the amino acid differences
result in charge differences that are detectable by electrophoresis.
13.3 Microsatellites are short tandem repeats in DNA that are often
highly variable, e.g. [AC]10 versus [AC]12.
13.4 A restriction fragment length polymorphism. A DNA base difference is detected as the presence or absence of a sequence recognized by a restriction enzyme.
13.5 Random ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA. Short synthetic DNA
primer sequences (often 10 bases in length) are used to prime
DNA ampliﬁcation. Polymorphisms are detected as the presence
or absence of fragments.
13.6 Ampliﬁed fragment length polymorphism. Genomic DNA is cut
with a restriction enzyme, speciﬁc DNA bases (adaptors) are
added and the DNA is ampliﬁed using primers that are complementary to the adaptor sequences. Polymorphism is detected as
presence or absence of DNA fragments.
13.7 A DNA ﬁngerprint is a banding pattern similar to a bar code that
is produced by cutting DNA with a restriction enzyme and
probing with a variable number repeat sequence. These repeats
are typically around 100 base pairs in length.
13.8 Microsatellites, RAPD and AFLP. Further, any locus for which
primers can be designed (including mtDNA) can be ampliﬁed
and typed by sequencing, SSCP, or by cutting with restriction
enzymes.
13.9 Evolutionary potential depends on quantitative genetic variation for reproductive ﬁtness characters.
3.10 Levels of genetic diversity for allozymes are signiﬁcantly lower
in vertebrates than in invertebrates or plants.
3.11 Endangered species on average have lower levels of genetic diversity than related non-endangered species.

Chapter 4
14.1 p0.913, q 0.087.
14.2 The Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium expected frequencies are
0.8336, 0.1589 and 0.0076, and the expected numbers (expected
frequenciestotal numbers) are 474.3, 90.4 and 4.3. χ2 0.137,
df1 (31 for total 1 for using allele frequency), so probability is 0.71. Thus, the deviation from expectations is not signiﬁcant.

547

548

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

14.3 p85 0.193, p91 0.648, p93 0.023, p95 0.136, and sum1.0.
14.4 Observed heterozygosity(13212)/440.614.
14.5 The expected frequencies of the six genotypes are as follows:

Genotypes
91/91
Expected
frequency p912

91/95

91/97

95/95

95/97

97/97

Total

2p91 p95

2p91 p97

p952

2p95 p97

p972

1

2 0.364 0.352 2 0.364 0.284 0.352 20.352 0.284 0.284 1
0.1325 0.2563
0.2068
0.1239 0.1999
0.0807 1.0001
0.364
Expected
number

5.83

Observed
number
7

2

2

2

11.28

9.10

5.45

8.80

3.55

44.01

10

8

5

11

3

44

14.5 χ2 1.185, df 6 123, probability0.76. Thus, the
observed numbers do not differ signiﬁcantly from
Hardy–Weinberg expectations.
14.6 Genotype frequencies are given by the terms of (pq)3.

Expected
frequency
14.7

FFF

FFS

FSS

SSS

Total

0.63

30.62 0.4

30.60.42

0.43

1

0.216

0.432

0.288

0.064

1

Expected frequency of AAOO mating 2f(AA)f(OO) 2
0.09 0.36 0.0648.

14.8

Number
Frequencies

MM

MN

NN

Total

406
0.274

744
0.502

332
0.224

1482
1.0

Mating

Observed

Expected numbers

MMMM
MMMN
MMNN
MNMN
MNNN
NNNN

58
202
88
190
162
41

0.2742 741
2 0.274 0.502 741
20.274 0.224 741
0.5022 741
20.502 0.224 741
0.2242 741

Total

741









55.63
203.85
90.96
186.73
166.65
37.18
741.00

14.5 χ2 0.794, df612 3, probability0.85. Thus, the
observed numbers do not differ signiﬁcantly from those
expected under random mating.

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

14.9
4.10
4.11
14.5

ne 1/(0.732 0.272) 1.65.
q2 4/1000.04, thus, q √0.04 0.20.
D ru st 0.20.10.50.20.08.
To obtain the gametic frequencies at equilibrium, we must ﬁrst
obtain the allele frequencies at the two loci. These are pA1 0.5
0.20.7, qA2 0.3, pB1 0.4, and qB2 0.6.

Equilibrium
frequency

A1B1

A1B2

A2B1

A2B2

Total

pA1pB1

pA1qB2

qA2pB1

qA2qB2

1

0.7 0.4
0.28

0.70.6
0.42

0.3 0.4
0.12

0.30.6
0.18

1
1

4.12 D20 D0 (1 c)t 0.2(1 0.05)20 0.0717.

Chapter 5
15.1 Parent mean19.971, offspring mean 19.229, parent variance
0.750, offspring variance 1.288, covariance0.608.
15.2 Regression equation is offspring shell length3.030.811
parent shell length. Thus, the heritability of shell length is
0.811.
15.3 Offspring mean 6.0, parent mean 6.0, covariance5.6/6
0.933, parental variance28/64.667, and regression
coefﬁcient 0.933/4.6670.20. Thus the heritability is 0.20.
15.4 h2 2 0.27 0.54.
15.5 A1A1 A1A2 A2A2
a
a
a
15.6 VA will increase by 10%, while the heritability will increase
by less than 10% as VA is both the numerator and present in
the denominator. VD will increase by a factor of (1.1)2, i.e. by
21%.
15.7 VA will drop by 50%, h2 will drop by less than 50% and VD will
drop by 75%.
15.8 S 8 102.
15.9 S 490 450 40 g. RS h2. Thus, R400.3514 g.
5.10 S 9.96 9.420.54 mm. Response R0.54 0.730.39 mm.

Chapter 6
6.1 Divide all % survival values by 90 to obtain the following relative
ﬁtnesses:
A2A2
6.1 A1A1 A1A2
⊥______⊥________________________⊥
1 1 hs
1 s
1
0.978
0.444
6.2 Thus, s 1 0.444 0.556 and hs1 0.978 0.022.
6.2 q1 0.127, q2 0.112 and q3 0.101.
6.3 t (1/qt) (1/q0) (1/0.001)(1/0.17) 994 generations.

549

550

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

6.4

Genotypes

Genotype frequencies
at fertilization
Relative ﬁtnesses
After selection
Adjust so total is 1

AA

Aa

aa

Total

0.09

0.42

0.49

1.0

1
0.09
0.095

1
0.42
0.442

0.9
0.441
0.464

0.951
1.001

6.5 New frequency of Ap1 [(2 0.095) 0.442] / 2 0.316
6.5 Change in frequency pp1 p0 0.3160.3000.016.
6.5

Genotypes
AA
Genotype frequencies p2
at fertilization
Relative ﬁtnesses
1
After selection
p2

Adjust so total is 1

Aa

aa

Total

2pq

q2

1.0

1 s/2
1 s
2pq(1s/2) q2(1s)

1spqsq2
1sq

p2 2pq(1  s/2) q2 (1  s)
1  sq
1  sq
1  sq

6.5 New frequency of A2 (p1)
p1 

p2  pq(1  s/2) p2  pq  1/2 spq p  1/2 spq


1  sq
1  sq
1  sq

6.5 Change in frequency
pp1 p0 


p  1/2 spq
p  1/2 spq  p(1  sq)
p
1  sq
1  sq

p  p  1/2 spq  spq 1/2 spq

1  sq
1  sq

6.6 Use equations from Table 6.2 with p0.1, q 0.9, s 0.1 and
h 0.02 / 0.10.2
6.5 (a) q– 1⁄2 spq / [1sq] – 0.50.1 0.10.9 / [1 0.10.9]
0.0090
6.5 (b) qspq2 / [1sq2] 0.10.10.92 / [10.10.92] 
0.016
6.5 (c) qsp2q / [1s(1p2)]0.10.12 0.9 / [1 0.1 (10.12)]
0.0018
6.5 (d) qspq [qh (pq) / [1 2hspqsq2]
6.5 (d) q 0.10.10.9 [0.9 0.2 (0.1 0.9)] / [1 20.20.1
0.10.90.10.92] 0.0073

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

Chapter 7
7.1 The allele will increase in frequency by up 0.9104 0.00009.
7.2 The equilibrium frequency is given by qu / (u v) 105/(105 
106) 0.909.
7.3 t 

ln p0  ln pt ln 1  ln 0.6

127 706 generations.
u
4  10 6

7.4 q̂  √u/s  √2 105/14.5103
6.5 Note that this is far lower than the observed frequency of 17%.
7.5 The mutation rate is estimated by rearranging Equation 7.4 and
substituting, as follows:
u sq2 1 0.172 0.0289
6.5 This is unrealistic as it is about 1000 times higher than typical
mutation rates. Consequently, the chondrodystrophy allele is
unlikely to be in mutation–selection equilibrium. The high frequency is probably due to the population bottleneck experienced
by the California condor (see Chapter 8) where large chance
changes in allele frequencies occurred; presumably the chondrodystrophy allele increased in frequency by chance, while many
other deleterious alleles were probably lost.
7.6
q  qmutation  qselection up  1⁄2spq /(1 sq) ⬃ up  1⁄2spq
6.5 (It is reasonable to assume that the denominator of the selection
term is approximately unity for a rare allele)
6.5 At equilibrium q up 1⁄2spq0
⬖ 1⁄2spq up
so q̂ 2u/s
7.7 The frequency of affected individuals (DDDd) is 10/94 000, so
q2 2pq 10/94000 1 p2
6.5 thus p0.999947, so q 5.3105
6.5 The relative ﬁtness is 20%, so
1 s 0.2, and s 0.8.
6.5 The mutation–selection equilibrium for an autosomal dominant
is:
q̂ u/s
6.5 Thus the mutation rate u is
u sq 0.85.3105 4.24 105
7.8 For loci with s 0.1 and u 105, the equilibrium frequencies
with different modes of inheritance are as follows:
6.5 Recessive autosomal q̂ 102
6.5 Additive autosomal
q̂ 2104
6.5 Dominant autosomal q̂ 105/0.1 104
6.5 Sex-linked recessive
q̂3104
6.5 Haploid
q̂104

551

552

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

6.5 Thus, the equilibrium frequencies are usually greater for
diploids than haploids (most mutations are recessive, or
partial recessives), and greater for recessive than for
dominants.
7.9 By rearranging Equation 7.5, we obtain:
m

q1  q0
qm  q0

6.5 The data supplied are q0 0.000 (African blacks), qm 0.422
(US Caucasians) and q1 0.045 (US African Americans).
Thus,
m

0.045  0
0.11
0.422  0

Chapter 8
8.1 Probability that A1 is absent in three offspring is the probability
of three A2A2 offspring (1⁄4)3 1/64.
8.2 The expected offspring are 1⁄4 A1A1: 1⁄4 A1A2: 1⁄4 A1A3: 1⁄4 A2A3. Thus the
probability that four individuals do not contain A1 is the probability of four A2A3 offspring (1⁄4)4 1/256. The probability that A2
is absent from the four offspring (1⁄2)4 1/16, and the probability
that A3 is absent in the four offspring is also 1/16.
8.3 The probability that an individual does not contain A2 is 0.92.
(a) Thus, the probability that 12 individuals do not contain A2 
0.924 0.080. (b) The probability that 100 individuals do not
contain A2 is 0.9200 71010. This is vastly lower than the
answer to (a), i.e. the chance of losing an allele is strongly dependent on the population size.
8.4 The probability that an offspring does not have the A1 allele is 1⁄2,
and the probability that n offspring do not have it is (1⁄2)n. To be
95% certain that the allele is retained, we set this equal to 0.05
and solve for n, i.e. (1⁄2)n 0.05, so n ln (0.05)/ln (0.5)4.3, i.e.
about ﬁve individuals. The probability that the A2 allele has a 95%
chance of being retained also requires about ﬁve offspring following the same reasoning.
8.5 Proportion of heterozygosity lost is 1/(2N), so (a) 1⁄2, (b) 0.1, (c) 0.036,
(d) 0.007, (e) 0.0000017.
8.6 The probability that an allele with a frequency of q is lost following a single generation bottleneck is (1q)2N. Thus, (a) 0.92 0.81,
(b) 0.656, (c) 2.66 105, (d) 0.077.

Chapter 9
9.1 He 4Neu / (4Neu 1)4 20 107 / (420 107 1)0.000008
ne 4Neu 11.000008
9.2 pA 0.802 and qs 0.198, respectively. The observed and
Hardy–Weinberg expected numbers are as follows:

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

Observed
Expected

AA

AS

SS

Totals

400
420.7

249
5
207.7 25.6

654
654

8.6 The deviation from Hardy–Weinberg expectations in adults is signiﬁcant (χ2 25.8, df1, probability0.0001). Thus, there is an
excess of heterozygotes and a deﬁciency of homozygotes.
8.6 The frequencies of the A and S alleles in infants are 0.814 and
0.186, respectively. The equivalent test for deviation from
Hardy–Weinberg expectation in infants is non-signiﬁcant (χ2 
0.14, df1, probability0.71).
9.3 s1 0.01 and s2 0.03. Thus, the equilibrium frequency of A2, q is
q̂ s1 / (s1 s2) 0.01 / (0.01 0.03)0.25
8.6 and the equilibrium frequency for A1 is 0.75.
9.4

RR
Survival
0.3
Relative ﬁtness 0.375
1 s1

RS

SS

0.8 0.56
1.0 0.70
1
1 s2

8.6 Thus, s1 0.625 and s2 0.30. Consequently, the equilibrium frequency for the R allele (p) is
p̂s2 / (s1 s2 ) 0.30 / (0.625 0.30)0.324.
9.5 The selection coefﬁcients s1 and s2 are 0.3 and 0.1. Thus, the equilibrium frequency q for the A2 allele in all populations is
q s1 / (s1 s2) 0.3 / (0.3 0.1) 0.75
8.6 (the initial frequencies are irrelevant).
9.6
Genotypes
A1A1
Frequencies
p2
at fertilization
Relative ﬁtnesses 1s1
After selection p2(1s1)

A1A2

A2A2

Total

2pq

q2

1.0

1
2pq

1s2
q2(1 s2)

1 s1p2 s2q2

p2 (1  s1 )
2pq
q2 (1  s2 )
1
1  s1p2  s2q2 1  s1p2  s2q2 1  s1p2  s2q2

Adjusted

New frequency of A1 p1 
p

p2 (1  s1 )  pq
p  s1p2

2
2
1  s1 p  s2 q
1  s1p2  s2q2

p  s1p2  p(1  s1p2  s2q2 )
p  s1p2


p
1  s1p2  s2q2
1  s1p2  s2q2

553

554

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

p

p  s1p2  p  s1p3  s2pq2
1  s1p2  s2q2

p

pq(s2q  s1p)
1  s1p2  s2q2

6.5 At equilibrium, p0.
6.5 This occurs when s1ps2q
6.5 Thus, the equilibrium frequency for A2 is
q̂ s1 / (s1 s2)
9.7 The relative ﬁtnesses of the three pollen alleles are determined as
follows:

Offspring
Female parent

Pollen

S1S2

S1S3

S2S3

1/3 S1S2
1/3 S1S3
1/3 S2S3

S3
S2
S1

—
1/6 S1S2
1/6 S1S2

1/6 S1S2
—
1/6 S1S3

1/6 S1S3
1/6 S2S3
—

6.5 This assumes that there is sufﬁcient pollen to fertilize all plants.
After reproduction, the three pollen alleles have made the same
contributions to the progeny, S1 S2 S3 1/3, so their ﬁtnesses
are:
6.5 S1 freq. now / freq. before(1/3) / (1/6) 2
6.5 S2 (1/3) / (1/3) 1
6.5 S3 (1/3) / (1/2) 2/3
6.5 Consequently, their relative ﬁtnesses (obtained by dividing by the
highest ﬁtness of 2) are S1 1, S2 1/2 and S3 1/3. Thus, the
rarest allele has the highest relative ﬁtness and the most
common the lowest ﬁtness.
9.8 The relative ﬁtnesses of the pollen alleles are determined as
shown below:

Offspring
Female
parent

Pollen

S1S2

S1S3

S2S3

S1S4

S2S4

S3S4

1/3 S1S2 0.97 S3
0.1618 0.1618
0.0049 0.049
0.03 S4
1/3 S1S3 0.97 S2 0.1618
0.1618
0.03 S4
0.0049
0.049
1/3 S2S3 0.97 S1 0.1618 0.1618
0.03 S4
0.0049 0.049
Totals

0.3234 0.3234 0.3234 0.01

0.01

0.01

6.5 The relative frequencies of pollen that can fertilize S1 S2 are
0.33/0.340.97 for S3 and 0.01/0.340.03 for S4 (and similarly for
the other female genotypes). The contributions of the four pollen
alleles to the progeny are 0.3234 S1, 0.3234 S2, 0.3234 S3 and 0.03
S4. If we compare these contributions to their frequencies in the
pollen to obtain their relative ﬁtnesses, we obtain

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

S1 0.3234/0.330.98
S2 0.3234/0.330.98
S3 0.3234/0.330.98
S4 0.03/0.013
Thus the relative ﬁtnesses of the four pollen alleles S1, S2, S3 and
S4 are 0.33, 0.33, 0.33 and 1, respectively, i.e. the new S4 allele has
a much higher ﬁtness than the existing alleles and will increase
in frequency.
9.9 Selective neutrality occurs approximately when s 1/2N, so an
allele with a selection coefﬁcient of 0.02 is effectively neutral
when the population size is 0.02 1/2N, so when N20.02, i.e.
when N25.

6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5
6.5

Chapter 10
110.1
110.1 (a) Ht / H0 [11 / (2Ne)]t [1 1 / (260)]100/20 0.959.
110.1 (b) Ht / H0 [11 / (210)]5 (19/20)5 0.774.
110.2
110.1 (a) Ht/H0 0.5 ⬃ et / 2Ne, then take natural logarithms of both
sides, yielding
ln (0.5)t / 2Ne
110.1 Thus,
t 2 ln (0.5) Ne 1.39 Ne
110.1 (b) Set et / 2Ne 0.05, and then take ln of both sides, and rearrange yielding
t 2 ln (0.05) Ne 5.99 Ne
110.3

110.1
110.4
110.5

110.6

Ht / H0 

n

 [1 1/(2N )]
i1

i

[1 1 / (2100)][(11 / (210)]
[1 1 / (2100)][11 / (2200)]
0.938
The second case is identical to the ﬁrst, as the same terms enter
the equation, but in a different order.
Hdiploid 0, Hallotetraploid 2pq0.18.
Ne 4 Nef Nem / (Nef Nem) (4605 6) / (605 6) 23.8. If the
population had a ‘normal’ sex-ratio, Ne 605.7, about 25 times
higher.
Ne (4N2) / (Vk 2). The mean family size(0125)/4
2, i.e a stable population. The variance in family size Vk is given
as follows:
1
Vk  兺(k k̄)2 [(0 2)2 (1 2)2 (2 2)2 (52)2]/4
n
14/4 3.5

110.1 Note that there is a complete census of the population, so that
n replaces n 1 in the equation for the variance. Since there are
four families, N8. Thus,
Ne (4 82)/(3.5 2)5.45.

555

556

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

110.1 This is only 68% of the population size of 8 potentially reproductive individuals.
110.7 Ne t / 兺(1/Ni) 4 / 兺[(1/10)(1/100)(1/1000)(1/250)]34.8.
110.8 Ne / N 1 / (1F) 1 / (10.18)0.85.
110.9 The population size is not stable (k 1 in both sexes), so we
have to use Equation 10.5.
110.1 For females:
Nef (Nk1)/[k 1 (Vk / k)] (802.091)/[2.09 1
(16.61 / 2.09)]18.4
110.1 Thus, for males
Nem (Nk1)/[k 1(Vk / k)] (602.461)/[2.46 1
(22.5 / 2.46)]13.8
110.1 Finally, we combine these two estimates
Ne 4 Nef Nem / (Nef Nem) (418.413.8) / (18.413.8) 
31.5
110.1 Thus the effective population size is about 23% of the actual
population size.
10.10 Ht / H0 0.43 et /2Ne e17 /2Ne
110.1 Take ln of both sides and rearranging yields
Ne 17 / [2 ln (0.43)]10

Chapter 11
111.1 F  1⁄4.
111.2 F 1 [1 1/(2Ne)]t 1(1 1/10)10 0.65.
111.3 F 1 

t

 [1 1/(2N
i1

ei

)]1(1  1⁄4)[1 (1/200)](1 1⁄4)[1 (1/200)]

0.44.
111.4 Using p0.83, q 0.17, and F 0.5, the expected genotype frequencies with selﬁng are:
f ( ) p2 Fpq 0.832 0.50.830.170.76
f ( /dw) 2pq(1F) 20.830.17 (10.5) 0.14
f (dw/dw)q2 Fpq 0.172 0.50.830.170.10
111.1 These sum to 1.0, as they should.
111.5 q0.01, so p0.99.
111.1 (a) Full-sib mating (F 0.25), ratio1[Fp / q]
1 [(0.250.99) / 0.01]25.75.
111.1 (b) For ﬁrst-cousin mating (F 1/16), ratio1 [(0.99 / 16) / 0.01]
7.19.
111.6 Ft  1⁄4 (1 2 Ft  1 Ft  2). Thus, the inbreeding coefﬁcients for
the ﬁrst ﬁve generations of full-sib mating are 0.25, 0.375, 0.50,
0.594 and 0.672, respectively.
111.7 2pq(1 F) 20.40.6 (10.47) 0.254.
111.8 Fe 1 HIsland / HMainland 1(0.36/0.792)0.545.
111.9 FX 兺(1⁄2)n(1 Fca). The paths are:

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

Path

n

Fca Contribution to FX

IEAGJ
IEBGJ
IFCHJ
IFDHJ

5
5
5
5

0
0
0
0

(1⁄2)5
(1⁄2)5
(1⁄2)5
(1⁄2)5
FX 1/8

11.10 FX 兺(1⁄2)n(1 Fca). Parents L and M have G, C, A and B as common
ancestors. The paths and their contributions to F are as follows:

Path

n

Fca

Contribution to FX

LIFCADGJM
LIGDBEHKM
LIGDBEJM
LIFCGJM
LIGJM

9
9
8
7
5

0
0
0
0
1/8

(1⁄2)9
(1⁄2)9
(1⁄2)8
(1⁄2)7
(1⁄2)5(1 1/8)
FX 26/5120.0508

11.11 Individuals A, B, D, E, G and I are common ancestors causing
relationships between parents I and L. The 11 paths of relationship, the number of paths joining parents through common
ancestors (n), the inbreeding coefﬁcients of common ancestors,
and the contribution of each of the paths to the inbreeding
coefﬁcient FX (rounded to four decimal places), are shown in
the table. A, B and E are all assumed to be unrelated.
111.1
Individual I is the result of an inbred mating; there are three
common ancestors of its parents F and G, A, B and D. The three
paths to consider are
FCADG, contributing (1⁄2)5 to the inbreeding coefﬁcient of I
(FI)
FCBDG, contributing (1⁄2)5 to FI, and
FDG, contributing (1⁄2)3 to FI
111.1 Thus, FI (1⁄2)5 (1⁄2)5 (1⁄2)3 3/16.

Paths of relationship
(common ancestors
are bold)
IFCADHJKL
IFCADGJKL
IFCBDHJKL
IFCBDGJKL
IFDHJKL
IFDGJKL
IGDHJKL
IGEHJKL
IGJKL
IKL
IL

n

Fca

9
9
9
9
7
7
7
7
5
3
2

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3/16
3/16

Contribution to FX

(1⁄2)9
(1⁄2)9
(1⁄2)9
(1⁄2)9
(1⁄2)7
(1⁄2)7
(1⁄2)7
(1⁄2)7
(1⁄2)5
(1⁄2)3 (1 3/16)
(1⁄2)2 (1 3/16)
Fx 264/5120.515625

557

558

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

11.12 P(homozygosity for a rare recessive lethal at one locus)
q2(1 F) Fq ⬃ Fq 0.55104 2.5104
111.1 P(not homozygous lethal at one locus)1Fq 12.5104
111.1 P(not homozygous lethal at 2000 loci) (1 Fq)2000
(1 2.5104)2000 0.61.
111.1 Thus, P(individual is homozygous lethal for at least one locus)
10.610.39.
111.1 Using a similar approach with random mating for 2000 loci,
P(individual homozygous for lethal for at least 1 locus) 
1(1 q2)2000
5 104.

Chapter 12
12.1 兺2pqdF, i.e. number of loci polymorphic for deleterious alleles
(兺), heterozygosity for deleterious alleles (2pq), dominance of
alleles (d), and inbreeding coefﬁcient (F).
12.2 None, there are no heterozygotes and no hidden deleterious
alleles.
12.3 Inbreeding depression2pqdF. p0.9, q 0.1, and F 0.5. To
compute inbreeding depression (ID) we must compute d.
12.3 (a) d 89[(9070) / 2] 9. Thus, ID 20.9 0.190.5
0.81, i.e the population mean survival drops from 89.62 to
88.81 due to selﬁng at this locus (see Table 12.3 for formula to
obtain means).
12.3 (b) d 90 [(8070)/2]15. Thus, ID 20.90.1150.5
1.35
12.3 (c) d 80[(9070)/2]0. Thus, ID 0.
12.4 δ 1 (inbred ﬁtness / outbred ﬁtness)1(0.45 / 0.75)0.4
(i.e. a 40% reduction in survival due to inbreeding).
12.5 (a) Lethal equivalents per haploid genomeB2.52. (b) Lethal
equivalents per diploid genome2B22.525.04.
12.6 The information translates into the following equations:
12.3 Full-sibs: ln SFS a BFa 1.570.25a 0.3925.
12.3 Thus SFS ea0.3925
12.3 Unrelated: ln SU a
12.3 Thus SU ea
12.3 The ratio of survival of full-sibs/unrelatedea0.3925/ea e0.3925
0.675.
12.3 Thus, the survival of full-sibs is reduced by 32.5% compared to
non-inbred individuals (the inbreeding depression).
12.7 One locus ID 2pqdF 2(15104) 5104 0.480.5 ⬃
2.4104.
12.3 Fitness due to inbreeding at 1 locus1ID 12.4104
0.99976
12.3 Fitness due to inbreeding at 5000 loci0.999765000 0.30
12.3 Total ID1 0.300.70.

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

Chapter 13
13.1 The impacts of fragmentation depend upon the details of gene
ﬂow among population fragments. If gene ﬂow among the fragments is less than about one effective migrant per generation,
then population fragments will become inbred and lose genetic
diversity at an accelerated rate (compared to a single large population) and are likely to suffer elevated extinction rates.
2
0.015.
13.2
q
2
pq {1 [11/(2Ne)]t}
13.3
q
13.3 (a) q2 0.30.7 [1[1 1/(2 50)]20 0.038
13.3 (b) q2 0.30.7 1 [1 1/(2 50)]100 0.133
13.4 FST 1/(4Nem 1) (Equation 13.5), so
13.3 Nem [1 / (FST) 1]/4(1/0.2 1)/41, i.e. one migrant per generation.
13.5 (a) HI (0.5 0.2)/2 0.35
12.3 (a) HS (2p1q1 2p2q2)/2(2 0.50.520.50.5) /2 0.5
12.3 (a) HT 2pq (using combined allele frequencies) 20.50.5
0.5
12.3 (b) HI (0.5 0.32)/2 0.41
12.3 (b) HS (2p1q1 2p2q2)/2 (2 0.50.520.80.2) /2 0.41
12.3 (b) HT 2pq (using combined allele frequencies) 20.350.65
0.455
12.3 (c) HI (0.5 0.13)/20.31
12.3 (c) HS (2p1q1 2p2q2)/2 (2 0.50.52 0.20.8) /2 0.41
12.3 (c) HT 2pq (using combined allele frequencies) 20.350.65
0.455
13.6 FIS 1 (HI / HS) 1 (0.052/0.074)0.30
FST 1 (HS / HT) 1 (0.074/0.098) 0.24
FIT 1 (HI / HT) 1(0.052/0.098)0.47
12.3 These statistics indicate that there is inbreeding within populations (FIS 0; probably as a result of selﬁng) and substantial differentiation among populations (FST 0).
13.7 HI (0.038 0.028 0.021) / 30.029, and HS (0.061 0.045
0.033) / 3 0.046.
12.3 FIS 1 (HI / HS) 1 (0.029/0.046)0.37
12.3 FST 1 (HS / HT) 1(0.046/0.053)0.13
12.3 FIT 1 (HI / HT) 1 (0.029/0.053)0.45
13.8 For the population of size 50, F 1[1 1 /(2Ne)]t
1 (99/100)30 0.26
12.3 For populations of size 25, F 1(49/50)30 0.45
12.3 For two pooled populations of size 25, F  1⁄4 ( FN  25FN  25) 0.23
12.3 (see Margan et al. 1998 equation 1)
12.3 Note that the inbreeding coefﬁcient of the pooled populations
is less than that of the single larger population.

Chapter 14
14.1 Ne VA/ 2 Vm VA/ (2 3103 VE) 167 h2/(1 h2) 29.
14.2 Under these conditions, Vm 3 104 VE, so Ne 294.

559

560

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

14.3 Using Equation 10.1: Ht/H0 [1 1 / (2Ne)]t ⬃ e t / 2Ne
14.7 and substituting Ht / H0 0.95 and t 100 years / L generations
0.95 ⬃ e 100/2LNe
14.7 taking ln gives
ln 0.95100/ 2LNe
14.7
14.4
14.5
14.6

Thus Ne 100/ 2 L ln (0.95)975 / L
Ne 475 / L 475 / (1/3)1425
Ne 475 / L 475 / 2023.75
From 14.3, the Ne 975 / L is required to retain 95% of genetic
diversity for 100 years, thus, for elephants
Ne 975 / 2637.5

14.7 and for deer mice Ne 975 / (1/3)2925.
14.7 To retain 90% of genetic diversity for 50 years, Ht / H0 0.90 and
t 50 / L
0.90 ⬃ e 50 / 2LNe
14.7 taking ln and rearranging yields
Ne 50/ 2 L ln 0.90237 / L
14.7 Thus, for elephants Ne 237 / 269.1, and for deer mice Ne 237
3711.
14.7 The recovery goal of 2150 wild populations and 1150
captive populations will not cause immediate additional
genetic problems of rapid inbreeding depression. If this results
in an Ne of about 300 0.1150 .3 ⬃ 75, then the rate of
inbreeding per generation is only 0.0067. Further, the condor
has a long generation interval, so the increase in inbreeding per
year will be slow. However, this population size will not prevent
slow deterioration in genetic diversity and slow build up of
inbreeding.

Chapter 15
15.1 Taxonomic uncertainties may result in undiagnosed species
being left to go extinct, undiagnosed species being hybridized to
other species with deleterious consequences, or resources being
wasted on populations belonging to common species, or conservation of hybrid populations that are not distinct species.
Further, crosses of differentiated populations within species
may result in outbreeding depression.
15.2 Two populations are sympatric if they occur in the same geographic location.
15.3 (a) Separate species as the distinct chromosome numbers indicate that they are not exchanging genes.
14.7 (b) They are not random mating, so they may be separate species.
Information on additional loci would be desirable.

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

14.7 (c) As there are no alleles in common they are not exchanging
genes, so they are likely to be separate species.
14.7 (d) Both populations share allele 1, so there may be gene ﬂow.
They probably belong to the same species, but more information is required to be certain as there is some degree of
genetic differentiation.
15.4 Two populations are allopatric if they are not found in the same
geographic location.
15.5 (a) Separate species as they have distinctly different chromosome numbers.
14.7 (b) There are insufﬁcient grounds to classify Sumatran tigers as
a separate species. The long isolation and the minor difference in mtDNA may be sufﬁcient to classify them as a separate sub-species.
14.7 (c) Separate species, as they show extremely large genetic differences between the forms, well beyond the differences found
for other ‘good’ species.
15.6 (a) Ixy 兺xi yi /√兺xi2 . 兺yi2 (0.12 0.22 0.72)/ √(0.12 0.22
0.72) 1
D ln Ixy ln (1) 0
15.6 (b) Ixy 0, D 
15.6 (c) Ixy (0.5 0 0.50.70.30)/ √(0.52 0.52 0)(0 0.72
0.32) 0.35/ 0.53850.65
D ln (0.65)0.43
15.7 (a) IVG (0.0230.981 0.977 0.019 0)/ √(0.0232 0.9772) 
(0.9812 0.0192)
0.041126/√0.955058 0.962722 0.043
D ln (0.043)3.15
15.6 (b) IAG (0.019 0.981 0.885 0.019)/√(0.0192 0.8852
0.0962) (0.9812 0.0192)
0.035454/√0.792802 0.962722 0.0406
D ln (0.043)3.20
15.8 If the populations are called A, B and C, then A and B are clas


siﬁed as 
and so should be managed as a single unit.


 since they differ
15.8 Conversely, (A, B) versus C are classiﬁed as 
at microsatellite loci (reject genetic exchangeability for both
recent and historical times frames) and for heritable characters
likely to be of ecological signiﬁcance (reject ecological exchangeability for both recent and historical times frames).
Consequently, C should be managed as a separate unit from A–B.
15.9
. There seem limited grounds for considering the two forms
as other than part of a continuum. Allow gene ﬂow between
them. They may even represent one management unit with
clinal variation.

561






562

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

Chapter 16
16.1 Introduce mainland individuals into the Barrow Island euro
population, probably from the nearest mainland location to
Barrow Island with euros. Females would probably have to be
used as male aggression may make male introductions difﬁcult.
16.2 Use the small population as it has a different genotype and so
should alleviate inbreeding depression.
16.3 The best procedure would be to genotype all populations before
deciding. If the population of concern and the large populations
have the same genotypes, use the small population as it has
more heterozygosity.
16.4 Introduce genetic material (e.g. pollen) from other populations.
Since plants often show adaptive genetic differentiation, this
should be done using nearby populations, but ones with distinct
S locus alleles. Check the chromosomes to ensure all populations have the same ploidy before allowing any pollen ﬂow.
16.5 Move individuals among the population fragments, such that
Nm is greater than 1, i.e. move about 1–5 individuals among
populations each generation on average.
16.6 Snail, as it is likely to have the lowest rate of gene ﬂow.
16.7 The average growth rate and mature size of trees is likely to
decline, as the harvest is removing the largest trees.
16.8 This species is an asexual clone. Management should aim to
minimize demographic and environmental stochasticity and
catastrophes by increasing the population size and having replicate populations in different locations.

Chapter 17
17.1 Captive populations deteriorate genetically due to inbreeding
depression, loss of genetic diversity, mutational accumulation
and genetic adaptation to captivity (that is deleterious when
they are reintroduced to the wild).
17.2 kGH 1/16.
17.3 The most familiar way to complete this problem is to determine
the inbreeding coefﬁcient for a progeny X of Thelma and Rita if
they could have one.

Path

Contribution to FX

Thelma–A–H-Rita
1/16
Thelma–F-A–H-Rita 1/32
Thelma–F–B–H-Rita 1/32
17.4 kTh–R FX 1/16 1/321/321/8.
17.4 kTh–Th  1⁄2 (1 FTh)  1⁄2 (1 1⁄4) 5/8.
17.5 mean mkRi 兺(kRi–Th kRi–L kRi–Ri kRi–Ro) / 4
(1/8 1/8 1/2 0) / 46 /(84) 3 / 160.1875.
17.6 A 4-population group can be labelled as populations

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

17.7

17.8
17.8
17.8
17.8
17.8
17.8

1(‘genotype’ AB), 2 (CD), 3 (EF) and 4 (GH). In the 1st generation,
males move one group to the right, 1 to 2, 2 to 3, 3 to 4 and 4 to 1.
Progeny in group 1 will have ‘genotype’ ABGH, 2 ABCD, 3 CDEF
and 4 EFGH. In the 2nd generation males are moved two groups
to the right, 1 to 3, 2 to 4, 3 to 1 and 4 to 2. Progeny in group 1
will have ‘genotype’ ABCDEFGH, 2 ABCDEFGH, 3 ABCDEFGH and
4 ABCDEFGH, i.e. all are now the same ‘genotype’ so avoidance of
inbreeding is no longer possible in future generations.
Cloning is widely used in plant conservation, i.e. cuttings can be
taken so that individual plants can be conserved, either by planting in the wild, or by taking them into botanical gardens. Tissue
culture is another form of cloning that can be done with many
plants. These forms of cloning can be used to rapidly increase
population sizes without major costs to the individual. In
mammals, only a few species that are closely related to domestic
animals can be cloned using nuclear transplantation. Animal
cloning is more difﬁcult than plant cloning as a recipient
mother is required; this must be of the same species, or a closely
related species. The use of closely related species may lead to
later behavioural problems, inappropriate learned skills, etc. We
are not aware of birds having been cloned, but amphibians were
the ﬁrst animals to be cloned using nuclear transplantation.
Currently, animal cloning is of little conservation value as so
few species can be cloned. In the future, it may be used to
increase the numbers of individuals of highly threatened
species. However, it is likely to remain a high-cost venture that
can be afforded in only a limited range of high proﬁle species.
The options to manage recessive hairlessness in red ruffed
lemurs are:
(a) ignore it
(b) remove affected individual from the gene pool
(c) remove potential carriers and affected individual from the
gene pool
(d) remove affected individual from the gene pool and re-pair
carriers that produce hairless offspring.
Given the allele frequency, about 1% of the progeny (q2) will be
hairless, so ignoring the condition or removing affected individual are both feasible options. If carriers were to be removed from
the pedigree this would lead to removal of 18% of the individuals – this is too great a loss of individuals for an endangered
species with only 125 individuals in captivity. If all potential carriers were to be removed, then much higher proportions of
progeny would have to be removed. The ﬁnal option minimizes
the number of hairless offspring produced and removes only a
few individuals from the breeding pool. When the population
reaches higher numbers, it may become possible to eliminate
the condition, especially if a molecular test for carriers was
devised.

563

564

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

Chapter 18
18.1 Genetic adaptation to captive conditions results in improved
reproductive ﬁtness in captivity, but these adaptations are typically deleterious when captive populations are reintroduced
into the wild.
18.2 Genetic adaptation to captivity depends upon the heritability of
reproductive ﬁtness in captivity (and thus on genetic diversity),
upon selection in captivity (this depends upon the mortality
rate and the difference in environment between captive and
wild environments), upon the effective population size, upon
the extent of migration into the population from wild populations and upon the generation length.
18.3 The genetic issues in reintroduction programs are:
18.2 (a) genetic problems that arise during the decline of the wild
population (inbreeding and loss of genetic diversity)
18.2 (b) genetic deterioration in captivity due to inbreeding, loss of
genetic diversity and genetic adaptations to captivity that
reduce reproductive ﬁtness in the wild environment
18.2 (c) choice of reintroduction sites and the likely adaptation of the
captive population to the sites
18.2 (d) choice of individuals to reintroduce, including impact of
reintroductions on the captive population, and impact of
reintroductions on genetic diversity in the reintroduced population
18.2 (e) inbreeding and reproductive ﬁtness of the reintroduced population.
18.4 Removal of an individual with high mean kinship (and low He)
will reduce mean kinship in the captive population and thus
will increase heterozygosity (from Equation 17.5).

Chapter 19
19.1 Time for all alleles in a population to coalescence is approximately 4Ne [1 (1/k)]3Ne generations, i.e. 150 generations for
Ne 50, and 30 generations for Ne 10.
19.2 (a) 3⁄4, (b) Ne 4 14/ (41)3.2, thus H1 / H0 11/(2 3.2)
0.84, (c) 7/8, (d) 19/20.
19.3 (a) 0, (b) 1⁄2, (c) 4/5.
19.4 Ne 4 110 /113.64.
18.2 Ht / H0 ⬃ [1 1 / (23.64)]7 0.36 (approximate only). Thus, the
bottleneck is insufﬁcient to account for the complete lack of
allozyme heterozygosity. The reason for the lack of allozyme variability is unknown. Presumably the population had been subjected to prior bottlenecks, due perhaps to disease epidemics.
19.5 mtDNA H75 / H0 0.067 / 0.800.084(11 / Nef)75 ⬃ et / Nef
e75 / Nef
18.2 Taking ln and rearranging yields
Nef 75 / ln (0.084) 30.

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

19.6 (a) Asexual / clonal.
18.2 (b) Compatible with selﬁng; only alleles present in the mother
are found in the offspring and the ratio of genotypes ﬁts
selﬁng. However, data from further loci would be necessary
to exclude outbreeding.
18.2 (c) Outcrossing; alleles not found in the mother are present in
the offspring. Only one male (A2A3) is necessary to account for
the offspring.
18.2 (d) Outbreeding; at least two males are necessary to account for
the offspring (e.g. A2A3 and A4A5).
18.2 (e) Haplo-diploid; females diploid and males haploid. If only one
locus of several showed this, it would indicate sex-linked
inheritance.
19.7 The Wollemi pine may be asexually reproducing, or it could be a
highly inbred homozygous population that is selﬁng, or even
outcrossing. The former is the most likely explanation.
19.8 Offspring are compatible with putative parents for loci B, C, D, F,
H, K, L and N. The following offspring are not compatible with
the putative parents: locus A gosling 4, Locus E goslings 3 and 4,
locus G gosling 4, locus I gosling 3, locus J gosling 1, locus M goslings 2, 3 and 4. Thus, goslings 1–4 do not belong to the putative
parents, 2 father excluded, 3 and 4 father and mother excluded.
Gosling 5 is the only one that belongs to the nest attendants.

Chapter 20
20.1 For the ﬁrst time step from 1960 to 1961, rln (350/70)1.609.
For the full data set 1960–86, mean r0.052 and variance (r) 
0.841.
20.2 The major recommendations for the northern hairy-nosed
wombat would be to preserve the habitat (remove cattle grazing
– has been done) and attempt to increase the population size. To
avoid catastrophes, establishment of another population is
strongly recommended (e.g. Deniliquin where a population previously existed). Captive breeding has not been recommended as
this species has not been bred in captivity. Research into captive
breeding of the related southern hairy-nosed wombat is recommended.
20.3 The only immediate option is captive breeding, with populations maintained at several sites to avoid catastrophes. To
reintroduce Partula into the wild would require extermination
of the introduced carnivorous snail (improbable), or reintroduction to an island lacking the predatory snail. Reserve populations in captivity would still be required to avoid losing wild
populations due the spread of the carnivorous snail.
20.4 With small overall populations and continued threats in the
wild, reserve captive breeding populations are required (there
are some captive animals). Management of the wild populations
requires habitat preservation, control of poaching and genetic

565

566

ANSWERS TO PROBLEMS

management to restore gene ﬂow. Artiﬁcial insemination may
be feasible to improve gene ﬂow in this species. It may be possible to move females of this species, but it is likely to be difﬁcult and costly.

Revision
1R.1 Endangered as N250.
1R.2
AA AB
BB
AC
BC
CC
Total
Expected
frequencies 0.01 0.06 0.09 0.12 0.36 0.36 1
1R.3 D – 0.11, so the population is not in linkage equilibrium, i.e. it
is in linkage disequilibrium.
1R.4 h2 CovOP/ VP 5.183/8.180.63.
1R.5 q̂ u / s 4 106 / 0.2 2105.
1R.6 t (ln p0 ln pt) / u (ln 1ln 0.75) / 104 2877 generations.
1R.7
AA
Aa aa
Relative ﬁtnesses 0.9412 1 0.9765

1R.8
1R.9
R.10
R.11

R.12
R.13

R.14

R.15

R.16

1 s1 1
1 s2
p̂s2 / (s1 s2) 0.0235 / (0.0588 0.0235)0.29.
Ht / H0 0.78.
Ne 30.
F 1/16.
FST is a measure of the inbreeding due to differentiation in allele
frequencies among populations. FST is inversely related to gene
ﬂow among populations, being 0 for undifferentiated populations, and 1 for completely differentiated populations.
IN 0.5 / √(0.38 1) 0.811 and D 0.21.
The populations are showing some reproductive isolation, but
this is not surprising as they are allopatric and isolated by
water. They probably belong to one species, but they may be subspecies. It would be preferable (obligatory) to have information
on additional informative loci.
The ﬁrst step would be to identify the clonal genotypes (these
will often be in different populations) and then conserve the
clones in the wild (and typically in captivity as well). In the wild
the efforts should be to preserve habitat and to increase their
population sizes.
From pedigrees, calculate kinship for all pairs of individuals in
the population, and for all individuals with themselves.
Calculate mean kinships for every individual. Choose individuals to reproduce based on minimizing mean kinship. Avoid
mating between close relatives and those with very different
mean kinships.
Ne 475 / L 475 / 859.

References
(For a given author, single author papers are ﬁrst, followed by papers with two
authors, and ﬁnally papers with three or more authors in year order.)
Abplanalp, H. 1990. Inbreeding. Pp. 955–984 in R.D. Crawford, ed. Poultry
Breeding and Genetics. Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Akçakaya, H.R. 2000. Population viability analyses with demographically and
spatially structured models. Ecol. Bull. 48, 23–38.
Akçakaya, H.R. & P. Sjögren-Gulve. 2000. Population viability analyses in conservation planning: an overview. Ecol. Bull. 48, 9–21.
Allard, R.W. 1960. Principles of Plant Breeding. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Allen, P.J., W. Amos, P.P. Pomeroy & S.D. Twiss. 1995. Microsatellite variation in
grey seals Halichoerus grypu shows evidence of genetic differentiation
between two British breeding colonies. Mol. Ecol. 4, 653–662.
Allendorf, F.W. 1986. Genetic drift and the loss of alleles versus heterozygosity.
Zoo Biol. 5, 181–190.
Allendorf, F.W. & R.S. Waples. 1996. Conservation and genetics of salmonid
ﬁshes. Pp. 238–280 in J.C. Avise & J.L. Hamrick, eds. Conservation Genetics: Case
Histories from Nature. Chapman & Hall, New York.
Allendorf, F.W., R.B. Harris & L.H. Metzgar. 1991. Estimation of effective population size of grizzly bears by computer simulation. Pp. 650–654 in Proceedings
of the Fourth International Congress of Systematic and Evolutionary Biology.
Allison, A.C. 1956. The sickle-cell and hemoglobin C genes in some African populations. Ann. Hum. Genet. 21, 67–89.
Allison, A.C. 1961. Abnormal hemoglobin and erythrocyte enzyme-deficiency
traits. Pp. 16–40 in G.A. Harrison, ed. Genetical Variation in Human Populations.
Pergamon Press, New York.
Amos, B., C. Schlotter & D. Tautz. 1993. Social structure of pilot whales revealed
by analytical DNA proﬁling. Science 260, 670–672.
Anonymous. 1996. Attwater’s greater prairie chicken (Tympanuchus cupido attwateri). Endang. Species Bulletin 21(3), 31.
Ardern, S.L. & D.M. Lambert. 1997. Is the black robin in genetic peril? Mol. Ecol.
6, 21–28.
Arnold, M.L. & S.A. Hodges. 1995. Are natural hybrids ﬁt or unﬁt relative to
their parents? Trends Ecol. Evol. 10, 67–71.
Arnold, S.J. 1995. Monitoring quantitative genetic variation and evolution in
captive populations. Pp. 295–317 in J.D. Ballou, M. Gilpin & T.J. Foose, eds.
Population Management for Survival and Recovery: Analytical Methods and
Strategies in Small Population Conservation. Columbia University Press, New
York.
Ashworth, D. & D.T. Parkin. 1992. Captive breeding: can genetic ﬁngerprinting
help? Pp. 135–149 in H.D.M. Moore, W.V. Holt & G.M. Mace, eds. Biotechnology
and the Conservation of Genetic Diversity. Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK.
Austin, C.R. & R.V. Short. 1984. Reproduction in Mammals, 2nd edn, vol. 4,
Reproductive Fitness. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Australia Institute. 1997. Institute ﬁnds koalas contribute $1.1 billion to
tourism. Aust. Inst. Newsl. No. 12 September (1977), 8–9.
Avise, J.C. 1994. Molecular Markers, Natural History, and Evolution. Chapman &
Hall, New York.

568

REFERENCES

Avise, J.C. 1996. Toward a regional conservation genetics perspective: phylogeography of faunas in the southeastern United States. Pp. 431–470 in J.C. Avise
& J.L. Hamrick, eds. Conservation Genetics: Case Histories from Nature. Chapman
& Hall, New York.
Avise, J.C. 2000. Phylogeography: The History and Formation of Species. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Avise, J.C. & R.M. J. Ball. 1990. Principles of genealogical concordance in species
concepts and biological taxonomy. Oxford Surv. Evol. Biol. 7, 45–67.
Avise, J.C. & J. L. Hamrick. (eds.) 1996. Conservation Genetics: Case Histories from
Nature. Chapman & Hall, New York.
Avise, J.C. & G.C. Johns. 1999. Proposal for a standardized temporal scheme of
biological classiﬁcation for extant species. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96,
7358–7363.
Avise, J.C. & W.S. Nelson. 1989. Molecular genetic relationships of the extinct
dusky seaside sparrow. Science 243, 646–648.
Avise, J.C., J.M. Quattro & R.C. Vrijenhoek. 1992. Molecular clones within organismal clones: mitochondrial DNA phylogenies and the evolutionary histories
of unisexual vertebrates. Evol. Biol. 26, 225–246.
Baker, C.S. & S.R. Palumbi. 1996. Population structure, molecular systematics,
and forensic identiﬁcation of whales and dolphins. Pp. 10–49 in J.C. Avise &
J.L. Hamrick, eds. Conservation Genetics: Case Histories from Nature. Chapman &
Hall, New York.
Baker, C.S., D.A. Gilbert, M.T. Weinrich, R. Lambertsen, J. Calambokidis, B.
McArdle, G.K. Chambers & S.J. O’Brien. 1993. Population characteristics of
DNA ﬁngerprints in humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae). J. Hered. 84,
281–290.
Ballou, J.D. 1983. Calculating inbreeding coefﬁcients from pedigrees. Pp.
509–520 in C.M. Schonewald-Cox, S.M. Chambers, B. MacBryde & L. Thomas,
eds. Genetics and Conservation: A Reference for Managing Wild Animal and Plant
Populations. Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, CA.
Ballou, J.D. 1989. Inbreeding and outbreeding depression in the captive propagation of black-footed ferrets. Pp. 49–68 in U.S. Seal, E.T. Thorne, M.A. Bogan
& S.H. Anderson, eds. Conservation Biology and the Black-Footed Ferret. Yale
University Press, New Haven, CT.
Ballou, J.D. 1997. Effects of ancestral inbreeding on genetic load in mammalian
populations. J. Hered. 88, 169–178.
Ballou, J.D. & T.J. Foose. 1996. Demographic and genetic management of
captive populations. Pp. 263–283 in D.G. Kleiman, M.E. Allen, K.V. Thompson
& S. Lumpkin, eds. Wild Animals in Captivity: Principles and Techniques.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Ballou, J.D. & R.C. Lacy. 1995. Identifying genetically important individuals for
management of genetic diversity in pedigreed populations. Pp. 76–111 in J.D.
Ballou, M. Gilpin & T.J. Foose, eds. Population Management for Survival and
Recovery: Analytical Methods and Strategies in Small Population Conservation.
Columbia University Press, New York.
Ballou, J.D. & R. Oakleaf. 1989. Demographic and genetic captive-breeding recommendations for black-footed ferrets. Pp. 247–267 in U.S. Seal, E.T. Thorne,
M.A. Bogan & S.H. Anderson, eds. Conservation Biology and the Black-Footed
Ferret. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
Ballou, J.D. & K. Ralls. 1982. Inbreeding and juvenile mortality in small populations of ungulates: a detailed analysis. Biol. Conserv. 24, 239–272.
Ballou, J.D. & J. Seidensticker. 1987. The genetic and demographic characteristics of the 1983 captive population of Sumatran tigers (Panthera tigris suma-

REFERENCES

trae). Pp. 329–347 in R.L. Tilson & U.S. Seal, eds. Tigers of the World: The Biology,
Biopolitics, Management, and Conservation of an Endangered Species. Noyes
Publications, Park Ridge, NJ.
Ballou, J.D., M. Gilpin & T.J. Foose. 1995. Population Management for Survival and
Recovery: Analytical Methods and Strategies in Small Population Conservation.
Columbia University Press, New York.
Ballou, J.D., R.C. Lacy, D. Kleiman, A. Rylands & S. Ellis. 1998. Leontopithecus II:
The Second Population and Habitat Viability Assessment for Lion Tamarins
(Leontopithecus): Final Report. Conservation Breeding Specialist Group
(SSC/IUCN), Apple Valley, MN.
Barber, H.N. 1955. Adaptive gene substitution in Tasmanian eucalypts. I.
Evolution 9, 1–14.
Barber, H.N. & W.D. Jackson. 1957. Natural selection in action in Eucalyptus.
Nature 179, 1267–1269.
Barone, M.A., M.E. Roelke, J. Howard, J.L. Brown, A.E. Anderson & D.E. Wildt.
1994. Reproductive characteristics of male Florida panthers: comparative
studies from Florida, Texas, Colorado, Latin America, and North American
zoos. J. Mammal. 75, 150–162.
Barrett, S.C.H. & J.R. Kohn. 1991. Genetic and evolutionary consequences of
small population size in plants: implications for conservation. Pp. 3–61 in
D.A. Falk & K.E. Holsinger, eds. Genetics and Conservation of Rare Plants. Oxford
University Press, New York.
Barrowclough, G.F. & R.J. Gutierrez. 1990. Genetic variation and differentiation
in the spotted owl (Strix occidentalis). Auk 107, 737–744.
Barrowclough, G.F., R.J. Gutierrez & J.G. Groth. 1999. Phylogeography of spotted
owl (Strix occidentalis) populations based on mitochondrial DNA sequences:
gene ﬂow, genetic structure, and a novel biogeographic pattern. Evolution 53,
919–931.
Bartley, D., M. Bagley, G. Gall & B. Bentley. 1992. Use of linkage disequilibrium
data to estimate effective size of hatchery and natural ﬁsh populations.
Conserv. Biol. 6, 365–375.
Beattie, A.J. 1995. Natural history at the cutting edge. Ecol. Econ. 13, 93–97.
Beck, B.B., L.G. Rapaport, M.R. Stanley Price & A.C. Wilson. 1994.
Reintroduction of captive-born animals. Pp. 265–286 in P.J.S. Olney, G.M.
Mace & A.T.C. Feistner, eds. Creative Conservation: Interactive Management of Wild
and Captive Animals. Chapman & Hall, London.
Becker, W.A. 1984. Manual of Quantitative Genetics, 4th edn. Academic
Enterprises, Pullman, Washington, DC.
Beheregaray, L.B., P. Sunnucks, D.L. Alpers, S.C. Banks & A.C. Taylor. 2000. A set
of microsatellite loci for the hairy-nosed wombats (Lasiorhinus krefftii and L.
latifrons). Conserv. Genet. 1, 89–92.
Behr, M.A., M.A. Wilson, W.P. Gill, H. Salamon, G.K. Schoolnik, S. Rane & P.M.
Small. 1999. Comparative genomics of BCG vaccines by whole-genome DNA
microarray. Science 284, 1520–1523.
Beilharz, R.G. 1982. The effect of inbreeding on reproduction in mice. Anim.
Prod. 34, 49–54.
Beissinger, S.R. & D.R. McCullough. 2002. Population Viability Analysis. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Belovsky, G.E. 1987. Extinction models and mammalian persistence. Pp. 35–57
in M.E. Soulé, ed. Viable Populations for Conservation. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Belyaev, D.K. 1979. Destabilising selection as a factor in domestication. J. Hered.
70, 301–308.

569

570

REFERENCES

Benirschke, K. & A.T. Kumamoto. 1991. Mammalian cytogenetics and conservation of species. J. Hered. 82, 187–191.
Bensch, S., D. Hasselquist & T. von Schantz. 1994. Genetic similarity between
parents predicts hatching failure: nonincestuous inbreeding in the great
reed warbler? Evolution 48, 317–326.
Berger, J. 1990. Persistence of different sized populations: an empirical assessment of rapid extinctions in bighorn sheep. Conserv. Biol. 4, 91–98.
Berthold, P., A.J. Helbig, G. Mohr & U. Querner. 1992. Rapid microevolution of
migratory behaviour in a wild bird species. Nature 360, 668–670.
Bérubé, M. & P. Pasbøll. 1996. Identiﬁcation of sex in cetaceans by multiplexing
with three ZFX and ZFY speciﬁc primers. Mol. Ecol. 5, 283–287.
Bever, J.D. & F. Felber. 1994. The theoretical population genetics of autopolyploids. Oxford Surv. Evol. Biol. 8, 185–217.
Bijlsma, R., J. Bundgaard & W.F. Van Putten. 1999. Environmental dependence
of inbreeding depression and purging in Drosophila melanogaster. J. Evol. Biol.
12, 1125–1137.
Bijlsma, R., J. Bundgaard & A.C. Boerema. 2000. Does inbreeding affect the
extinction risk of small populations? Predictions from Drosophila. J. Evol. Biol.
13, 502–514.
Billington, H.L. 1991. Effects of population size on genetic variation in a dioecious conifer. Conserv. Biol. 5, 115–119.
Bingaman-Lackey, L. 1999. International Giraffe Studbook. ISIS, Apple Valley, MN.
Birstein, V.J., P. Doukakis, B. Sorkin & R. DeSalle. 1998. Population aggregation
analysis of three caviar-producing species of sturgeons and implications for
the species identiﬁcation of black caviar. Conserv. Biol. 12, 766–775.
Bishop, J.A. & L.M. Cook. 1975. Moths, melanism and clean air. Scient. Am. 232,
90–99.
Black, F.L. & P.W. Hedrick. 1997. Strong balancing selection at HLA loci: evidence from segregation in South Amerindian families. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 94, 12452–12456.
Black, J.M. 1995. The nene Branta sandvicensis recovery initiative: research
against selection. Ibis 137, S153-S160.
Bohonak, A.J. 1999. Dispersal, gene ﬂow and population structure. Quart. Rev.
Biol. 74, 21–45.
Bollmer, J.L., M.E. Irwin, J.P. Rieder & P.G. Parker. 1999. Multiple paternity in
loggerhead turtle clutches. Copeia, no. 2, 475–478.
Bonnell, M.L. & R.K. Selander. 1974. Elephant seals: genetic variation and near
extinction. Science 184, 908–909.
Borlase, S.C., D.A. Loebel, R. Frankham, R.K. Nurthen, D.A. Briscoe & G.E.
Daggard. 1993. Modelling problems in conservation genetics using captive
Drosophila populations: consequences of equalization of family sizes. Conserv.
Biol. 7, 122–131.
Botting, D. 1999. Gerald Durrell: The Authorized Biography. HarperCollins, New
York.
Bouzat, J.L., H.A. Lewin & K.N. Paige. 1998. The ghost of genetic diversity past:
historical DNA analysis of the greater prairie chicken. Am. Natur. 152, 1–6.
Bowdoin, J. & B. Williams. 1996. Conservation spotlight: the Attwater’s prairie
chicken. Endang. Species Updates 13, 12.
Bowen, B.W. & J.C. Avise. 1996. Conservation genetics of marine turtles. Pp.
190–237 in J.C. Avise & J.L. Hamrick, eds. Conservation Genetics: Case Histories
from Nature. Chapman & Hall, New York.
Bowen, B.W., F.A. Abreu-Grobois, G.H. Balazs, N. Kamenzaki, C.J. Limpus & R.J.

REFERENCES

Ferl. 1995. Trans-Pacific migrations of the loggerhead turtle (Caretta caretta)
demonstrated with mitochondrial DNA markers. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 92,
3731–3734.
Bowles, M.L. & C.J. Whelan. 1994. Restoration of Endangered Species: Conceptual
Issues, Planning and Implementation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
Bowman, J.C. & D.S. Falconer. 1960. Inbreeding depression and heterosis of
litter size in mice. Genet. Res. 1, 262–274.
Boyce, M.S. 1994. Population viability analysis exempliﬁed by models for the
northern spotted owl. Pp. 3–18 in D.J. Fletcher & B.F.J. Manly, eds. Statistics in
Ecology and Environmental Monitoring, vol. 2. University of Otago Press,
Dunedin, New Zealand.
Boyd, L. & K.A. Houpt. 1994. Przewalski’s Horse: The History and Biology of an
Endangered Species. State University of New York Press, Albany, NY.
Bradshaw, A.D. 1991. Genostasis and the limits to evolution. Phil. Trans. R. Soc.
Lond. B 333, 289–305.
Bradshaw, A.D. & T. McNeilly. 1981. Evolution and Pollution. Arnold, London.
Brewer, B.A., R.C. Lacy, M.L. Foster & G. Alaks. 1990. Inbreeding depression in
insular and central populations of Peromyscus mice. J. Hered. 81, 257–266.
Briggs, D. & S.M. Walters. 1997. Plant Variation and Evolution, 3rd edn. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Briscoe, D.A. & N.N. Tait. 1995. Allozyme evidence for extensive and ancient
radiations in Australian Onychophora. J. Hered. 114, 91–102.
Briscoe, D.A., J.M. Malpica, A. Robertson, G.J. Smith, R. Frankham, R.G. Banks &
J.S.F. Barker. 1992. Rapid loss of genetic variation in large captive populations of Drosophila ﬂies: implications for the genetic management of captive
populations. Conserv. Biol. 6, 416–425.
Briton, J., R.K. Nurthen, D.A. Briscoe & R. Frankham. 1994. Modelling problems
in conservation genetics using captive Drosophila populations: consequences
of harems. Biol. Conserv. 69, 267–275.
Brock, M.K. & B.N. White. 1992. Application of DNA ﬁngerprinting to the recovery program of the endangered Puerto Rican parrot. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA
89, 11121–11125.
Brook, B.W. & J. Kikkawa. 1998. Examining threats faced by island birds: a population viability analysis on the Capricorn silvereye using long-term data. J.
Appl. Ecol. 35, 491–503.
Brook, B.W., L. Lim, R. Harden & R. Frankham. 1997a. How secure is the Lord
Howe Island woodhen? A population viability analysis using VORTEX. Paciﬁc
Conserv. Biol. 3, 125–133.
Brook, B.W., L. Lim, R. Harden & R. Frankham. 1997b. Does population viability
analysis software predict the behaviour of real populations? A retrospective
study on the Lord Howe Island woodhen Tricholimnas sylvestris (Sclater). Biol.
Conserv. 82, 119–128.
Brook, B.W., J.J. O’Grady, A.P. Chapman, M.A. Burgman, H.R. Akçakaya & R.
Frankham. 2000. Predictive accuracy of population viability analysis in conservation biology. Nature 404, 385–387.
Brookﬁeld, J.F.Y. & P.M. Sharp. 1994. Neutralism and selectionism face up to
DNA data. Trends Genet. 10, 109–111.
Brown, A.H.D. 1989. Genetic characterisation of plant mating systems. Pp.
145–162 in A.H.D. Brown, M.T. Clegg, A.L. Kahler & B.S. Weir, eds. Plant
Population Genetics, Breeding and Genetic Resources. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Brown, A.H.D. & A.G. Young. 2000. Genetic diversity in tetraploid populations

571

572

REFERENCES

of the endangered daisy Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides and implications for its
conservation. Heredity 85, 122–129.
Brown, J.L. & E.R. Brown. 1998. Are inbred offspring less ﬁt? Survival in a
natural population of Mexican jays. Behav. Ecol. 9, 60–63.
Brown, S.M. & B.A. Houlden. 1999. Isolation and characterization of microsatellite markers in the black rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis). Mol. Ecol. 8, 1559–1561.
Bryant, E.H. & D.H. Reed. 1999. Fitness decline under relaxed selection in
captive populations. Conserv. Biol. 13, 665–669.
Bryant, E.H., S.A. McCommas & L.M. Combs. 1986. The effect of an experimental
bottleneck upon quantitative genetic variation in the houseﬂy. Genetics 114,
1191–1211.
Bryant, E.H., L.M. Meffert & S.A. McCommas. 1990. Fitness rebound in serially
bottlenecked populations of the houseﬂy. Am. Natur. 136, 542–549.
Bryant, E.H., V.L. Backus, M.E. Clark & D.H. Reed. 1999. Experimental tests of
captive breeding for endangered species. Conserv. Biol. 13, 1487–1496.
Burdon, J.J. 1987. Diseases and Plant Population Biology. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Burgman, M.A. & B.B. Lamont. 1992. A stochastic model for the viability of
Banksia cuneata populations: environmental, demographic and genetic
effects. J. Appl. Ecol. 29, 719–727.
Burgman, M.A. & D.B. Lindenmayer. 1998. Conservation Biology for the Australian
Environment. Surrey Beatty & Sons, Chipping Norton, NSW, Australia.
Burgman, M.A., S. Ferguson & H.R. Akçakaya. 1993. Risk Assessment in
Conservation Biology. Chapman & Hall, London.
Buri, P. 1956. Gene frequency in small populations of mutant Drosophila.
Evolution 10, 367–402.
Burton, R.S., P.D. Rawson & S. Edmands. 1999. Genetic architecture of physiological phenotypes: empirical evidence for coadapted gene complexes. Am.
Sci. 39, 451–462.
Bush, G.L. 1975. Modes of animal speciation. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 6, 339–364.
Bush, G.L., R.W. Neck & G.B. Kitto. 1976. Screwworm eradication: inadvertent
selection for noncompetitive ecotypes during mass rearing. Science 193,
491–493.
Butler, D. & D. Merton. 1992. The Black Robin: Saving the World’s Most Endangered
Bird. Oxford University Press, Auckland, New Zealand.
Butler, M.A., A.R. Templeton & B. Read. 1994. DNA ﬁngerprinting in Speke’s
gazelle: a test for genetic distinctness, and the correlation between relatedness and similarity. Mol. Ecol. 3, 355–361.
Buza, L., A. Young & P. Thrall. 2000. Genetic erosion, inbreeding and reduced
ﬁtness in fragmented populations of the endangered tetraploid pea
Swainsonia recta. Biol. Conserv. 93, 177–186.
Byers, D.L. & T.R. Meagher. 1999. Mate availability in small populations of plant
species with homomorphic sporophytic self-incompatibility. Heredity 68,
353–359.
Caballero, A. 1994. Developments in the prediction of effective population size.
Heredity 73, 657–679.
Calero, C., O. Ibanez, M. Mayol & J.A. Rosello. 1998. Random ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA (RAPD) markers detect a single phenotype in Lysimachia minoricensis
J.J. Rodr. (Primulaceae), a wild extinct plant. Mol. Ecol. 8, 2133–2136.
Cann, R.L., R.A. Feldman, L. Agullana & L.A. Freed. 1996. A PCR approach to
detection of malaria in Hawaiian birds. Pp. 202–213 in T.B. Smith & R.K.
Wayne, eds. Molecular Genetic Approaches in Conservation. Oxford University
Press, New York.

REFERENCES

Caro, T.M. & M.K. Laurenson. 1994. Ecological and genetic factors in conservation: a cautionary tale. Science 263, 485–486.
Carrington, M., G.W. Nelson, M.P. Martin, T. Kissner, D. Vlahov, J.J. Goegert, R.
Kaslow, S. Buchbinder, K. Hoots & S.J. O’Brien. 1999. HLA and HIV–1: heterozygote advantage and B*35-Cw*04 disadvantage. Science 283, 1748–1752.
Caughley, G. & A. Gunn. 1996. Conservation Biology in Theory and Practice.
Blackwell Scientiﬁc, Cambridge, MA.
Chan, S.H., T. Tan, A. Kamarudin, G.B. Wee & V.S. Rajan. 1979. HLA and sexually
transmitted disease in prostitutes. Br. J. Venereal Dis. 55, 207–210.
Channell, R. & M.V. Lomollno. 2000. Dynamic biogeography and conservation
of endangered species. Nature 403, 84–86.
Chapman, A.P., B.W. Brook, T.H. Clutton-Brock, B.T. Grenfell & R. Frankham.
2001. Population viability analyses on a cycling population: a cautionary
tale. Biol. Conserv. 97, 61–69.
Charlesworth, B. 1998. The effect of synergistic epistasis on the inbreeding
load. Genet. Res. 71, 85–89.
Charlesworth, B. & D. Charlesworth. 1999. The genetic basis of inbreeding
depression. Genet. Res. 74, 329–340.
Charlesworth, B. & K.A. Hughes. 2000. The maintenance of genetic variation in
life-history traits. Pp. 369–392 in R.S. Singh & C. Krimbas, eds. Evolutionary
Genetics from Molecules to Morphology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
Charlesworth, D. & P. Awadalla. 1998. Flowering plant self-incompatibility: the
molecular population genetics of Brassica S-loci. Heredity 81, 1–9.
Charlesworth, D. & B. Charlesworth. 1987. Inbreeding depression and its evolutionary consequences. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 18, 237–268.
Charlesworth, D., M.T. Morgan & B. Charlesworth. 1993. Mutation accumulation in ﬁnite outbreeding and inbreeding populations. Genet. Res. 61, 39–56.
Chen, X. 1993. Comparison of inbreeding and outbreeding in hemaphroditic
Arianta arbustorum (L.) (land snail). Heredity 71, 456–461.
Cheverud, J., E. Routman, C. Jaquish, S. Tardif, G. Peterson, N. Belﬁore & L.
Forman. 1994. Quantitative and molecular genetic variation in captive
cotton-top tamarins (Saguinus oedipus). Conserv. Biol. 8, 95–105.
Cioﬁ, C. & M.W. Bruford. 1998. Isolation and characterization of microsatellite
loci in the Komodo dragon Varanus komodoensis. Mol. Ecol. 7, 134–136.
Claridge, M.F., H.A. Dawah & M.R. Wilson. 1997. Species: The Units of Biodiversity.
Chapman & Hall, London.
Clark, T.W. 1994. Restoration of the endangered black-footed ferret: a twentyyear overview. Pp. 272–297 in M.L. Bowles & C. J. Whelan, eds. Restoration of
Endangered Species: Conceptual Issues, Planning and Implementation. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Clark, T.W., R.P. Reading & A.L. Clarke. 1994. Endangered Species Recovery: Finding
the Lessons, Improving the Process. Island Press, Washington, DC.
Clarke, B.C. 1969. The evidence for apostatic selection. Heredity 124, 347–352.
Clarke, G.M. 1995. Relationships between developmental stability and ﬁtness:
applications for conservation biology. Conserv. Biol. 9, 18–24.
Clausen, J., D.D. Keck & W.M. Hiesey. 1940. Experimental studies on the nature
of Species. I. Effect of varied environments on Western North American
Plants. Carnegie Institute of Washington Publications No. 520. Carnegie Institute,
Washington, DC.
Coates, D.J. & V.L. Hamley. 1999. Genetic divergence and the mating system in
the endangered and geographically restricted species Lambertia orbifolia
Gardner (Proteaceae). Heredity 83, 418–427.

573

574

REFERENCES

Cody, M.L. & J.M. Overton. 1996. Short-term evolution of reduced dispersal in
island plant populations. J. Ecol. 84, 53–61.
Coltman, D.W., W.D. Bowne & J.M. Wright. 1998. Birth weight and neonatal survival of harbour seal pups are positively correlated with genetic variation
measured by microsatellites. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 265, 803–809.
Coltman, D.W., J.G. Pilkington, J.A. Smith & J.M. Pemberton. 1999. Parasitemediated selection against inbred Soay sheep in a free-living island population. Evolution 53, 1259–1267.
Conway, W.G. 1986. The practical difﬁculties and ﬁnancial implications of
endangered species breeding programmes. Int. Zoo Yb. 24/25, 210–219.
Cook, L.M. 1965. Inheritance of shell size in the snail Arianta arbustorum.
Evolution 19, 86–94.
Cooper, A., J. Rhymer, H.F. James, S.L. Olson, C. E. McIntosh, M.D. Sorenson &
R.C. Fleischer. 1996. Ancient DNA and island endemics. Nature 381, 484.
Cooper, S.J.B., C.M. Bull & M.G. Gardner. 1997. Characterization of microsatellite loci from the socially monogamous lizard Tiliqua rugosa using a PCRbased isolation technique. Mol. Ecol. 6, 793–795.
Costanza, R., R. d’Arge, R. de Groot, S. Farber, M. Grasso, B. Hannon, K. Limburg,
S. Naeem, R.V. O’Neill, J. Paruelo, R.G. Raskin, P. Sutton & M. van den Belt.
1997. The value of the world’s ecosystem services and natural capital. Nature
387, 253–260.
Cott, H.B. 1940. Adaptive Coloration in Animals. Methuen, London.
Coulson, T.N., J.M. Pemberton, S.D. Albon, M. Beaumont, T.C. Marshall, J. Slate,
F.E. Guinness & T.H. Clutton-Brock. 1998. Microsatellites reveal heterosis in
red deer. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 265, 489–495.
Coyne, J.A. & H.A. Orr. 1989. Patterns of speciation in Drosophila. Evolution 43,
362–381.
Cracraft, J. 1997. Species concepts in systematics and conservation biology: an
ornithological viewpoint. Pp. 325–339 in M.F. Claridge, H.A. Dawah & M.R.
Wilson, eds. Species: The Units of Biodiversity. Chapman & Hall, London.
Cracraft, J., J. Feinstein, J. Vaughn & K. Helm-Bychowski. 1998. Sorting out tigers
(Panthera tigris): mitochondrial sequences, nuclear inserts, systematics, and
conservation genetics. Anim. Conserv. 1, 139–150.
Craig, J.L. 1994. Meta-populations: is management as ﬂexible as nature? Pp.
50–66 in P.J.S. Olney, G.M. Mace & A.T.C. Feistner, eds. Creative Conservation:
Interactive Management of Wild and Captive Animals. Chapman & Hall, London.
Crandall, K.A., O.R.P. Bininda-Edmonds, G.M. Mace & R.K. Wayne. 2000.
Considering evolutionary processes in conservation biology: an alternative
to ‘evolutionarily signiﬁcant units’. Trends Ecol. Evol. 15, 290–295.
Crnokrak, P. & D.A. Roff. 1995. Dominance variance: associations with selection
and fitness. Heredity 75, 530–540.
Crnokrak, P. & D.A. Roff. 1999. Inbreeding depression in the wild. Heredity 83,
260–270.
Crooks, K.R., M.A. Sanjayan & D.F. Doak. 1998. New insights into cheetah conservation through demographic modelling. Conserv. Biol. 12, 889–895.
Crow, J.F. & M. Kimura. 1970. An Introduction to Population Genetics Theory. Harper
& Row, New York.
Crozier, R.H. 1997. Preserving the information content of species: genetic diversity, phylogeny, and conservation worth. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 28, 243–268.
Culver, M., W.E. Johnson, J. Pecon-Slattery & S.J. O’Brien. 2000. Genomic ancestry of the American puma (Puma concolor). J. Hered. 91, 186–197.
Daily, G.C. 1999. Developing a scientiﬁc basis for managing Earth’s life support

REFERENCES

systems. Conserv. Ecol. 3, 14 [online] URL http://www.consecol.orf/vol3/iss2/art14.
Daniels, S.J. & J.R. Walters. 2000. Inbreeding depression and its effects on natal
dispersal in red-cockaded woodpeckers. Condor 102, 482–491.
Daniels, S.J., J.A. Priddy & J.R. Walters. 2000. Inbreeding in small populations of
red-cockaded woodpeckers: analyses using a spatially-explicit simulation
model. Pp. 129–147 in A.G. Young & G.M. Clarke, eds. Genetics, Demography and
Viability of Fragmented Populations. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Darwin, C. 1876. The Effects of Cross and Self-Fertilization in the Vegetable Kingdom.
John Murray, London.
Daszak, P., A.A. Cunningham & A.D. Hyatt. 2000. Emerging infectious diseases
of wildlife: threats to biodiversity and human health. Science 287, 443–449.
Daugherty, C.H., A. Cree, J.M. Hay & M.B. Thompson. 1990. Neglected taxonomy
and continuing extinctions of tuatara (Sphenodon). Nature 347, 177–179.
David, P. 1998. Heterozygosity–ﬁtness correlations: new perspectives on old
problems. Heredity 80, 531–537.
Davis, J. (ed.) 1992. The Wildlands Project, Wild Earth Special Issue. Cenozoice
Society Inc., Canton, NY.
Dayanandan, S., J. Dole, K. Bawa & R. Kesseli. 1999. Population structure delineated with microsatellite markers in fragmented populations of a tropical
tree, Carapa guianensis (Meliaceae). Mol. Ecol. 8, 1585–1592.
De Bois, H., A.A. Dhondt & B. Van Puijenbroek. 1990. Effects of inbreeding on juvenile survival of the okapi Okapi johnstoni in captivity. Biol. Conserv. 54, 147–155.
de la Peña, M., S.F. Elena & A. Moya. 2000. Effects of deleterious mutation accumulation on the ﬁtness of RNA bacteriophage MS2. Evolution 54, 686–691.
Demauro, M.M. 1993. Relationship of breeding system to rarity in the lakeside
daisy (Hymenoxys acaulis var. glabra). Conserv. Biol. 7, 542–550.
Demauro, M.M. 1994. Development and implementation of a recovery program
for the federally threatened lakeside daisy (Hymenoxys acaulis var. glabra). Pp.
298–321 in M.L. Bowles & C.J. Whelan, eds. Restoring of Endangered Species:
Conceptual Issues, Planning and Implementation. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Dhondt, A.A. & E. Mattysen. 1993. Conservation biology of birds: can we bridge
the gap between head and heart? Trends Ecol. Evol. 8, 160–161.
Diamond, J.M. 1984. ‘Normal’ extinctions of isolated populations. Pp. 191–246
in M. H. Nitecki, ed. Extinctions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL..
Diamond, J. 1991. The Third Chimpanzee. Radius, London.
Diamond, J. 1997. Guns, Germs and Steel. W.W. Norton & Co., New York.
Diamond, J. & J.I. Rotter. 1987. Observing the founder effect in human evolution. Nature 329, 105–106.
Dietz, J.M., A.J. Baker & J.D. Ballou. 2000. Demographic evidence of inbreeding
depression in wild golden lion tamarins. Pp. 203–211 in A.G. Young & G.M.
Clarke, eds. Genetics, Demography and Viability of Fragmented Populations.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Dinerstein, E. & G.F. McCracken. 1990. Endangered greater one-horned rhinoceros carry high levels of genetic variation. Conserv. Biol. 4, 417–422.
Dizon, A., G. Lento, S. Baker, P. Parsboll, F. Capriano & R. Reeves. 2000. Molecular
Genetic Identiﬁcation of Whales, Dolphins, and Porpoises: Proceedings of a Workshop
on the Forensic Use of Molecular Techniques to Identify Wildlife Products in the
Marketplace. NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS. US Department of
Commerce, Washington, DC.
Dobson, A.P. 1999. Introduction: Genetics and conservation biology. Pp.

575

576

REFERENCES

xiii–xviii in L.F. Landweber & A.P. Dobson, eds. Genetics and the Extinction of
Species. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Dobson, A.P., G.M. Mace, J. Poole & R.A. Brett. 1992. Conservation biology: the
ecology and genetics of endangered species. Pp. 405–430 in R.J. Berry, T.J.
Crawford & G.M. Hewitt, eds. Genes in Ecology. Blackwell, Oxford, UK.
Dobzhansky, T., F.J. Ayala, G.L. Stebbins & J.W. Valentine. 1977. Evolution. W.H.
Freeman, San Francisco, CA.
Double, M. & P. Olsen. 1997. Simpliﬁed polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based
sexing assists conservation of an endangered owl, Norfolk Island boobook
Ninox novaeseelandiae undulata. Bird Conserv. Int. 7, 283–286.
Drake, J.W., B. Charlesworth, D. Charlesworth & J.F. Crow. 1998. Rates of spontaneous mutation. Genetics 148, 1667–1686.
Duda, T.F.J. & S.R. Palumbi. 1999. Molecular genetics of ecological diversiﬁcation: duplication and rapid evolution of toxin genes of the venomous gastropod Conus. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 96, 6820–6823.
Dudash, M.R. 1990. Relative ﬁtness of selfed and outcrossed progeny in a selfcompatible, protandrous species, Sabatia angularis L. (Gentianaceae): a comparison of three environments. Evolution 44, 1129–1139.
Dudash, M.R. & C.B. Fenster. 2000. Inbreeding and outbreeding depression in
fragmented populations. Pp. 35–53 in A.G. Young & G.M. Clarke, eds. Genetics,
Demography and Viability of Fragmented Populations. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Dudley, J.W. 1977. 76 generations of selection for oil and protein percentage in
maize. Pp. 459–473 in E. Pollak, O. Kempthorne & T.B. Bailey, eds. Proceedings
of the First International Conference on Quantitative Genetics. Iowa State University
Press, Ames, IA.
Dunbar, R. 1998. Your cheatin’ heart. New Scient. (21 November), 29–32.
Durrell, G. 1990. The Ark’s Anniversary. Collins, London.
East, E.M. 1916. Studies on size inheritance in Nicotiana. Genetics 1, 164–176.
Ecological Bulletin 2000. The use of population viability analyses in conservation
planning. Ecological Bulletin 48, 1–203 (editors Sjögren-Gulve, Pa Ebenhard, T.).
Edwards, S.V. & P.W. Hedrick. 1998. Evolution and ecology of MHC molecules:
from genomics to sexual selection. Trends Ecol. Evol. 13, 305–311.
Ehrlich, P.R. & A.H. Ehrlich. 1981. Extinction: The Causes and Consequences of the
Disappearance of Species. Ballantine Books, New York.
Eldridge, M.D.B. 1991. Chromosomal rearrangements and speciation in rock
wallabies, Petrogale. PhD thesis, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
Eldridge, M.D.B. & R.L. Close. 1992. Taxonomy of rock-wallabies, Petrogale
(Marsupialia: Macropodidae). I. A revision of the eastern Petrogale with a
description of three new species. Aust. J. Zool. 40, 605–625.
Eldridge, M.D.B. & R.L. Close. 1993. Radiation of chromosome shufﬂes. Curr.
Opin. Genet. and Devel. 3, 15–22.
Eldridge, M.D.B., J.M. King, A.K. Loupis, P.B.S. Spencer, A.C. Taylor, L.C. Pope &
G.P. Hall. 1999. Unprecedented low levels of genetic variation and inbreeding
depression in an island population of the black-footed rock-wallaby. Conserv.
Biol. 13, 531–541.
Elgar, M.A. & D. Clode. 2001. Inbreeding and extinction in island populations: a
cautionary tale. Conserv. Biol. 15, 284–286.
El-Kassaby, Y.A. & A.D. Yanchuk. 1994. Genetic diversity, differentiation, and
inbreeding in Paciﬁc yew from British Columbia. J. Hered. 85, 112–117.
Ellstrand, N.C. & J. Antonovics. 1985. Experimental studies of the evolutionary
signiﬁcance of sexual reproduction. II. A test of the density-dependent selection hypothesis. Evolution 39, 657–666.

REFERENCES

Ellstrand, N.C., H.C. Prentice & J.F. Hancock. 1999. Gene ﬂow and introgression
from domesticated plants into their wild relatives. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 30,
539–563.
Emerson, B.C. & G.P. Wallis. 1994. Species status and population genetic structure of the ﬂightless chafer beetles Prodontria modesta and P. bicolorata
(Coleoptera; Scarabaeidae) from South Island, New Zealand. Mol. Ecol. 3,
339–345.
Endler, J.A. 1986. Natural Selection in the Wild. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ.
England, P.R. 1997. Conservation genetics of population bottlenecks. PhD
thesis, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
England, P.R., D.A. Briscoe & R. Frankham. 1996. Microsatellite polymorphisms
in a wild population of Drosophila melanogaster. Genet. Res. 67, 285–290.
Evans, P.G.H. 1987. Electrophoretic variability of gene products. Pp. 105–162 in
F. Cooke & P.A. Buckley, eds. Avian Genetics: A Population and Ecological Approach.
Academic Press, London.
Eyre-Walker, A. & P.D. Keightley. 1999. High genomic deleterious mutation
rates in hominids. Nature 397, 344–347.
Falconer, D.S. 1977. Some results of the Edinburgh selection experiments with
mice. Pp. 101–115 in E. Pollak, O. Kempthorne & T.B. Bailey, eds. Proceedings of
the First International Conference on Quantitative Genetics. Iowa State University
Press, Ames, IA.
Falconer, D.S. & T.F.C. Mackay. 1996. Introduction to Quantitative Genetics, 4th edn.
Longman, Harlow, UK.
Falk, D.A. & K.E. Holsinger. 1991. Genetics and Conservation of Rare Plants. Oxford
University Press, New York.
Falk, D.A., C.I. Millar & M. Olwell. 1996. Restoring Diversity: Strategies for
Reintroduction of Endangered Plants. Island Press, Washington, DC.
Fenner, F. & F.N. Ratcliffe. 1965. Myxomatosis. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Ferson, S. & M.A. Burgman. 2000. Quantitative Methods in Conservation Biology.
Springer-Verlag, New York.
Fiedler, P.L. & P.M. Karieva. 1998. Conservation Biology for the Coming Decade, 2nd
edn. Chapman & Hall, New York.
Findlay, C.S. & F. Cooke. 1983. Genetic and environmental components of
clutch size variance in a wild population of lesser snow geese (Anser caerulescens caerulescens). Evolution 37, 724–734.
Finnegan, D.J. 1989. Eukaryotic transposable elements and genome evolution.
Trends Genet. 5, 103–107.
Fischer, M. & D. Matthies. 1998. Effects of population size on performance in
the rare plant Gentianella germanica. J. Ecol. 86, 195–204.
Fitzsimmons, N.N., S.W. Buskirk & M.H. Smith. 1995. Population history, genetic
variability, and horn growth in bighorn sheep. Conserv. Biol. 9, 314–323.
Fleischer, R.C. 1996. Application of molecular methods to the assessment of
genetic mating systems in vertebrates. Pp. 133–161 in J.D. Ferraris & S.
Palumbi, eds. Molecular Zoology: Advances, Strategies, and Protocols. Wiley–Liss,
New York.
Fleischer, R.C., C.L. Tarr & T.K. Pratt. 1994. Genetic structure and mating system
in the palila, an endangered Hawaiian honeycreeper, as assessed by DNA
ﬁngerprinting. Mol. Ecol. 3, 383–392.
Foley, P. 1994. Predicting extinction times from environmental stochasticity
and carrying capacity. Conserv. Biol. 8, 124–137.
Foose, T.J. 1986. Riders of the last ark: the role of captive breeding in conserva-

577

578

REFERENCES

tion strategies. Pp. 141–165 in L. Kaufman & K. Mallory, eds. The Last Extinction.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Foose, T.J. 1991. Viable population strategies for reintroduction programmes.
Pp. 165–172 in J.H.W. Gipps, ed. Beyond Captive Breeding: Re-Introducing
Endangered Mammals to the Wild, vol. 62. Zoological Society of London, Oxford,
UK.
Foose, T.J., L. de Boer, U.S. Seal & R. Lande. 1995. Conservation management
strategies based on viable populations. Pp. 273–294 in J. D. Ballou, M. Gilpin
& T. J. Foose, eds. Population Management for Survival and Recovery: Analytical
Methods and Strategies in Small Population Conservation. Columbia University
Press, New York.
Forbes, S.H. & J.T. Hogg. 1999. Assessing population structure at high levels of
differentiation: microsatellite comparisons of bighorn sheep and large carnivores. Anim. Conserv. 2, 223–233.
Fowler, K. & M.C. Whitlock. 1999. The variance in inbreeding depression and
the recovery of ﬁtness in bottlenecked populations. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 266,
2061–2066.
Frankel, O.H. 1970. Variation, the essence of life. Proc. Linn. Soc. NSW 95, 158–169.
Frankel, O.H. 1974. Genetic conservation: our evolutionary responsibility.
Genetics 78, 53–65.
Frankel, O.H. & M.E. Soulé (eds.) 1981. Conservation and Evolution. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Frankel, O.H., A.H.D. Brown & J. Burdon. 1995. The Conservation of Plant
Biodiversity. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Frankham, R. 1980. The founder effect and response to artiﬁcial selection in
Drosophila. Pp. 87–90 in A. Robertson, ed. Selection Experiments in Laboratory and
Domestic Animals. Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux, Farnham Royal, UK.
Frankham, R. 1983. Origin of genetic variation in selection lines. Pp. 1–18 in
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Breeders’ Roundtable.
Frankham, R. 1990a. Are responses to artiﬁcial selection for reproductive
ﬁtness traits consistently asymmetrical? Genet. Res. 56, 35–42.
Frankham, R. 1990b. Contribution of novel sources of genetic variation to selection response. Proc. 4th World Congr. Genet. Appl. Livestock Prod. 13, 185–194.
Frankham, R. 1995a. Conservation genetics. Ann. Rev. Genet. 29, 305–327.
Frankham, R. 1995b. Inbreeding and extinction: a threshold effect. Conserv. Biol.
9, 792–799.
Frankham, R. 1995c. Effective population size / adult population size ratios in
wildlife: a review. Genet. Res. 66, 95–107.
Frankham, R. 1995d. Genetic management of captive populations for reintroduction. Pp. 31–34 in M. Serena, ed. Reintroduction Biology of Australian and New
Zealand Fauna. Surrey Beatty & Sons, Chipping Norton, NSW, Australia.
Frankham, R. 1996. Relationship of genetic variation to population size in wildlife. Conserv. Biol. 10, 1500–1508.
Frankham, R. 1997. Do island populations have lower genetic variation than
mainland populations? Heredity 78, 311–327.
Frankham, R. 1998. Inbreeding and extinction: island populations. Conserv. Biol.
12, 665–675.
Frankham, R. 1999. Quantitative genetics in conservation biology. Genet. Res. 74,
237–244.
Frankham, R. 2000a. Modeling problems in conservation genetics using laboratory animals. Pp. 259–273 in S. Ferson & M. Burgman, eds. Quantitative
Methods in Conservation Biology. Springer-Verlag, New York.

REFERENCES

Frankham, R. 2000b. Genetics and conservation: Commentary on Elgar &
Clode. Aust. Biol. 13(3), 45–54.
Frankham, R. 2001. Inbreeding and extinction in island populations: reply to
Elgar and Clode. Conserv. Biol. 15, 287–289.
Frankham, R. & I.R. Franklin. 1998. Response to Lynch and Lande. Anim. Conserv.
1, 73.
Frankham, R. & D.A. Loebel. 1992. Modelling problems in conservation genetics
using captive Drosophila populations: rapid genetic adaptation to captivity.
Zoo Biol. 11, 333–342.
Frankham, R. & K. Ralls. 1998. Conservation biology: inbreeding leads to extinction. Nature 392, 441–442.
Frankham, R. & K.E. Weber. 2000. Nature of quantitative genetic variation. Pp.
351–368 in R.S. Singh & C.B. Krimbas, eds. Evolutionary Genetics: From Molecules
to Morphology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Frankham, R., H. Hemmer, O.A. Ryder, E.G. Cothran, M.E. Soulé, N.D. Murray &
M. Snyder. 1986. Selection in captive populations. Zoo Biol. 5, 127–138.
Frankham, R., K. Lees, M.E. Montgomery, P.R. England, E. Lowe & D.A. Briscoe.
1999. Do population size bottlenecks reduce evolutionary potential? Anim.
Conserv. 2, 255–260.
Frankham, R., H. Manning, S.H. Margan & D.A. Briscoe. 2000. Does equalisation
of family sizes reduce genetic adaptation to captivity? Anim. Conserv. 4,
357–363.
Frankham, R., D.M. Gilligan, D. Morris & D.A. Briscoe. 2001. Inbreeding and
extinction: effects of purging. Conserv. Genet. 2, 279–284.
Franklin, I.R. 1980. Evolutionary change in small populations. Pp. 135–150 in
M.E. Soulé & B.A. Wilcox, eds. Conservation Biology: An Evolutionary–Ecological
Perspective. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Franklin, I.R. & R. Frankham. 1998. How large must populations be to retain
evolutionary potential. Anim. Conserv. 1, 69–71.
Fritsch, P. & L.H. Rieseberg. 1996. The use of random ampliﬁed polymorphic
DNA (RAPD) in conservation genetics. Pp. 54–73 in T.B. Smith & R.K.
Wayne, eds. Molecular Approaches in Conservation. Oxford University Press,
New York.
Fuerst, P.A. & T. Maruyama. 1986. Considerations on the conservation of alleles
and of genic heterozygosity in small managed populations. Zoo Biol. 5,
171–179.
Futuyma, D.J. 1979. Evolutionary Biology. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Futuyma, D.J. 1998. Evolutionary Biology, 3rd edn. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Fyfe, R.W. 1978. Reintroducing endangered birds to the wild: a review.
Pp. 323–329 in S. A. Temple, ed. Endangered Birds: Management Techniques
for Preserving Threatened Species. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison,
WI.
Garcia-Dorado, A., C. Lopez-Fanjul & A. Caballero. 1999. Properties of spontaneous mutations affecting quantitative traits. Genet. Res. 74, 341–350.
Garrett, L. 1994. The Coming Plague: Newly Emerging Diseases in a World out of
Balance. Virago Press, London.
Gentry, A.H. 1986. Endemism in tropical versus temperate plant communities.
Pp. 153–181 in M.E. Soulé, ed. Conservation Biology: The Science of Scarcity and
Diversity. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Georghiou, G.P. 1986. The magnitude of the resistance problem. Pp. 14–43 in
Pesticide Resistance: Strategies and Tactics for Management. National Academy
Press, Washington, DC.

579

580

REFERENCES

Georgiadis, N., L. Bishof, A. Templeton, J. Patton, W. Karesh & D. Western. 1994.
Structure and history of African elephant populations. I. Eastern and
Southern Africa. J. Hered. 85, 100–104.
Geyer, C. J., O.A. Ryder, L.G. Chemnick & E.A. Thompson. 1993. Analysis of relatedness in the California condor, from DNA ﬁngerprints. Mol. Biol. Evol. 10,
571–589.
Gilbert, D.A., C. Packer, A.E. Pusey, J.C. Stephens & S.J. O’Brien. 1991. Analytical
DNA fingerprinting in lions: parentage, genetic diversity and kinship.
J. Hered. 82, 378–386.
Gillespie, J.H. 1991. The Causes of Molecular Evolution. Oxford University Press,
New York.
Gilligan, D.M. 2001. Conservation genetics and long term survival: testing
models using Drosophila. PhD thesis, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW,
Australia.
Gilligan, D.M., L.M. Woodworth, M.E. Montgomery, D.A. Briscoe & R. Frankham.
1997. Is mutation accumulation a threat to the survival of endangered populations? Conserv. Biol. 11, 1235–1241.
Gilligan, D.M., L.M. Woodworth, M.E. Montgomery, R.K. Nurthen, D.A. Briscoe &
R. Frankham. 2000. Can ﬂuctuating asymmetry be used to detect inbreeding
and loss of genetic diversity in endangered populations? Anim. Conserv. 3,
97–104.
Gillings, M.R. & P. Fahy. 1994. Genomic ﬁngerprinting: towards a uniﬁed view
of the Pseudomonas solanacearum species complex. Pp. 95–112 in A.C. Hayward
& G.L. Hartman, eds. Bacterial Wilt: The Disease and its Causative Agent,
Pseudomonas solanacearum. CAB International, Wallingford, UK.
Gilpin, M. 1991. The genetic effective size of a metapopulation. Biol. J. Linn. Soc.
42, 165–176.
Gilpin, M.E. & M.E. Soulé. 1986. Minimum viable populations: processes of
species extinction. Pp. 19–34 in Soulé, M.E., ed. Conservation Biology: The Science
of Scarcity and Diversity. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Ginsberg, J. 1993. Can we build an ark? Trends Ecol. Evol. 8, 4–6.
Gipps, J.H.W. (ed.) 1991. Beyond Captive Breeding: Re-Introducing Endangered
Mammals into the Wild, vol. 62. Symposia of the Zoological Society of London,
Oxford, UK.
Glenn, T.C., W. Stephan & M.J. Braun. 1999. Effects of a population bottleneck
on whooping crane mitochondrial DNA variation. Conserv. Biol. 13,
1097–1107.
Goldberg, T.L. 1997. Inferring the geographic origins of ‘refugee’ chimpanzees
in Uganda from mitochondrial DNA sequences. Conserv. Biol. 11, 1441–1446.
Goldstein, D.B. & C. Schlotterer. 1999. Microsatellites: Evolution and Applications.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Gorman, M. 1999. Oryx go back to the brink. Nature 398, 190.
Gottelli, D., C. Sillero-Zubiri, G.D. Appelbaum, M.S. Roy, D.J. Girman, J. GarciaMoreno, E.A. Ostrander & R.K. Wayne. 1994. Molecular genetics of the most
endangered canid: the Ethiopian wolf Canis simensis. Mol. Ecol. 3, 301–312.
Grant, B.R. & P.R. Grant. 1989. Evolutionary Dynamics of a Natural Population: The
Large Cactus Finch of the Galapagos. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Grant, B.S. 1999. Fine tuning the peppered moth paradigm. Evolution 53,
980–984.
Grant, P.R. & B.R. Grant. 1992. Demography and the genetically effective size of
two populations of Darwin’s ﬁnches. Ecology 73, 766–784.
Grant, P.R. & B.R. Grant. 1995. Predicting microevolutionary responses to directional selection on heritable variation. Evolution 49, 241–251.

REFERENCES

Grant, P.R. & R.B. Grant. 2000. Quantitative genetic variation in populations of
Darwin’s ﬁnches. Pp. 3–40 in T.A. Mousseau, B. Sinervo & J. Endler, eds.
Adaptive Genetic Variation in the Wild. Oxford University Press, New York.
Grant, V. 1981. Plant Speciation, 2nd edn. Columbia University Press, New York.
Grativol, A.D., J.D. Ballou & R.C. Fleischer. 2001. Microsatellite variation within
and among recently fragmented populations of the golden lion tamarin
(Leontopithecus rosalia). Conserv. Genet. 2, 1–9.
Greaves, J.H., R. Redfern, P.B. Ayres & J.E. Gill. 1977. Warfarin resistance: a
balance polymorphism. Genet. Res. 30, 257–263.
Groombridge, J.J., C.G. Jones, M.W. Bruford & R.A. Nichols. 2000. ‘Ghost’ alleles
of the Mauritius kestrel. Nature 403, 616.
Groves, C.P., C. Westwood & B.T. Shea. 1992. Unﬁnished business: Mahalanobis
and a clockwork orang. J. Hum. Evol. 22, 327–340.
Guerrant, E.O.J. 1996. Designing populations: demographic, genetic and horticultural dimensions. Pp. 171–207 in D.A. Falk, C.I. Millar & M. Olwell, eds.
Restoring Diversity: Strategies for Reintroduction of Endangered Plants. Island Press,
Washington, DC.
Haig, S.M. & J.C. Avise. 1996. Avian conservation genetics. Pp. 160–189 in J.C.
Avise & J.L. Hamrick, eds. Conservation Genetics: Case Histories from Nature.
Chapman & Hall, New York.
Haig, S.M., J.D. Ballou & S.R. Derrickson. 1990. Management option for preserving genetic diversity: reintroduction of Guam rails to the wild. Conserv. Biol. 4,
290–300.
Haig, S.M., J.R. Belthoff & D.H. Allen. 1993. Population viability analysis for a
small population of red-cockaded woodpeckers and evaluation of enhancement strategies. Conserv. Biol. 7, 289–301.
Haig, S.M., J.D. Ballou & N.J. Casna. 1994. Identiﬁcation of kin structure among
Guam rail founders: a comparison of pedigrees and DNA proﬁles. Mol. Ecol. 3,
109–119.
Haig, S.M., J.D. Ballou & N.J. Casna. 1995. Genetic identiﬁcation of kin in
Micronesian kingﬁshers. J. Hered. 86, 423–431.
Haig, S.M., R.S. Wagner, E.D. Forsman & T.D. Mullins. 2001. Geographic variation and genetic structure in spotted owls. Conserv. Genet. 2, 25–40.
Hairston, N.G.J., W. Lampert, C.E. Caceres, C.L. Holtmeier, L.J. Weider,
U. Gaedke, J.M. Fischer, J.A. Fox & D.M. Post. 1999. Rapid evolution revealed by
dormant eggs. Nature 401, 446.
Haldane, J.B.S. 1924. A mathematical theory of natural and artiﬁcial selection.
Part I. Trans. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 23, 10–41.
Haldane, J.B.S. & S.D. Jayakar. 1963. Polymorphism due to selection of varying
direction. J. Genet. 58, 237–242.
Halley, J. & A.R. Hoelzel. 1996. Simulation models of bottleneck events in
natural populations. Pp. 347–364 in T.B. Smith & R.K. Wayne, eds. Molecular
Genetic Approaches in Conservation. Oxford University Press, New York.
Hamer, T.E., E.D. Forsman, A.D. Fuchs & M.L. Walter. 1994. Hybridization
between barred and spotted owls. Auk 111, 487–492.
Hamrick, J.L. & M.J.W. Godt. 1989. Allozyme diversity in plant species. Pp. 43–63
in A.H.D. Brown, M.T. Clegg, A.L. Kahler & B.S. Weir, eds. Plant Population
Genetics, Breeding, and Genetic Resources. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Hamrick, J.L. & M.J.W. Godt. 1996. Conservation genetics of endemic plant
species. Pp. 281–304 in J.C. Avise & J.L. Hamrick, eds. Conservation Genetics: Case
Histories from Nature. Chapman & Hall, New York.
Hanski, I.A. & M.E. Gilpin. 1997. Metapopulation Biology: Ecology, Genetics and
Evolution. Academic Press, Orlando, FL.

581

582

REFERENCES

Harris, H., D.A. Hopkinson & Y.H. Edwards. 1977. Polymorphism and the
subunit structure of enzymes: a contribution to the neutralist–selectionist
controversy. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 74, 698–701.
Harry, J.L. & D.A. Briscoe. 1988. Multiple paternity in the loggerhead turtle
(Caretta caretta). J. Hered. 79, 96–99.
Hartl, D.L. & A.G. Clark. 1997. Principles of Population Genetics, 3rd edn. Sinauer,
Sunderland, MA.
Hartl, G.B. & Z. Pucek. 1994. Genetic depletion in the European bison (Bison
bonasus) and the signiﬁcance of electrophoretic heterozygosity for conservation. Conserv. Biol. 8, 167–174.
Harvey, P.H., A.J. Leigh Brown, J. Maynard Smith & S. Nee. 1996. New Uses for New
Phylogenies. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Hastings, A. & S. Harrison. 1994. Metapopulation dynamics and genetics. Ann.
Rev. Ecol. Syst. 25, 167–188.
Hayasaka, K., T. Gojobori & S. Horai. 1988. Molecular phylogeny and evolution
of primate mitochondrial DNA. Mol. Biol. Evol. 5, 626–644.
Hebard, F.V. 1994. Inheritance of leaf and stem morphology traits in crosses of
Chinese and American chestnut. J. Hered. 85, 440–446.
Hedrick, P.W. 1983. Genetics of Populations. Science Books International, Boston,
MA.
Hedrick, P.W. 1987. Genetic bottlenecks. Science 237, 963.
Hedrick, P.W. 1992. Genetic conservation in captive populations and endangered species. Pp. 45–68 in S.K. Jain & L.W. Botsford, eds. Applied Population
Biology. Kluwer, Dordrecht, Netherlands.
Hedrick, P.W. 1994. Purging inbreeding depression and the probability of
extinction: full-sib mating. Heredity 73, 363–372.
Hedrick, P.W. 1995a. Elephant seals and the estimation of a population bottleneck. J. Hered. 86, 232–235.
Hedrick, P.W. 1995b. Gene ﬂow and genetic restoration: the Florida panther as
a case study. Conserv. Biol. 9, 996–1007.
Hedrick, P.W. 1996. Bottleneck(s) or metapopulation in cheetahs. Conserv. Biol.
10, 897–899.
Hedrick, P.W. 2000. Genetics of Populations, 2nd edn. Jones & Bartlett, Sudbury,
MA.
Hedrick, P.W. & S.T. Kalinowski. 2000. Inbreeding depression in conservation
biology. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 31, 139–162.
Hedrick, P.W. & T.J. Kim. 2000. Genetics of complex polymorphisms: parasites
and maintenance of MHC variation. Pp. 204–234 in R.S. Singh & C.K.
Krimbas, eds. Evolutionary Genetics from Molecules to Morphology. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Hedrick, P.W. & P.S. Miller. 1992. Conservation genetics: techniques and fundamentals. Ecol. Applic. 2, 30–46.
Hedrick, P.W. & J.D. Parker. 1997. Evolutionary genetics of haplo-diploid organisms and X-linked chromosomes. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 28, 55–83.
Hedrick, P.W. & O. Savolainen. 1996. Molecular and adaptive variation: a perspective for endangered plants. Pp. 99–102 in J. Maschinski, H.D. Hammond
& L. Holter, eds. Southwest Rare and Endangered Plants: Proceeding of the Second
Conference. US Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain
Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, CO.
Hedrick, P.W., W. Klitz, W.P. Robinson, M.K. Kuhner & G. Thomson. 1991.
Population genetics of HLA. Pp. 248–271 in R.K. Selander, A.G. Clark &
T.S. Whittam, eds. Evolution at the Molecular Level. Sinauer, Sunderland,
MA.

REFERENCES

Hedrick, P.W., R.C. Lacy, F.W. Allendorf & M.E. Soulé. 1995. Directions in conservation biology: comments on Caughley. Conserv. Biol. 10, 1312–1320.
Hedrick, P.W., P.S. Miller, E. Geffen & R. Wayne. 1997. Genetic evaluation of the
three Mexican wolf lineages. Zoo Biol. 16, 47–69.
Helenurm, K. 1998. Outplanting and differential source population success in
Lupinus guadalupensis. Conserv. Biol. 12, 118–127.
Herbert, G., L.A. Lyons, S.J. O’Brien & S. Easteal. 1999. Patterns of primate evolution and phylogeny inferred from multiple loci in the nuclear genome. P. 24
in Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Conference of the Society for Molecular Biology
and Evolution, Brisbane, Qld, Australia.
Heschel, M.S. & K.N. Paige. 1995. Inbreeding depression, environmental stress,
and population size variation in scarlet gilia (Ipomopsis aggregata). Conserv.
Biol. 9, 126–133.
Hey, J. 1999. The neutralist, the ﬂy and the selectionists. Trends Ecol. Evol. 14,
35–38.
Hill, W.G. 1981. Estimation of effective population size from data on linkage
disequilibrium. Genet. Res. 38, 209–216.
Hill, W.G. 1982. Predictions of response to artiﬁcial selection from new mutations. Genet. Res. 40, 255–278.
Hillis, D.M., C. Moritz & B.K. Mable. 1996. Molecular Systematics, 2nd edn.
Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Hindar, K., N. Ryman & F. Utter. 1991. Genetic effects of cultured ﬁsh on natural
ﬁsh populations. Can. J. Fish. Aq. Sci. 48, 945–957.
Hodskins, L.G. (ed.) 1997. AZA Annual Report on Conservation and Science 1996–1997,
vol. 1. American Zoo and Aquarium Association, Silver Spring, MD.
Hoelzel, A.R. (ed.) 1998. Molecular Genetic Analysis of Populations: A Practical
Approach, 2nd edn. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Hoelzel, A.R., J. Halley, S.J. O’Brien, C. Campagna, T. Arnbom, B. Le Boef, K.
Ralls & G.A. Dover. 1993. Elephant seal genetic variation and the use of simulation models to investigate historical population genetics. J. Hered. 84,
443–449.
Hoffmann, A.A. & P.A. Parsons. 1991. Evolutionary Genetics and Environmental
Stress. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Hoffmann, A.A. & P.A. Parsons. 1997. Extreme Environmental Change and Evolution.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Hogbin, P.M., R. Peakall & M.A. Sydes. 2000. Achieving practical outcomes from
genetic studies of rare Australian plants. Aust. J. Bot. 48, 375–382.
Hohenboken, W.D., Y. Kochera & P.S. Dawson. 1991. Variability among families
of Tribolium castaneum in inbreeding depression for ﬁtness traits. J. Anim.
Breed. Genet. 108, 446–454.
Holden, C. 2000. DNA test to thwart tiger trade. Science 287, 963.
Höss, M., M. Kohn, S. Pääbo, F. Knauer & W. Schroder. 1992. Excrement analysis
by PCR. Nature 359, 199.
Houlden, B.A., P.R. England, A.C. Taylor, W.D. Greville & W.B. Sherwin. 1996.
Low genetic variability of the koala Phascolarctos cinereus in southeastern
Australia. Mol. Ecol. 5, 269–281.
Houlden, B.A., L. Woodworth & K. Humphreys. 1997. Captive breeding, paternity determination and genetic variation in chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) in
the Australasian region. Primates 38, 341–347.
Houlden, B.A., B.H. Costello, D. Sharkely, E.V. Fowler, A. Melzer, W. Ellis, F.
Carrick, P.R. Baverstock & M.S. Elphinstone. 1998. Phylogeographic differentiation in the mitochondrial control region in the koala, Phascolarctos cinereus
(Goldfuss 1817). Mol. Ecol. 8, 999–1011.

583

584

REFERENCES

Houle, D., B. Morikawa & M. Lynch. 1996. Comparing mutational variabilities.
Genetics 143, 1467–1483.
Howard, D.J. & S.H. Berlocher 1998. Endless Forms: Species and Speciation. Oxford
University Press, New York.
Huenneke, L.F. 1991. Ecological implications of genetic variation in plant populations. Pp. 30–44 in D.A. Falk & K.E. Holsinger, eds. Genetics and Conservation of
Rare Plants. Oxford University Press, New York.
Huey, R.B., G.W. Gilchrist, M.L. Carlson, D. Berrigan & L. Serra. 2000. Rapid evolution of a geographic cline in size in an introduced ﬂy. Science 287, 308–309.
Hughes, A.L. & M. Yeager. 1998. Natural selection at major histocompatibility
complex loci of vertebrates. Ann. Rev. Genet. 32, 415–435.
Hughes, L. 2000. Biological consequences of global warming: is the signal
already apparent? Trends Ecol. Evol. 15, 56–61.
Hurst, L.D. & J.R. Peck. 1996. Recent advances in understanding of the evolution
and maintenance of sex. Trends Ecol. Evol. 11, 46–52.
Husband, B.C. & D.W. Schemske. 1996. Evolution of the magnitude and timing
of inbreeding depression in plants. Evolution 50, 54–70.
Husband, B.C. & D.W. Schemske. 1997. The effect of inbreeding in diploid and
tetraploid populations of Epilobium angustifolium (Onagraceae): implications
for the genetic basis of inbreeding depression. Evolution 51, 737–746.
Huttley, G.A., M.W. Smith, M. Carrington & S.J. O’Brien. 1999. A scan for linkage
disequilibrium across the human genome. Genetics 152, 1711–1722.
Hutton, J. & B. Dixon. 2000. Endangered Species, Threatened Convention: The Past,
Present and Future of CITES. Earthscan Publications, London.
IUCN. 1987. The IUCN Policy Statement on Captive Breeding. IUCN, Gland,
Switzerland.
IUCN. 1996. 1996 IUCN Red List of Threatened Animals. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.
IUCN. 1997. Red List of Threatened Plants. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.
Jaenike, J.R. 1973. A steady state model of genetic polymorphism on islands.
Am. Natur. 107, 793–795.
James, F. 1995. The status of the red-cockaded woodpecker in 1990 and the prospect for recovery. Pp. 439–451 in D.L. Kulhavy, R.G. Hooper & R. Costa, eds.
Red-Cockaded Woodpecker: Recovery, Ecology and Management. Center for Applied
Studies, Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches, TX.
Jewell, P.A. 1976. Selection for reproductive success. Pp. 71–109 in C.R. Austin &
R.V. Short, eds. Reproduction in Mammals, vol. 6, The Evolution of Reproduction.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Jiménez, J.A., K.A. Hughes, G. Alaks, L. Graham & R.C. Lacy. 1994. An experimental study of inbreeding depression in a natural habitat. Science 266, 271–273.
Johns, G.C. & J.C. Avise. 1998. A comparative summary of genetic distances in
the vertebrates from the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene. Mol. Biol. Evol. 15,
1481–1490.
Johnson, M.S. & J.R.G. Turner. 1979. Absence of dosage compensation for a sexlinked enzyme in butterﬂies (Heliconius). Heredity 43, 71–77.
Johnston, L.A. & R.C. Lacy. 1995. Genome resource banking for species conservation: selection of sperm donors. Cryobiology 32, 68–77.
Johnston, P.G., R.J. Davey & J.H. Seebeck. 1984. Chromosome homologies in
Potorous tridactylus and P. longipes (Marsupialia: Macropodidae) based on
G-banding patterns. Aust. J. Zool. 32, 319–324.
Jones, D.A. & D.A. Wilkins. 1971. Variation and Adaptation in Plant Species.
Heinemann, London.
Jones, L.P., R. Frankham & J.S.F. Barker. 1968. The effects of population size and

REFERENCES

selection intensity in selection for a quantitative character in Drosophila. II.
Long-term response to selection. Genet. Res. 12, 249–266.
Joseph, L., C. Moritz & A. Hugall. 1995. Molecular data support vicariance as a
source of diversity in rainforests. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 260, 177–182.
Kalinowski, S.T., P.W. Hedrick & P.S. Miller. 1999. No inbreeding depression
observed in Mexican and red wolf captive programs. Conserv. Biol. 13,
1371–1377.
Karieva, P.M., J.G. Kingslover & R.B. Huey. 1993. Biotic Interactions and Climate
Change. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Kärkkäinen, K., V. Koski & O. Savolainen. 1996. Geographical variation in the
inbreeding depression of Scots pine. Evolution 50, 111–119.
Keightley, P.D. 1996. Nature of deleterious load in Drosophila. Genetics 144,
1993–1999.
Kettlewell, H.B.D. 1958. A survey of the frequencies of Biston betularia (L.) (Lep.)
and its melanic forms in Great Britain. Heredity 12, 551–572.
Kettlewell, H.B.D. 1973. The Evolution of Melanism. Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK.
Kimura, M. 1983. The Neutral Theory of Molecular Evolution. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
King, H.D. 1939. Life processes in gray Norway rats during fourteen years in captivity. Am. Anat. Mem. 17, 1–77.
Kinnaird, M.F. & T.G. O’Brien. 1991. Viable populations for an endangered forest
primate, the Tana River crested mangabey (Cercocebus galeritus galeritus).
Conserv. Biol. 5, 203–213.
Kleiman, D.G., B.B. Beck, J.M. Dietz & L.A. Dietz. 1991. Cost of a re-introduction
and criteria for success: accounting and accountability in the golden lion
tamarin conservation program. Pp. 125–142 in J.H.W. Gipps, ed. Beyond
Captive Breeding: Re-Introducing Endangered Mammals to the Wild. Clarendon
Press, Oxford, UK.
Kleiman, D.G., M.R. Stanley Price & B.B. Beck. 1994. Criteria for reintroductions.
Pp. 287–303 in P.J.S. Olney, G.M. Mace & A.T.C. Feistner, eds. Creative
Conservation: Interactive Management of Wild and Captive Animals. Chapman &
Hall, London.
Kleiman, D.G., M.E. Allen, K.V. Thompson & S. Lumpkin (eds.) 1996. Wild
Mammals in Captivity: Principles and Techniques. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL.
Klein, J., A. Sato, S. Nagl & C. O’hUigin. 1998. Molecular trans-species polymorphism. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 29, 1–21.
Knapp, E.E. & A.R. Dyer. 1998. When do genetic considerations require special
approaches to ecological restoration? Pp. 345–363 in P.L. Fiedler & P.M.
Karieva, eds. Conservation Biology for the Coming Decade, 2nd edn. Chapman &
Hall, New York.
Koenig, W.D., D. Van Vuren & P.N. Hooge. 1996. Detectability, philopatry, and
the distribution of dispersal distances in vertebrates. Trends Ecol. Evol. 11,
514–517.
Komdeur, J. 1996. Breeding of the Seychelles magpie robin Copsychus sechellarum
and implications for its conservation. Ibis 138, 485–491.
Komdeur, J., A. Kappe & L. van de Zande. 1998. Inﬂuence of population isolation
on genetic variation and demography in Seychelles warblers: a ﬁeld experiment. Anim. Conserv. 1, 203–212.
Kondrashov, A.S. & D. Houle. 1994. Genotype–environment interactions and
the estimation of the genomic mutation rate in Drosophila melanogaster. Proc.
R. Soc. Lond. B 258, 221–227.

585

586

REFERENCES

Kosuda, K. 1972. Synergistic effects of inbreeding on viability in Drosophila
virilis. Genetics 72, 461–468.
Kozol, A.J., J.F.A. Traniello & S.M. Williams. 1994. Genetic variation in the
endangered burying beetle Nicrophorus americanus (Coleoptera: Silphidae).
Ann. Ent. Soc. Am. 87, 928–935.
Kreitman, M. 1983. Nucleotide polymorphism at the alcohol dehydrogenase
locus of Drosophila melanogaster. Nature 304, 412–417.
Kreitman, M. 1996. The neutral theory is dead. Long live the neutral theory.
BioEssays 18, 678–683.
Kreitman, M. & H. Akashi. 1995. Molecular evidence for natural selection. Ann.
Rev. Ecol. Syst. 26, 403–422.
Kulhavy, D.L., R.G. Hooper & R. Costa. 1995. Red-Cockaded Woodpecker: Recovery,
Ecology and Management. Center for Applied Studies, Stephen F. Austin State
University, Nacogdoches, TX.
Lacy, R.C. 1987. Loss of genetic diversity from managed populations: interacting effects of drift, mutation, immigration, selection, and population subdivision. Conserv. Biol. 1, 143–158.
Lacy, R.C. 1997. Importance of genetic variation to the viability of mammalian
populations. J. Mammal. 78, 320–335.
Lacy, R.C. 1998. Partitioning additive, dominance, epistatic and maternal
effects on reproductive performance in crosses between subspecies of
Peromyscus polionotes. Pp. 88 in J. Sved, ed. 45th Annual Meeting of the Genetics
Society of Australia Inc. Genetics Society of Australia Inc., Sydney.
Lacy, R.C. & J.D. Ballou. 1998. Effectiveness of selection in reducing the genetic
load in populations of Peromyscus polionotus during generations of inbreeding. Evolution 52, 900–909.
Lacy, R.C., N.R. Flesness & U.S. Seal. 1990. Puerto Rican Parrot Population Viability
Analysis. Captive Breeding Specialist Group, Species Survival Commission,
IUCN, Apple Valley, MN.
Lacy, R.C., G. Alaks & A. Walsh. 1996. Hierarchical analysis of inbreeding depression in Peromyscus polionotus. Evolution 50, 2187–2200.
Lacy, R.C., J.D. Ballou & J.P. Pollak. 2000. PM2000. Chicago Zoological Society,
Chicago, IL.
Laerm, J., J.C. Avise, J.C. Patton & R.A. Lansman. 1982. Genetic determination of
the status of an endangered species of pocket gopher in Georgia. J. Wildl.
Manag. 46, 513–518.
Lahaye, W.S., R.J. Gutierrez & H.R. Akçakaya. 1994. Spotted owl metapopulation
dynamics in Southern California. J. Anim. Ecol. 63, 775–785.
Laikre, L. & N. Ryman. 1991. Inbreeding depression in a captive wolf (Canis
lupus) population. Conserv. Biol. 5, 33–40.
Laikre, L., R. Andren, H.O. Larsson & N. Ryman. 1996. Inbreeding depression in
brown bear, Ursus arctos. Biol. Conserv. 76, 69–72.
Laikre, L., N. Ryman & N.G. Lundh. 1997. Estimating inbreeding in a small, wild
muskox Ovibos moschatus population and its possible effects on population
reproduction. Biol. Conserv. 79, 197–204.
Lambert, D.M. & C.D. Millar. 1995. DNA science and conservation. Paciﬁc Conserv.
Biol. 2, 21–38.
Lamotte, M. 1959. Polymorphism of natural populations of Cepaea nemoralis.
Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 24, 65–84.
Land, D.E. & R.C. Lacy. 2000. Introgression level achieved through Florida
panther genetic restoration. Endang. Species Updates 17, 99–103.
Lande, R. 1988. Genetics and demography in biological conservation. Science
241, 1455–1460.

REFERENCES

Lande, R. 1995a. Mutation and conservation. Conserv. Biol. 9, 782–791.
Lande, R. 1995b. Breeding plans for small populations based on the dynamics
of quantitative genetic variance. Pp. 318–340 in J.D. Ballou, M. Gilpin & T.J.
Foose, eds. Population Management for Survival and Recovery: Analytical Methods
and Strategies in Small Population Conservation. Columbia University Press, New
York.
Lande, R. & G.F. Barrowclough. 1987. Effective population size, genetic variation, and their use in population management. Pp. 87–123 in M.E. Soulé, ed.
Viable Populations for Conservation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
Lande, R. & D.W. Schemske. 1985. The evolution of self-fertilization and
inbreeding depression in plants. I. Genetic models. Evolution 39, 24–40.
Landweber, L.F. & A.P. Dobson. (eds.) 1999. Genetics and the Extinction of Species:
DNA and the Conservation of Biodiversity. Princeton University Press, Princeton,
NJ.
Lanza, R.P., B.L. Draper & P. Damiani. 2000. Cloning Noah’s ark. Scient. Am. 87(5),
84–89.
Latter, B.D.H. 1998. Mutant alleles of small effect are primarily responsible for
the loss of ﬁtness with slow inbreeding in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics
148, 1143–1158.
Latter, B.D.H. & J.A. Sved. 1994. A reevaluation of data from competitive tests
shows high levels of heterosis in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 137,
509–511.
Latter, B.D.H., J.C. Mulley, D. Reid & L. Pascoe. 1995. Reduced genetic load
revealed by slow inbreeding in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 139, 287–297.
Lawton, J.H. & R.M. May. (eds.) 1995. Extinction Rates. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.
Leakey, R. & R. Lewin. 1995. The Sixth Extinction: Biodiversity and its Survival.
Phoenix, London.
Leberg, P.L. 1990a. Inﬂuence of genetic variability on population growth: implications for conservation. J. Fish Biol. 37 (suppl. A), 193–195.
Leberg, P.L. 1990b. Genetic considerations in the design of introduction programs. Pp. 609–619 in Transactions of the 55th North American Wildlife and
Natural Resources Conference.
Leberg, P.L. 1996. Applications of allozyme electrophoresis in conservation
biology. Pp. 87–103 in T.B. Smith & R.K. Wayne, eds. Molecular Genetic
Approaches in Conservation. Oxford University Press, New York.
Leberg, P.L., P.W. Stangel, H.O. Hillstead, R.L. Marchinton & M.H. Smith. 1994.
Genetic structure of reintroduced wild turkey and white-tailed deer populations. J. Wildl. Manag. 58, 698–711.
Ledig, F.T. & M.T. Conkle. 1983. Gene diversity and genetic structure in a narrow
endemic, Torrey pine (Pinus torreyana Parry ex Carr). Evolution 37, 79–85.
Legge, J.T., R. Roush, R. DeSalle, A.P. Vogler & B. May. 1996. Genetic criteria for
establishing evolutionarily signiﬁcant units in Cryan’s buckmoth. Conserv.
Biol. 10, 85–98.
Lens, L., P. Galbusera, T. Brooks, E. Waiyaki & T. Schenck. 1998. Highly skewed
sex ratios in the critically endangered Taita thrush as revealed by CHD genes.
Biodiver. Conserv. 7, 869–873.
Lerner, I.M. 1954. Genetic Homeostasis. Oliver & Boyd, Edinburgh, UK.
Les, D.H., J.A. Reinhartz & E.J. Esselman. 1991. Genetic consequences of rarity in
Aster furcatus (Asteraceae), a threatened, self-incompatible plant. Evolution 45,
1641–1650.
Lesica, P., R.F. Leary, F.W. Allendorf & D.E. Bilderback. 1988. Lack of genetic

587

588

REFERENCES

diversity within and among populations of an endangered plant Howellia
aquaticus. Conserv. Biol. 2, 275–282.
Letcher, B.H., J.A. Priddy, J.A. Walters & L.B. Crowder. 1998. An individual-based,
spatially-explicit simulation model of the population dynamics of the
endangered red-cockaded woodpecker, Piciodes borealis. Biol. Conserv. 86, 1–14.
Lewis, W.H. (ed.) 1980. Polyploidy: Biological Relevance. Plenum Press, New York.
Lewontin, R.C. 1974. The Genetic Basis of Evolutionary Change. Columbia University
Press, New York.
Lewontin, R.C. & L.C. Birch. 1966. Hybridization as a source of variation for
adaptation to new environments. Evolution 20, 315–336.
Li, C.C. 1955. Population Genetics. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Li, C.C. 1976. First Course in Population Genetics. Boxwood Press, Paciﬁc Grove, CA.
Li, W.-H. & Graur, D. 1991. Fundamentals of Molecular Evolution. Sinauer,
Sunderland, MA.
Lindenmayer, D.B. & H.A. Nix. 1993. Ecological principles for the design of wildlife corridors. Conserv. Biol. 7, 627–630.
Lindenmayer, D.B. & H.P. Possingham. 1994. The Risk of Extinction: Ranking
Management Options for Leadbeater’s Possum using Population Viability Analysis.
Center for Resource and Environmental Studies, Australian National
University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
Little, R.M., T.M. Crowe & W.S. Grant. 1993. Does hunting affect demography
and genetic structure of the greywing francolin Francolinus africanus? Biodiver.
Conserv. 2, 567–585.
Liu, F., L. Zhgang & D. Charlesworth. 1998. Genetic diversity in Leavenworthia
populations with different inbreeding levels. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 265, 293–301.
Lively, C.M. & M.F. Dybdahl. 2000. Parasite adaptation to locally common host
genotypes. Nature 405, 679–681.
Lively, C.M., C. Craddock & R.C. Vrijenhoek. 1990. Red Queen hypothesis supported by parasitism in sexual and clonal ﬁsh. Nature 344, 864–866.
Loeschcke, V., J. Tomiuk & S.K. Jain. (eds.) 1994. Conservation Genetics. Birkhäuser,
Basel, Switzerland.
Longmire, J.L., G.F. Gee, C.L. Hardenkopf & G.A. Mark. 1992. Establishing paternity in whooping cranes (Grus americana) by DNA analysis. Auk 109, 522–529.
Loope, L.L. & A.C. Medeiros. 1994. Impacts of biological invasions on the management and recovery of rare plants in Haleakala National Park, Mau,
Hawaiian Islands. Pp. 143–158 in M.L. Bowles & C.J. Whelan, eds. Restoration of
Endangered Species: Conceptual Issues, Planning and Implementation. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Lopez, M.A. & C. Lopez-Fanjul. 1993. Spontaneous mutation for a quantitative
trait in Drosophila melanogaster. II. Distribution of mutant effects on the trait
and ﬁtness. Genet. Res. 61, 117–126.
Lopez-Fanjul, C. & A. Villaverde. 1989. Inbreeding increases genetic variance for
viability in Drosophila melanogaster. Evolution 43, 1800–1804.
Ludwig, D. 1999. Is it meaningful to estimate probability of extinction? Ecology
80, 298–310.
Luikart, G. & J. Cornuet. 1998. Empirical evaluation of a test for identifying
recently bottlenecked populations from allele frequency data. Conserv. Biol.
12, 228–237.
Luikart, G. & P.R. England. 1999. Statistical analysis of microsatellite DNA data.
Trends Ecol. Evol. 14, 253–256.
Lynch, A.J.J., R.W. Barnes, J. Cambecedes & R.E. Vaillancourt. 1998. Genetic evidence that Lomatia tasmanica (Proteaceae) is an ancient clone. Aust. J. Bot. 46,
25–33.

REFERENCES

Lynch, M. 1991. The genetic interpretation of inbreeding depression and outbreeding depression. Evolution 45, 622–629.
Lynch, M. 1996. A quantitative–genetic perspective on conservation issues. Pp.
471–501 in J.C. Avise & J.L. Hamrick, eds. Conservation Genetics: Case Histories
from Nature. Chapman & Hall, New York.
Lynch, M. & B. Walsh. 1998. Genetics and Analysis of Quantitative Traits. Sinauer,
Sunderland, MA.
Lynch, M., J. Conery & R. Bürger. 1995. Mutational meltdowns in sexual populations. Evolution 49, 1067–1080.
Lynch, M., J. Blanchard, D. Houle, T. Kibota, S. Schultz, L. Vassilieva & J. Willis.
1999. Perspective: spontaneous deleterious mutation. Evolution 53, 645–663.
MacCluer, J.W., J.L. VandeBerg, B. Read & O.A. Ryder. 1986. Pedigree analysis by
computer simulation. Zoo Biol. 5, 147–160.
Mace, G.M. 1986. Genetic management of small populations. Int. Zoo Yb. 24/25,
167–174.
Mace, G.M. & R. Lande. 1991. Assessing extinction threats: towards a reevaluation of IUCN threatened species categories. Conserv. Biol. 5, 148–157.
Mace, G.M., T.B. Smith, M.W. Bruford & R.K. Wayne. 1996. An overview of the
issues. Pp. 1–21 in T.B. Smith & R.K. Wayne, eds. Molecular Genetic Approaches in
Conservation. Oxford University Press, New York.
Mackay, T.F.C. 1989. Mutation and the origin of quantitative variation. Pp.
113–119 in W.G. Hill & T.F.C. Mackay, eds. Evolution and Animal Breeding:
Reviews on Molecular and Quantitative Approaches in Honour of Alan Robertson.
CAB International, Wallingford, UK.
Mackay, T.F.C., J.D. Fry, R.F. Lyman & S.V. Nuzhdin. 1994. Polygenic mutation in
Drosophila melanogaster: estimates from response to selection of inbred
strains. Genetics 136, 937–951.
Madsen, T., B. Stille & R. Shine. 1996. Inbreeding depression in an isolated population of adders Vipera berus. Biol. Conserv. 75, 113–118.
Madsen, T., R. Shine, M. Olsson & H. Wittzell. 1999. Restoration of an inbred
adder population. Nature 402, 34–35.
Maehr, D.S., R.C. Lacy, E.D. Land, O.L. Bass & T.S. Hoctor. 2001. A reassessment of
Florida panther viability analysis and recovery efforts from multiple perspectives. In S.R. Beissinger & D.R. McCullough, eds. Population Viability
Analysis. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Magin, C.D., T.H. Johnson, B. Groombridge, M. Jenkins & H. Smith. 1994. Species
extinctions, endangerment and captive breeding. Pp. 3–31 in P.J.S. Olney,
G.M. Mace & A.T.C. Feistner, eds. Creative Conservation: Interactive Management of
Wild and Captive Animals. Chapman & Hall, London.
Majerus, M.E.N. 1998. Melanism: Evolution in Action. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.
Maki, M. & S. Horie. 1999. Random ampliﬁed polymorphic DNA (RAPD) markers
reveal less genetic variation in the endangered plant Cerastium ﬁscherianum
var. molle than in the widespread conspeciﬁc C. ﬁscherianum var. ﬁshcerianum
(Caryophyllaceae). Mol. Ecol. 8, 145–150.
Maki, M., M. Masuda & K. Inoue. 1996. Genetic diversity and hierarchal population structure of a rare autotetraploid plant, Aster kantoensis (Asteraceae). Am.
J. Bot. 83, 296–303.
Malecot, G. 1969. The Mathematics of Heredity. W.H. Freeman, San Francisco,
CA.
Manly, B.F.J. 1985. The Statistics of Natural Selection on Animal Populations.
Chapman & Hall, London.
Margan, S.H., R.K. Nurthen, M.E. Montgomery, L.M. Woodworth, E. Lowe,

589

590

REFERENCES

D.A. Briscoe & R. Frankham. 1998. Single large or several small? Population
fragmentation in the captive management of endangered species. Zoo Biol.
17, 467–480.
Marker, L. & S.J. O’Brien. 1989. Captive breeding of the cheetah (Acinonyx
jubatus) in North American zoos (1871–1986). Zoo Biol. 8, 3–16.
Marshall, D.R. & A.H.D. Brown. 1975. Optimum sampling strategies in genetic
conservation. Pp. 53–80 in O.H. Frankel & J.G. Hawkes, eds. Crop Genetic
Resources for Today and Tomorrow. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Marshall, T.C. & J.A. Spalton. 2000. Simultaneous inbreeding and outbreeding
depression in reintroduced Arabian oryx. Anim. Conserv. 3, 241–248.
Marshall, T.C., P. Sunnucks, J.A. Spalton, A. Greth & J.M. Pemberton. 1999. Use
of genetic data for conservation management: the case of the Arabian oryx.
Anim. Conserv. 2, 269–278.
Martins, P.S. & S.K. Jain. 1979. Role of genetic variation in the colonizing ability
of rose clover (Trifolium hirtum ALL.). Am. Natur. 114, 591–595.
Mather, K. 1973. Genetical Structure of Populations. Chapman & Hall, London.
Maughan, P.J., M.A.S. Maroof & G.R. Buss. 1995. Microsatellite and ampliﬁed
length polymorphisms in cultivated and wild soybean. Genome 38, 715–723.
May, R.M. 1973. Stability and Complexity in Model Ecosystems. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ.
May, R.M. 1995. The cheetah controversy. Nature 374, 309–310.
Mayden, R.L. 1997. A hierarchy of species concepts: the denouncement in the
saga of the species problem. Pp. 381–424 in M.F. Claridge, H.A. Dawah & M.R.
Wilson, eds. Species: The Units of Biodiversity. Chapman & Hall, London.
Mayr, E. 1963. Animal Species and Evolution. Harvard University Press, Cambridge,
MA.
McCauley, D.E. & M.J. Wade. 1981. The population effects of inbreeding in
Tribolium. Heredity 46, 59–67.
McCullough, D.R. 1996. Metapopulatons and Wildlife Conservation. Island Press,
Washington, DC.
McCullough, D.R., J.K. Fischer & J.D. Ballou. 1996. From bottleneck to metapopulation: recovery of the Tule elk in California. Pp. 375–403 in D.R.
McCullough, ed. Metapopulations and Wildlife Conservation. Island Press,
Washington, DC.
McIntosh, N. 1999. Hawaii’s endangered humpback whales. Endang. Species
Updates 16, 60–63.
McKenzie, J.A. 1996. Ecological and Evolutionary Aspects of Insecticide Resistance.
Academic Press and R.G. Lands Co., Austin, TX.
McKenzie, J.A. & P. Batterham. 1994. The genetic, molecular and phenotypic consequences of selection for insecticide resistance. Trends Ecol. Evol. 9, 166–169.
McKusick, V.A. 1969. Human Genetics, 2nd edn. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ.
McNeely, J.A., K.R. Miller, W.V. Reid, R.A. Mittermeier & T.B. Werner. 1990.
Conserving the World’s Biological Diversity. IUCN, World Resources Institute,
Conservation International, WWF-US and the World Bank, Washington,
DC.
McNeill, W.H. 1976. Plagues and Peoples. Anchor Press, Garden City, NY.
Meagher, S. 1999. Genetic diversity and Capillaria hepatica (Nematoda) prevalence in Michigan deer mouse populations. Evolution 53, 1318–1324.
Meagher, S., D.J. Penn & W.K. Potts. 2000. Male–male competition magniﬁes
inbreeding depression in wild house mice. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 97,
3324–3329.

REFERENCES

Meffe, G.K. & C.R. Carroll. 1997. Principles of Conservation Biology, 2nd edn.
Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Mejdell, C.M., O. Lie, H. Solbu, E.F. Arnet & R.L. Spooner. 1994. Association of
major histocompatability complex antigens (BoLA-A) with AI bull progeny
test results for mastitis, ketosis and fertility in Norwegian cattle. Anim. Genet.
25, 99–104.
Menges, E. 1990. Population viability analysis for an endangered plant. Conserv.
Biol. 4, 52–61.
Menges, E.S. 1991. Seed germination percentage increases with population size
in a fragmented prairie species. Conserv. Biol. 5, 158–164.
Menges, E.S. 1992. Stochastic modeling of extinction in plant populations. Pp.
253–275 in P.L. Fiedler & S.K. Jain, eds. Conservation Biology: The Theory and
Practice of Nature Conservation Preservation and Management. Chapman & Hall,
New York.
Menges, E.S. 2000. Population viability analyses in plants: challenges and
opportunities. Trends Ecol. Evol. 15, 51–56.
Merila, J. & B.C. Sheldon. 2000. Lifetime reproductive success and heritability
in nature. Am. Natur. 155, 301–310.
Mesta, R. 1999. Final rule to remove the American peregrine falcon from the
federal list of endangered and threatened wildlife, and to remove the similarity of appearance provision for free-ranging peregrines in the continental
United States. Federal Register 64(164), 46541–46558.
Miklos, G.L.G. & R.M. Rubin. 1996. The role of genome project in determining
gene function: insights from organisms. Cell 86, 521–529.
Millar, C.D., C.E.M. Reed, J.L. Halverson & D.M. Lambert. 1997. Captive management and molecular sexing of endangered avian species: an application to
the black stilt Himantopus novaezelandiae and hybrids. Biol. Conserv. 82, 81–86.
Millar, J.G. 1999. Proposed rule to remove the bald eagle in the lower 48 states
from the list of endangered and threatened wildlife. Federal Register 64(128),
36453–36464.
Millar, J.S. & R.M. Zammuto. 1983. Life histories of mammals: an analysis of life
tables. Ecology 64, 631–635.
Miller, P.M. & R.C. Lacy. 1999. VORTEX: A Stochastic Simulation of the Extinction
Process. Version 8 User’s Manual. Conservation Breeding Specialist Group
(SSC/IUCN), Apple Valley, MN.
Mills, L.S. & F.W. Allendorf. 1996. The one-migrant-per-generation rule in conservation and management. Conserv. Biol. 10, 1509–1518.
Mills, L.S. & M.S. Lindberg. 2001. Sensitivity analysis to evaluate the consequences of conservation action. In S.R. Beissinger & D.R. McCullough, eds.
Population Viability Analysis. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Mills, L.S. & P.E. Smouse. 1994. Demographic consequences of inbreeding in
remnant populations. Am. Natur. 144, 412–431.
Milne, H. & F.W. Robertson. 1965. Polymorphism in egg albumen and behaviour in eider ducks. Nature 205, 367–369.
Miyamoto, M.M., M.W. Allard & J.A. Moreno. 1994. Conservation genetics of the
plain pigeon (Columba inornata) in Puerto Rico. Auk 111, 910–916.
Montalvo, A.M. & N.C. Ellstrand. 2000. Transplantation of the subshrub Lotus
scoparius: testing the home-site advantage hypothesis. Conserv. Biol. 14,
1034–1045.
Montgomery, M.E., J.D. Ballou, R.K. Nurthen, P.R. England, D.A. Briscoe & R.
Frankham. 1997. Minimizing kinship in captive breeding programs. Zoo Biol.
16, 377–389.

591

592

REFERENCES

Montgomery, M.E., L.M. Woodworth, R.K. Nurthen, D.M. Gilligan, D.A. Briscoe &
R. Frankham. 2000. Relationships between population size and genetic diversity: Comparisons of experimental results with theoretical predictions.
Conserv. Genet. 1, 33–43.
Morin, P.A., J. Wallis, J.J. Moore & D.S. Woodruff. 1994. Paternity exclusion in a
community of wild chimpanzees using hypervariable simple sequence
repeats. Mol. Ecol. 3, 469–478.
Moritz, C. 1995. Uses of molecular phylogenies for conservation. Phil. Trans. R.
Soc. Lond. B 349, 113–118.
Moritz, C., J. Worthington Wilmer, L. Pope, W.B. Sherwin, A.C. Taylor & C.J.
Limpus. 1996. Applications of genetics to the conservation and management
of Australian fauna: four case studies from Queensland. Pp. 442–456 in T.B.
Smith & R.K. Wayne, eds. Molecular Genetic Approaches to Conservation. Oxford
University Press, New York.
Morris, C.A. 1998. Genetics of disease resistance in Bos taurus cattle. AGRI 23,
1–11.
Morton, N.E., J.F. Crow & H.J. Muller. 1956. An estimate of the mutational
damage in man from data on consanguineous marriages. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.
USA 42, 855–863.
Mourant, A.E., A.C. Kopéc & K. Domaniewsha-Sobczak. 1976. The Distribution of
the Human Blood Groups and Other Polymorphisms. Oxford University Press,
London.
Mousseau, T.A. & D.A. Roff. 1987. Natural selection and the heritability of
ﬁtness components. Heredity 59, 181–197.
Mousseau, T.A., B. Sinervo & J.A. Endler. 2000. Adaptive Genetic Variation in the
Wild. Oxford University Press, New York.
Muir, C.C., B.M.F. Galdikas & A.T. Beckenbach. 1998. Is there sufﬁcient evidence
to elevate the orangutan of Borneo and Sumatra to separate species? J. Mol.
Evol. 46, 378–381.
Mundy, N.I., C.S. Winchell, T. Burr & D.S. Woodruff. 1997. Microsatellite variation and microevolution in the critically endangered San Clemente Island
loggerhead shrike (Lanius lucovicianus mearnsi). Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 264,
869–875.
Murawski, D.A., I.A.U.N. Gunatilleke & K.S. Bawa. 1994. The effects of selective
logging on inbreeding in Shorea megistophylla (Dipterocarpaceae) from Sri
Lanka. Conserv. Biol. 8, 997–1002.
Murray, J. & B. Clarke. 1968. Inheritance of shell size in Partula. Heredity 23,
189–198.
Myers, N. 1979. The Sinking Ark: A New Look at the Problem of Disappearing Species.
Pergamon Press, New York.
Nei, M. 1975. Molecular Population Genetics and Evolution. North-Holland
Publishing Co., Amsterdam, Netherlands.
Nei, M. 1987. Molecular Evolutionary Genetics. Columbia University Press, New
York.
Nei, M. 1996. Phylogenetic analysis in molecular evolutionary genetics. Ann.
Rev. Genet. 30, 371–403.
Nei, M. & A.L. Hughes. 1991. Polymorphism and evolution of the major histocompatibility complex in mammals. Pp. 222–247 in R.K. Selander, A.G. Clark
& T.S. Whittham, eds. Evolution at the Molecular Level. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Nei, M. & S. Kumar. 2000. Molecular Evolution and Phylogenetics. Oxford University
Press, New York.
Nei, M. & N. Takezaki. 1994. Estimation of genetic distances and phylogenetic

REFERENCES

trees from DNA analysis. Proc. 5th World Congr. Genet. Appl. Livestock Prod. 21,
405–412.
Neigel, J.E. 1996. Estimation of effective population size and migration parameters from genetic data. Pp. 329–346 in T.B. Smith & R.K. Wayne, eds. Molecular
Genetic Approaches in Conservation. Oxford University Press, New York.
Nelson, M. 1995. Rediscovery of the Palo Verdes blue butterﬂy. Endang. Species
Bulletin 19(6), 3.
Nesje, M., K.H. Roed, D.A. Bell, P. Lindberg & J.T. Lifjeld. 2000. Microsatellite
analysis of population structure and genetic variability in peregrine falcons
(Falco peregrinus). Anim. Conserv. 3, 267–275.
Nevo, E., A. Bieles & R. Ben-Shlomo. 1984. The evolutionary signiﬁcance of
genetic diversity: ecological, demographic and life history correlates. Pp.
13–213 in G.S. Mani, ed. Evolutionary Dynamics of Genetic Diversity. SpringerVerlag, Berlin, Germany.
Newman, A., M. Bush, D.E. Wildt, D. Van Dam, M.T. Frankenhuis, L. Simmons, L.
Phillips & S.J. O’Brien. 1985. Biochemical genetic variation in eight endangered or threatened felid species. J. Mammal. 66, 256–267.
Newman, D.K. 1995. Importance of genetics on survival of small populations:
genetic drift, inbreeding, and migration. PhD thesis, University of Montana,
Missoula, MT.
Newman, D. & D. Pilson. 1997. Increased probability of extinction due to
decreased genetic effective population size: experimental populations of
Clarkia pulchella. Evolution 51, 354–362.
Newmark, W.D. 1995. Extinction of mammal populations in western North
American national parks. Conserv. Biol. 9, 512–526.
Nicholas, F.W. 1987. Veterinary Genetics. Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK.
Nielsen, E.E., M.M. Hansen & V. Loeschcke. 1999. Genetic variation in time and
space: microsatellite analysis of extinct and extant populations of Atlantic
salmon. Evolution 53, 261–268.
Norman, J., P. Olsen & L. Christidis. 1998. Molecular genetics conﬁrms taxonomic afﬁnities of the endangered Norfolk Island boobook Ninox novaeseelandiae undulata. Biol. Conserv. 86, 33–36.
NPWS. 1998. Wollemi Pine (Wollemi nobilis) Recovery Plan. NSW National Parks
and Wildlife Service, Hurstville, NSW, Australia.
Nunney, L. 1999. The effective size of a hierarchically structured population.
Evolution 53, 1–10.
Nunney, L. & K.A. Campbell. 1993. Assessing minimum viable population size:
demography meets population genetics. Trends Ecol. Evol. 8, 234–239.
Nusser, J.A., R.M. Goto, D.B. Ledig, R.C. Fleischer & M.M. Miller. 1996. RAPD analysis reveals low genetic variability in the endangered light-footed clapper
rail. Mol. Ecol. 5, 463–472.
O’Brien, S.J. 1994. Genetic and phylogenetic analyses of endangered species.
Ann. Rev. Genet. 28, 467–489.
O’Brien, S.J. & J.F. Evermann. 1988. Interactive inﬂuence of infectious disease
and genetic diversity in natural populations. Trends Ecol. Evol. 3, 254–259.
O’Brien, S.J. & E. Mayr. 1991. Bureaucratic mischief: recognizing endangered
species and subspecies. Science 251, 1187–1188.
O’Brien, S.J., M.E. Roelke, N. Yuhki, K.W. Richards, W.E. Johnson, W.L. Franklin,
A.E. Anderson, O.L.J. Bass, R.C. Belden & J.S. Martenson. 1990. Genetic introgression within the Florida panther Felis concolor coryi. Natl Geogr. Res. 6,
485–494.
O’Brien, S.J., J.S. Martenson, S. Miththapala, D. Janczewski, J. Pecon-Slattery, W.

593

594

REFERENCES

Johnson, D.A. Gilbert, M. Roelke, C. Packer, M. Bush & D.E. Wildt. 1996.
Conservation genetics of the Felidae. Pp. 50–74 in J.C. Avise & J.L. Hamrick,
eds. Conservation Genetics: Case Histories from Nature. Chapman & Hall, New
York.
Oedekoven, K. 1980. The vanishing forest. Envir. Policy and Law 6, 184–185.
Ohta, T. 1992. The near neutral theory of molecular evolution. Ann. Rev. Ecol.
Syst. 23, 263–286.
Ohta, T. 1996. The current signiﬁcance and standing of neutral and near
neutral theories. BioEssays 18, 673–677.
Olney, P.J.S., G.M. Mace & A.T.C. Feistner. (eds.) 1994. Creative Conservation:
Interactive Management of Wild and Captive Animals. Chapman & Hall, London.
Oostermeijer, J. G. B. 2000. Population viability analysis of the rare Gentiana
pneumonanthe; the importance of genetics, demography and reproductive
biology. Pp. 313–334 in A.G. Young & G.M. Clarke, eds. Genetics, Demography
and Viability of Fragmented Populations. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
O’Ryan, C., J.R.B. Flamand & E.H. Harley. 1994. Mitochondrial DNA variation in
black rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis): conservation management implications.
Conserv. Biol. 8, 495–500.
O’Ryan, C., E.H. Harley, M.W. Bruford, M. Beaumont, R.K. Wayne & M.I. Cherry.
1998. Microsatellite analysis of genetic diversity in fragmented South
African buffalo populations. Anim. Conserv. 1, 85–94.
Osborne, W.A. & J.A. Norman. 1991. Conservation genetics of corroboree frogs,
Pseudophryne corroboree Moore (Anura: Myobatrachidae): population subdivision and genetic divergence. Aust. J. Zool. 39, 285–297.
Paetkau, D. & C. Strobeck. 1994. Microsatellite analysis of genetic variation in
black bear populations. Mol. Ecol. 3, 489–495.
Paetkau, D., W. Calvert, I. Stirling & C. Strobeck. 1995. Microsatellite analysis of
population structure in Canadian polar bears. Mol. Ecol. 4, 347–354.
Pain, S. 1998. Jungle survivor: Vietnam’s unique rhinos are facing extinction.
New Scient. (20 June), 25.
Palacios, C. & F. González-Candelas. 1997. Analysis of population genetic structure and variability using RAPD markers in the endemic and endangered
Limonium dufourii (Plumbaginaceae). Mol. Ecol. 6, 1107–1121.
Pannell, J.R. & B. Charlesworth. 1999. Neutral genetic diversity in a metapopulation with recurrent local extinction and recolonization. Evolution 53,
664–676.
Parham, P. & T. Ohta. 1996. Population biology of antigen presentation by MHC
class I molecules. Science 272, 67–79.
Patenaude, N.J., J.S. Quinn, P. Beland, M. Kingsley & B.N. White. 1994. Genetic
variation of the St. Lawrence beluga whale population assessed by DNA
ﬁngerprinting. Mol. Ecol. 3, 375–381.
Paxinos, E., C. McIntosh, K. Ralls & R. Fleischer. 1997. A noninvasive method for
distinguishing among canid species: ampliﬁcation and enzyme restriction
of DNA from dung. Mol. Ecol. 6, 483–486.
Paxinos, E.E., H.F. James, S.L. Olson & R.C. Fleischer. in press. Prehistoric decline
of genetic diversity in a Hawaiian goose (Branta sandvicensis) population
revealed by analysis of subfossil DNA.
Peacock, M.M. 1997. Determining natal dispersal patterns in a population of
North American pikas (Ochotona princeps) using direct mark–resight and indirect genetic methods. Behav. Ecol. 8, 340–350.

REFERENCES

Pearce, F. 1999. Counting down. New Scient. (2 October), 20–21.
Penn, D.J. & W.K. Potts. 1999. The evolution of mating preference and major
histocompatibility complex genes. Am. Natur. 153, 145–164.
Polans, N.O. & R.W. Allard. 1989. An experimental evaluation of the recovery
potential of ryegrass populations from genetic stress resulting from restriction of population size. Evolution 43, 1320–1324.
Potts, W.K., C.J. Manning & E.K. Wakeland. 1994. The role of infectious disease,
inbreeding and mating preference in maintaining MHC genetic diversity: an
experimental test. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B 346, 369–378.
Powers, D.A., T. Lauerman, D. Crawford & L. DiMichele. 1991. Genetic mechanisms for adapting to a changing environment. Ann. Rev. Genet. 25, 629–659.
Primack, R.B. 1998. Essentials of Conservation Biology, 2nd edn. Sinauer,
Sunderland, MA.
Primmer, C.R., A.P. Móller & H. Ellegren. 1996. A wide-range survey of crossspecies microsatellite ampliﬁcation in birds. Mol. Ecol. 5, 365–378.
Princée, F.P.G. 1995. Overcoming the constraints of social structure and incomplete pedigree data through low-intensity genetic management. Pp. 124–154
in J.D. Ballou, M. Gilpin & T.J. Foose, eds. Population Management for Survival
and Recovery: Analytical Methods and Strategies in Small Population Conservation.
Columbia University Press, New York.
Prober, S.M., L.H. Spindler & A.H.D. Brown. 1998. Conservation of the grassy
white box woodlands: effects of remnant population size on genetic diversity in the allotetraploid herb Microseris lanceolate. Conserv. Biol. 12,
1279–1290.
Prosser, M.R., H.L. Gibbs & P.J. Weatherhead. 1999. Microgeographic population
genetic structure in the northern water snake Nerodia sipedon sipedon
detected using microsatellite DNA loci. Mol. Ecol. 8, 329–333.
Prout, T. 2000. How well does opposing selection maintain variation? Pp.
157–181 in R.S. Singh & C.B. Krimbas, eds. Evolutionary Genetics: From Molecules
to Man. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Quammen, D. 1996. The Song of the Dodo: Island Biogeography in an Age of
Extinction. Hutchinson, London.
Ralls, K. & J. Ballou. 1983. Extinction: lessons from zoos. Pp. 164–184 in C.M.
Schonewald-Cox, S.M. Chambers, B. MacBryde & L. Thomas, eds. Genetics and
Conservation: A Reference for Managing Wild Animal and Plant Populations.
Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, CA.
Ralls, K. & A.M. Starﬁeld. 1995. Choosing a management strategy: two structured decision-making methods for evaluating the predictions of stochastic
simulation models. Conserv. Biol. 9, 175–181.
Ralls, K., P.H. Harvey & A.M. Lyles. 1986. Inbreeding in natural populations of
birds and mammals. Pp. 35–56 in M.E. Soulé, ed. Conservation Biology: The
Science of Scarcity and Diversity. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Ralls, K., J.D. Ballou & A. Templeton. 1988. Estimates of lethal equivalents and
the cost of inbreeding in mammals. Conserv. Biol. 2, 185–193.
Ralls, K., D.P. Demaster & J.A. Estes. 1996. Developing a criterion for delisting
the southern sea otter under the US Endangered Species Act. Conserv. Biol. 10,
1528–1537.
Ralls, K., J.D. Ballou, B.A. Rideout & R. Frankham. 2000. Genetic management of
chondrodystrophy in the California condor. Anim. Conserv. 3, 145–153.
Ramsey, J. & D.W. Schemske. 1998. Pathways, mechanisms, and rates of polyploid formation in ﬂowering plants. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 29, 467–501.

595

596

REFERENCES

Ratner, S., R. Lande & B.R. Roper. 1997. Population viability analysis of spring
chinook salmon in the South Umpqua River, Oregon. Conserv. Biol. 11,
879–889.
Raup, D.M. 1991. Extinction: Bad Genes or Bad Luck? W.W. Norton, New York.
Rave, E.H., R.C. Fleischer, F. Duvall & J.M. Black. 1994. Genetic analyses through
DNA ﬁngerprinting of captive populations of Hawaiian geese. Conserv. Biol. 8,
744–751.
Reed, D.H. & E.H. Bryant. 2000. Experimental test of minimum viable population size. Anim. Conserv. 3, 7–14.
Reed, D.H. & R. Frankham. 2001. How closely correlated are molecular and quantitative measures of genetic diversity: a meta-analysis. Evolution 55, 1095–1103.
Reed, D.H. & R. Frankham. 2002. Population ﬁtness is correlated with genetic
diversity. Conserv. Biol. 17, 230–237.
Reed, J.Z., D.J. Tollit, P.M. Thompson & W. Amos. 1997. Molecular scatology: the
use of molecular genetic analysis to assign species, sex and individual identity to seal faeces. Mol. Ecol. 6, 225–234.
Reeve, H.K., D.F. Westneat, W.A. Noon, P.W. Sherman & C.F. Aquadro. 1990. DNA
‘ﬁngerprinting’ reveals high level of inbreeding in colonies of the eusocial
naked mole-rat. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 87, 2496–2500.
Rhymer, J.M. & D. Simberloff. 1996. Extinction by hybridization and introgression. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 27, 83–109.
Richards, A.J. 1997. Plant Breeding Systems, 2nd edn. Chapman & Hall, London.
Richards, C.M. 2000. Inbreeding depression and genetic rescue in a plant metapopulation. Am. Natur. 155, 383–394.
Richman, A.D. & J.R. Kohn. 1996. Learning from rejection: the evolutionary
biology of single-locus incompatibility. Trends Ecol. Evol. 11, 497–502.
Richter, J. 1996. New friends for the Kirtland’s warbler. Endang. Species Bulletin
21(3), 12.
Rieseberg, L.H. 1991. Hybridization in rare plants: insights from case studies in
Cercocarpus and Helianthus. Pp. 171–181 in D.A. Falk & K.E. Holsinger, eds.
Genetics and Conservation of Rare Plants. Oxford University Press, New York.
Rieseberg, L.H. & S.M. Swensen. 1996. Conservation genetics of endangered
island plants. Pp. 305–334 in J.C. Avise & J.L. Hamrick, eds. Conservation
Genetics: Case Histories from Nature. Chapman & Hall, New York.
Roberts, R.C. 1966. The limits to artiﬁcial selection for body weight in the
mouse. I. The limits attained in earlier experiment. Genet. Res. 8, 347–360.
Robertson, A. 1952. The effect of inbreeding on the variation due to recessive
genes. Genetics 37, 189–207.
Robertson, A. 1956. The effect of selection against extreme deviants based on
deviation or on homozygosis. J. Genet. 54, 236–248.
Robertson, A. 1960. A theory of limits in artiﬁcial selection. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B
153, 234–249.
Robertson, A. 1962. Selection for heterozygotes in small populations. Genetics
47, 1291–1300.
Robichaux, R.H., E.A. Friar & D.W. Mount. 1997. Molecular genetic consequences of a population bottleneck associated with reintroduction of the
Mauna Kea silversword (Argyroxiphium sandwicense ssp. sandwicense
[Asteraceae]). Conserv. Biol. 11, 1140–1146.
Rodríguez-Trelles, F. & M.A. Rodríguez. 1998. Rapid micro-evolution and loss of
chromosomal diversity in Drosophila in response to climate warming. Evol.
Ecol. 12, 829–838.
Roelke, M.E., J. Martenson & S.J. O’Brien. 1993. The consequences of demo-

REFERENCES

graphic reduction and genetic depletion in the endangered Florida panther.
Curr. Biol. 3, 340–350.
Roelke-Parker, M.E., L. Munson, C. Packer, R. Kock, S. Cleaveland, M. Carpenter,
S.J. O’Brien, A. Pospischil, R. Hofmann-Lehmann, H. Lutz, G.L.M.
Mwamengele, M.N. Mgasa, G.A. Machange, B.A. Summers & M.J.G. Appel.
1996. A canine distemper virus epidemic in Serengeti lions (Panthera leo).
Nature 379, 441–445.
Roff, D.A. 1997. Evolutionary Quantitative Genetics. Chapman & Hall, New York.
Roff, D.A. & T. A. Mousseau. 1987. Quantitative genetics and ﬁtness: lessons
from Drosophila. Heredity 58, 103–118.
Roldan, E.R.S., J. Cassinello, T. Abaigar & M. Gomendio. 1997. Inbreeding, ﬂuctuating asymmetry, and ejaculate quality in an endangered ungulate. Proc. R.
Soc. Lond. B 265, 243–248.
Rossetto, M., P.K. Weaver & K.W. Dixon. 1995. Use of RAPD analysis in devising
conservation strategies for the rare and endangered Grevillea scapigera
(Protaceae). Mol. Ecol. 4, 321–329.
Rossetto, M., G. Jezierski, S.J. Hopper & K.W. Dixon. 1999. Conservation genetics
and clonality in two critically endangered eucalypts from the highly
endemic south-western Australian ﬂora. Biol. Conserv. 88, 321–331.
Rowley, I., E. Russell & M. Brooker. 1993. Inbreeding in birds. Pp. 304–328 in
N.W. Thornhill, ed. The Natural History of Inbreeding and Outbreeding: Theoretical
and Empirical Perspectives. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Rumball, W., I.R. Franklin, R. Frankham & B.L. Sheldon. 1994. Decline in heterozygosity under full-sib and double ﬁrst-cousin inbreeding in Drosophila
melanogaster. Genetics 136, 1039–1049.
Rundle, H.D., L. Nagel, J. Wenrick Boughman & D. Schluter. 2000. Natural selection and parallel speciation in sympatric stickleback. Science 287, 306–308.
Russell, W.C. 1999. The 1999 Black-Footed Ferret Studbook. University of Wyoming,
Laramie, WY.
Russell, W.C., E.T. Thorne, R. Oakleaf & J.D. Ballou. 1994. The genetic basis of
black-footed ferret reintroduction. Conserv. Biol. 8, 263–266.
Ruwende, C., S.C. Khoo, R.W. Snow, S.N.R. Yates, D. Kwaitkowski, S. Gupta, P.
Warn, C.E.M. Allsopp, S.C. Gilbert, N. Peschu, C.I. Newbold, B.M. Greenwood, K.
Marsh & A.V.S. Hill. 1995. Natural selection of hemi- and heterozygotes for
G6PGD deﬁciency in Africa by resistance to severe malaria. Nature 376, 246–249.
Ryder, O.A. 1988. Founder effects and endangered species. Nature 331, 396.
Ryder, O.A. & R.C. Fleischer. 1996. Genetic research and its applications in zoos.
Pp. 255–262 in D.G. Kleiman, M.E. Allen, K.V. Thompson & S. Lumpkin, eds.
Wild Mammals in Captivity: Principles and Techniques. University of Chicago
Press, Chicago, IL.
Ryder, O.A., A.T. Kumamoto, B.S. Durrant & K. Benirschke. 1989. Chromosomal
divergence and reproductive isolation in dik-diks. Pp. 208–255 in D. Otte &
J.A. Endler, eds. Speciation and its Consequences. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Ryder, O.A., A. McLaren, S. Brenner, Y.-P. Zhang & K. Benirschke. 2000. DNA
banks for endangered animal species. Science 288, 275–277.
Ryman, N., R. Baccus, C. Reuterwall & M.H. Smith. 1981. Effective population
size, generation interval, and potential loss of genetic variability in game
species under different hunting regimes. Oikos 36, 257–266.
Ryman, N., F. Utter & K. Hindar. 1995. Introgression, supportive breeding, and
genetic conservation. Pp. 341–365 in J.D. Ballou, M. Gilpin & T.J. Foose, eds.
Population Management for Survival and Recovery: Analytical Methods and Strategies
in Small Population Conservation. Columbia University Press, New York.

597

598

REFERENCES

Saccheri, I.J., P.M. Brakeﬁeld & R.A. Nichols. 1996. Severe inbreeding depression
and rapid ﬁtness rebound in the butterﬂy Bicyclus anynana (Satyridae).
Evolution 50, 2000–2013.
Saccheri, I., M. Kuussaari, M. Kankare, P. Vikman, W. Fortelius & I. Hanski. 1998.
Inbreeding and extinction in a butterﬂy metapopulation. Nature 392, 491–494.
Saccheri, I.J., I.J. Wilson, R.A. Nichols, M.W. Bruford & P.M. Brakeﬁeld. 1999.
Inbreeding of bottlenecked butterﬂy populations: estimation using the likelihood of changes in marker allele frequencies. Genetics 151, 1053–1063.
Sampson, J.F., B.G. Collins & D.J. Coates. 1994. Mixed mating in Banksia brownii
Baxter Ex R Br (Proteaceae). Aust. J. Bot. 42, 103–111.
Satta, Y., C. O’Huigin, N. Takahata & J. Klein. 1994. Intensity of natural selection
at the major histocompatibility complex loci. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 91,
7184–7188.
Schemske, D.W. 2000. Understanding the origin of species. Evolution 54,
1069–1073.
Schonewald-Cox, C.M., S.M. Chambers, B. MacBryde & W.L. Thomas. 1983.
Genetics and Conservation: A Reference for Managing Wild Animal and Plant
Populations. Benjamin/Cummings, Menlo Park, CA.
Schulman, F.Y., R.J. Montali, M. Bush, S.B. Citino et al. 1993. Dubin–Johnson-like
syndrome in golden lion tamarins. Vet. Pathol. 30, 491–498.
Schwartz, M.K., D.A. Tallmon & G. Luikart. 1998. Review of DNA-based census
and effective population size estimators. Anim. Conserv. 1, 293–299.
Scobie, P. 1997. SPARKS 1.42 (Single Population Animal Records Keeping System).
International Species Information System, St. Paul, MN.
Scribner, K.T. & T.D. Bowman. 1998. Microsatellites identify depredated waterfowl remains from glaucous gull stomachs. Mol. Ecol. 7, 1401–1405.
Seal, U.S. 1991. Life after extinction. Pp. 39–55 in J.H.W. Gipps, ed. Beyond Captive
Breeding: Re-Introducing Endangered Mammals to the Wild, vol. 62. Zoological
Society of London, Oxford, UK.
Seal, U.S. 1992. Aruba Island Rattlesnake (Crotalus durissus unicolor):
International Symposium and Workshop on the Conservation and Research of the
Aruba Island Rattlesnake: Population and Habitat Viability Assessment. Aruba
Department of Agriculture Husbandry and Fisheries, Captive Breeding
Specialist Group (CBSG/SSC/IUCN), American Association of Zoological Parks
and Aquariums, Apple Valley, MN.
Seal, U.S. & R.C. Lacy. 1989. Florida panther Felis concolor conyi Viability Analysis
and Species Survival Plan. Conservation Breeding Specialist Group (SSC/IUCN),
Apple Valley, MN.
Seal, U.S., E.T. Thorne, M.A. Bogan & S.H. Anderson. 1989. Conservation Biology
and the Black-Footed Ferret. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
Seal, U., F. Westley, O. Byers & G. Ness. 1998. Bringing people into population
and habitat viability analyses. Endang. Species Updates 15, 111–113.
Seddon, J.M. & P.R. Baverstock. 1998. Variation on islands: major histocompatibility complex (Mhc) polymorphism in populations of the Australian bush
rat. Mol. Ecol. 8, 2071–2079.
Seebeck, J.H. & P.G. Johnson. 1980. Potorous longipes (Marsupialia:
Macropodidae): a new species from Eastern Victoria. Aust. J. Zool. 28,
119–134.
Seielstad, M.T., E. Minch & L.L. Cavalli-Sforza. 1998. Genetic evidence for a
higher female migration rate in humans. Nature Genetics 20, 278–280.
Selander, R.K. 1970. Behavior and genetic variation in natural populations. Am.
Zool. 10, 53–66.

REFERENCES

Serena, M. (ed.) 1995. Reintroduction Biology of Australian and New Zealand Fauna.
Surrey Beatty & Sons, Chipping Norton, NSW, Australia.
Seymour, A.M., M.E. Montgomery, B.H. Costello, S. Ihle, G. Johnsson, B. St. John,
D. Taggart & B.A. Houlden. 2001. High effective inbreeding coefﬁcients correlate with morphological abnormalities in populations of South Australian
koalas (Phascolarctos cinereus). Anim. Conserv. 4, 211–219.
Sgrò, C.M. & A.A. Hoffmann. 1998. Effects of stress combinations on the expression of additive genetic variation for fecundity in Drosophila melanogaster.
Genet. Res. 72, 13–18.
Shabalina, S.A., L.Y. Yampolsky & A.S. Kondrashov. 1997. Rapid decline in ﬁtness
in panmictic populations of Drosophila melanogaster maintained under
relaxed natural selection. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 94, 13034–13039.
Shaffer, M.K. 1981. Minimum viable populations size for species conservation.
Bioscience 31, 131–134.
Shaffer, M. 1987. Minimum viable populations: coping with uncertainty. Pp.
69–86 in M.E. Soulé, ed. Viable Populations for Conservation. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Shaffer, M., L. Hood, W.J. Snape iii & I. Latkis. 2001. Population viability analysis
and conservation policy. In S.R. Beissinger & D.M. McCullough, eds.
Population Viability Analysis. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Sharp, P.M., D.L. Robertson & B.H. Hahn. 1996. Cross-species transmission and
recombination of ‘AIDS’ viruses. Pp. 134–152 in P.H. Harvey, A.J. Leigh Brown,
J. Maynard Smith & S. Nee, eds. New Uses for New Phylogenies. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, UK.
Sherwin, W.S. & P.R. Brown. 1990. Problems in the estimation of the effective
size of a population of the eastern barred bandicoot (Perameles gunii) at
Hamilton, Victoria. Pp. 367–373 in J.H. Seebeck, P.R. Brown, R.L. Wallis & C.M.
Kemper, eds. Bandicoots and Bilbies. Surrey Beatty & Sons, Chipping Norton,
NSW, Australia.
Sherwin, W.B., N.D. Murray, J.A. Marshall Graves & P.R. Brown. 1991.
Measurement of genetic variation in endangered populations: bandicoots
(Marsupialia: Peramelidae) as an example. Conserv. Biol. 5, 103–108.
Sherwin, W.B., P. Timms, J. Wilcken & B. Houlden. 2000. Analysis and conservation implications of koala genetics. Conserv. Biol. 14, 639–649.
Shields, W.M. 1983. Genetic considerations in the management of the wolf and
other large vertebrates: an alternative view. Pp. 90–92 in L.N. Carbyn, ed.
Wolves in Canada and Alaska: Their Status, Biology and Management. Canadian
Wildlife Service Report Series no. 45, Canadian Wildlife Service, Ottawa,
Canada.
Signer, E.N., C.R. Schmidt & A.J. Jeffreys. 1994. DNA variability and parentage
testing in captive Waldrapp ibises. Mol. Ecol. 3, 291–300.
Simmons, M.J. & J.F. Crow. 1977. Mutations affecting ﬁtness in Drosophila populations. Ann. Rev. Genet. 11, 47–78.
Simmons, M.J. & J.F. Crow. 1983. The mutation load in Drosophila. Pp. 1–35 in M.
Ashburner, H.L. Carson & J.N. Thompson Jr., eds. The Genetics and Biology of
Drosophila, vol. 3c. Academic Press, London.
Simpson, G.G. 1961. Principles of Animal Taxonomy. Columbia University Press,
New York.
Sinclair, A.R.E. 1996. Mammal populations: ﬂuctuation, regulation, life history
and their implications for conservation. Pp. 127–154 in R.B. Floyd, A.W.
Sheppard & P.J. De Barro, eds. Frontiers of Population Ecology. CSIRO Publishing,
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.

599

600

REFERENCES

Singer, M.C., C.D. Thomas & C. Permesan. 1993. Rapid human-induced evolution of insect–host associations. Nature 366, 681–683.
Singh, N., S. Agrawal & A.K. Rastogi. 1997. Infectious diseases and immunity:
special reference to major histocompatibility complex. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 3,
41–49.
Singh, R.S. & C. Krimbas. (eds.) 2000. Evolutionary Genetics: From Molecules to
Morphology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Slade, R.W., C. Moritz, A.R. Hoelzel & H.R. Burton. 1998. Molecular population
genetics of the southern elephant seal Mirounga leonina. Genetics 149,
1945–1957.
Slate, J., L.E.B. Kruuk, T.C. Marshall, J.M. Pemberton & T.H. Clutton-Brock. 2000.
Inbreeding depression inﬂuences lifetime breeding success in a wild population of red deer (Cervus elaphus). Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 267, 1657–1662.
Slatkin, M. 1995. A measure of population subdivision based on microsatellite
allele frequencies. Genetics 139, 457–462.
Slatkin, M. & W.P. Maddison. 1989. A cladistic measure of gene ﬂow inferred
from the phylogenies of alleles. Genetics 123, 603–613.
Sloane, M.A., P. Sunnucks, D. Alpers, L.B. Beheregaray & A.C. Taylor. 2000.
Highly reliable genetic identiﬁcation of individual northern hairy-nosed
wombats from single remotely collected hairs: a feasible censusing method.
Mol. Ecol. 9, 1233–1240.
Small, M.P., T.D. Beacham, R.E. Withler & R.J. Nelson. 1998. Discriminating
coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch) populations within the Fraser River,
British Columbia, using microsatellite DNA markers. Mol. Ecol. 7, 141–155.
Smil, V. 1999. How many billions to go? The peaking of the population growth
rate deserves wider recognition. Nature 401, 429.
Smith, H.G. 1993. Heritability of tarsus length in cross-fostered broods of the
European starling (Sturnus vulgaris). Heredity 71, 318–322.
Smith, T.B. & R.K. Wayne. (eds.) 1996. Molecular Genetic Approaches in Conservation.
Oxford University Press, New York.
Smith, T.B., L.A. Freed, J.K. Lepson & J.H. Carothers. 1995. Evolutionary consequences of extinctions in populations of a Hawaiian honeycreeper. Conserv.
Biol. 9, 107–113.
Soulé, M.E. 1980. Thresholds for survival: maintaining ﬁtness and evolutionary
potential. Pp. 151–169 in M.E. Soulé & B.A. Wilcox, eds. Conservation Biology: An
Evolutionary–Ecological Perspective. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Soulé, M.E. 1985. What is conservation biology? Bioscience 35, 727–734.
Soulé, M.E. (ed.) 1987. Viable Populations for Conservation. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, UK.
Soulé, M.E. & R. Frankham. 2000. Sir Otto Frankel: memories and tributes.
Conserv. Biol. 14, 582–583.
Soulé, M.E. & D. Simberloff. 1986. What do genetics and ecology tell us about
the design of nature reserves? Biol. Conserv. 35, 19–40.
Soulé, M.E. & B.A. Wilcox. (eds.) 1980. Conservation Biology: An
Evolutionary–Ecological Perspective. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Soulé, M.E., M. Gilpin, W. Conway & T. Foose. 1986. The millenium ark: how
long a voyage, how many staterooms, how many passengers? Zoo Biol. 5,
101–113.
Spielman, D. & R. Frankham. 1992. Modelling problems in conservation genetics using captive Drosophila populations: improvement in reproductive
ﬁtness due to immigration of one individual into small partially inbred populations. Zoo Biol. 11, 343–351.

REFERENCES

Spiess, E.B. 1989. Genes in Populations, 2nd edn. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Srikwan, S. & D.S. Woodruff. 2000. Monitoring genetic erosion in mammal
populations following tropical forest fragmentation. Pp. 149–172 in A.G.
Young & G.M. Clarke, eds. Genetics, Demography and Viability of Fragmented
Populations. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Stacey, P.B. & M. Taper. 1992. Environmental variation and the persistence of
small populations. Ecological Applications 2, 18–29.
Stangel, P.W., M.R. Lennartz & M.H. Smith. 1992. Genetic variation and population structure of red-cockaded woodpeckers. Conserv. Biol. 6, 283–292.
Stanley Price, M.R. 1989. Animal Re-Introductions: The Arabian Oryx in Oman.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Stear, M.J., K. Bairden, S.C. Bishop, J. Buitkamp, J.L. Duncan, G. Gettinby, Q.A.
McKellar, M. Park, J.J. Parkins, S.W. Reid, S. Strain & M. Murray. 1997. The
genetic basis of resistance to Ostertagia circumcincta in lambs. Vet. J. 154,
111–119.
Steinberg, E.K. & C.E. Jordan. 1998. Using molecular genetics to learn about
ecology of threatened species: the allure and the illusion of measuring
genetic structure in natural populations. Pp. 440–460 in P.L. Fiedler & P.M.
Karieva, eds. Conservation Biology: For the Coming Decade, 2nd edn. Chapman &
Hall, New York.
Stenseth, N.C., K.-S. Chan, H. Tong, R. Boonstra, S. Boutin, C. J. Krebs, E. Post, M.
O’Donoghue, N.G. Yoccoz, M.C. Forshhammer & J.W. Hurrell. 1999. Common
dynamic structure of Canada lynx populations within three climatic zones.
Science 285, 1071–1073.
Storfer, A. 1996. Quantitative genetics: a promising approach for the assessment of genetic variation in endangered species. Trends Ecol. Evol. 11, 343–348.
Strickberger, M.W. 1985. Genetics, 3rd edn. Macmillan, New York.
Strickberger, M.W. 1996. Evolution, 2nd edn. Jones & Bartlett, Sudbury, MA.
Stukely, M.J.C. & C.E. Crane. 1994. Genetically based resistance of Eucalyptus
marginata to Phytophthora cinamomi. Phytopathology 84, 650–656.
Sukumar, R., U. Ramakrishnan & J.A. Santosh. 1998. Impact of poaching on an
Asian elephant population in Periyar, southern India: a model of demography and tusk harvest. Anim. Conserv. 1, 281–291.
Sun, M. 1996. The allopolyploid origin of Spiranthes hongkongensis (Orchidaceae).
Am. J. Bot. 83, 252–260.
Sun, M. & F.R. Ganders. 1988. Mixed mating systems in Hawaiian Bidens
(Asteraceae). Evolution 42, 516–527.
Sunnucks, P. 2000a. Conservation myths. Nature Australia, Summer 1999–2000,
5–6.
Sunnucks, P. 2000b. Efﬁcient markers for population biology. Trends Ecol. Evol.
15, 199–203.
Sunnucks, P. & N. Tait. 2001. Velvet worms: tales of the unexpected. Nature
Australia 27(1), 60–69.
Taberlet, P., J.J. Camarra, S. Grifﬁn, E. Uhres, O. Hanotte, L.P. Waits, C. DuboisPaganon, T. Burke & J. Bouvert. 1997. Noninvasive genetic tracking of the
endangered Pyrenean brown bear population. Mol. Ecol. 6, 869–876.
Talbot, J. 1994. Record of hearing #10151. Land and Environment Court of New
South Wales.
Tanaka, Y. 2000. Theoretical properties of extinction by inbreeding depression
under stochastic environments. Pp. 274–290 in S. Ferson & M. Burgman, eds.
Quantitative Methods in Conservation Biology. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Tanton, J.H. 1994. End of the migration epoch? The Social Contract IV(3), 162–176.

601

602

REFERENCES

Taracha, E.L.N., B.M. Goddeeris, A.J. Teale, S.J. Kemp & W.I. Morrison. 1995.
Parasite strain speciﬁcity of bovine cytotoxis T cell response to Theileria parva
is determined primarily by immunodominance. J. Immunol. 155, 4854–4860.
Tarr, C.L. & R.C. Fleischer. 1999. Population boundaries and genetic diversity in
the endangered Mariana crow (Corvus kubaryi). Mol. Ecol. 8, 941–949.
Tarr, C.L., S. Conant & R.C. Fleischer. 1998. Founder events and variation at
microsatellite loci in an insular passerine bird, the Laysan ﬁnch (Telespiza
cantans). Mol. Ecol. 7, 729–731.
Taylor, A.C., W.B. Sherwin & R.K. Wayne. 1994. Genetic variation of microsatellite loci in a bottlenecked species: the northern hairy-nosed wombat
Lasiorhinus krefftii. Mol. Ecol. 3, 277–290.
Taylor, A.C., A. Horsup, C.N. Johnson, P. Sunnucks & W.B. Sherwin. 1997.
Relatedness structure detected by microsatellite analysis and attempted pedigree reconstruction in an endangered marsupial, the northern hairy-nosed
wombat Lasiorhinus krefftii. Mol. Ecol. 6, 9–19.
Templeton, A.R. 1986. Coadaptation and outbreeding depression. Pp. 105–116
in M.E. Soulé, ed. Conservation Biology: The Science of Scarcity and Diversity.
Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Templeton, A.R. 1998. Nested clade analyses of phylogeographic data: testing
hypotheses about gene ﬂow and population history. Mol. Ecol. 7, 381–397.
Templeton, A.R. & B. Read. 1984. Factors eliminating inbreeding depression in a
captive herd of Speke’s gazelle. Zoo Biol. 3, 177–200.
Templeton, A.R. & B. Read. 1994. Inbreeding: one word, several meanings, much
confusion. Pp. 91–105 in V. Loeschcke, J. Tomiuk & S.K. Jain, eds. Conservation
Genetics. Birkhäuser, Basel, Switzerland.
Terborgh, J. & B. Winter. 1980. Some causes of extinction. Pp. 119–134 in M.E.
Soulé & B.A. Wilcox, eds. Conservation Biology: An Ecological–Evolutionary
Perspective. Sinauer, Sunderland, MA.
Thomas, A. 1995. Genotypic inference with the Gibbs sampler. Pp. 261–270 in
J.D. Ballou, M. Gilpin & T.J. Foose, eds. Population Management for Survival and
Recovery: Analytical Methods and Strategies in Small Population Conservation.
Columbia University Press, New York.
Thomas, C.D. 1990. What do real populations tell us about minimum viable
population sizes? Conserv. Biol. 4, 324–327.
Thomas, D.A. & H.N. Barber. 1974. Studies on leaf characteristics of a cline of
Eucalyptus urnigera from Mount Wellington, Tasmania. I. Water repellency
and the freezing of leaves. Aust. J. Biol. Sci. 22, 501–512.
Thompson, J.N. 1998. Rapid evolution as an ecological process. Trends Ecol. Evol.
13, 329–332.
Thornhill, N.W. (ed.) 1993. The Natural History of Inbreeding and Outbreeding:
Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Thurz, M.R., H.C. Thomas, B.M. Greenwood & A.V.S. Hill. 1997. Heterozygote
advantage for HLA class-II type in hepatitis B virus infection. Nature Genetics
17, 11–12.
Tongue, S. 1999. Species safety nets. Lifewatch, Summer 1999, 12–14.
Touchell, D.H. & K.W. Dixon. 1993. Cryopreservation of seed of Western
Australian native species. Biodiver. Conserv. 2, 594–602.
Travis, S.E., J. Maschinski & P. Kleim. 1996. An analysis of genetic variation in
Astragalus cremnophylax var. cremnophylax, a critically endangered plant, using
AFLP markers. Mol. Ecol. 5, 735–745.
Tucker, P.K. & B.L. Lundrigan. 1996. The utility of paternally inherited nuclear

REFERENCES

genes in conservation genetics. Pp. 74–86 in T.B. Smith & R.K. Wayne, eds.
Molecular Genetic Approaches in Conservation. Oxford University Press, New
York.
Tudge, C. 1991. Last Animals at the Zoo: How Mass Extinctions can be Stopped. Island
Press, Washington, DC.
Tudge, C. 1995. Captive audiences for future conservation. New Scient. (28
January), 51–52.
Turcek, F.J. 1951. Effect of introductions on two game populations in
Czechoslovakia. J. Wildl. Manag. 15, 113–114.
Van Dierendonck, M.C. & M.F. Wallis de Vries. 1996. Ungulate reintroductions:
experiences with the takhi or Przewalski Horse (Equus ferus przewalskii) in
Mongolia. Conserv. Biol. 10, 728–740.
van Noordwijk, A.J. 1994. The interaction of inbreeding depression and environmental stochasticity in the risk of extinction of small populations. Pp.
131–146 in V. Loeschcke, J. Tomiuk & S.K. Jain, eds. Conservation Genetics.
Birkhäuser, Basel, Switzerland.
van Treuren, R., R. Bijlsma, N.J. Ourborg & W. van Delden. 1993. The signiﬁcance of genetic erosion in the process of extinction. IV. Inbreeding depression and heterosis effects caused by selﬁng and outcrossing in Scabiosa
columbaria. Evolution 47, 1669–1680.
Van Valen, L. 1973. A new evolutionary law. Evol. Theory 1, 1–30.
Varvio, S., R. Chakraborty & M. Nei. 1986. Genetic variation in subdivided populations and conservation genetics. Heredity 57, 189–198.
Vila, C., P. Savolainen, J.E. Maldonado, I.R. Amorim, J.E. Rice, R.L. Honeycutt,
K.A. Crandall, J. Lundeberg & R.K. Wayne. 1997. Multiple and ancient origins
of the domestic dog. Science 276, 1687–1689.
Vincek, V., C. O’Huiguin, Y. Satta, N. Takahata, P.T. Boag, P.R. Grant, B.R. Grant &
J. Klein. 1997. How large was the founding population of Darwin’s ﬁnches?
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 264, 111–118.
Volf, J. 1999. Pedigree Book of the Przewalski’s Horse (Equus przewalskii). Prague
Zoo, Prague, Czech Republic.
Vollestad, L.A., K. Hindar & A.P. Moller. 1999. A meta-analysis of ﬂuctuating
asymmetry in relation to heterozygosity. Heredity 83, 206–218.
Vrijenhoek, R.C. 1994. Genetic diversity and ﬁtness in small populations. Pp.
37–53 in V. Loeschcke, J. Tomiuk & S.K. Jain, eds. Conservation Genetics.
Birkhäuser, Basel, Switzerland.
Vrijenhoek, R.C., E. Pfeiler & J. Wetherington. 1992. Balancing selection in a
desert stream-dwelling fish, Peociliopsis monacha. Evolution 46, 1642–1657.
Vucetich, J.A. & T.A. Waite. 2000. Is one migrant per generation sufﬁcient for
the genetic management of ﬂuctuating populations? Anim. Conserv. 3,
261–266.
Vucetich, J.A., R.O. Peterson & T.A. Waite. 1997. Effect of social structure and
prey dynamics on extinction risk in gray wolves. Conserv. Biol. 11, 957–965.
Wallace, B. 1963. The elimination of an autosomal lethal from an experimental
population of Drosophila melanogaster. Am. Natur. 97, 65–66.
Waller, D.M., D.M. O’Malley & S.C. Gawler. 1987. Genetic variation in the
extreme endemic Pedicularis furbishiae (Scrophulariaceae). Conserv. Biol. 1,
335–340.
Walter, H.S. 1990. Small viable population: the red-tailed hawk of Socorro
Island. Conserv. Biol. 4, 441–443.
Wang, D.G., J.B. Fam, C.J. Siao, A. Berno, P. Young, R. Sapolsky, G. Ghandour, N.

603

604

REFERENCES

Perkins, E. Winchester, J. Spencer, L. Knuglyak, L. Stein, L. Hsie, T. Topaloglou,
E. Hubbell, E. Robinson, M. Mittman, M.S. Morris, K. Shen, D. Kibum, J. Rioux,
C. Nusbaum, S. Rozen, T.J. Hudson, R. Lipschutz, M. Chee & E.S. Lander. 1998.
Large-scale identiﬁcation, mapping and genotyping of single-nucleotide
polymorphisms in the human genome. Science 280, 1077–1082.
Wang, J. & A. Caballero. 1999. Developments in predicting the effective size of
subdivided populations. Heredity 82, 212–226.
Ward, R.D., D.O.F. Skibinski & M. Woodwark. 1992. Protein heterozygosity,
protein structure, and taxonomic differentiation. Evol. Biol. 26, 73–159.
Waser, N.M. 1993. Population structure, optimal outbreeding, and assortative
mating in angiosperms. Pp. 173–199 in N.W. Thornhill, ed. The Natural History
of Inbreeding and Outbreeding: Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives. University of
Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Wayne, R.K. 1996. Conservation genetics in the Canidae. Pp. 75–118 in J.C. Avise
& J.L. Hamrick, eds. Conservation Genetics: Case Histories from Nature. Chapman
& Hall, New York.
Wayne, R.K., N. Lehman, D. Girman, P.J.P. Gogan, D.A. Gilbert, K. Hansen, R.O.
Peterson, U.S. Seal, A. Eisenhawker, L.D. Mech & R.J. Krumenaker. 1991.
Conservation genetics of the endangered Isle Royale gray wolf. Conserv. Biol. 5,
41–51.
Wayne, R.K., M.W. Bruford, D. Girman, W.E.R. Rebholz, P. Sunnucks & A.C.
Taylor. 1994. Molecular genetics of endangered species. Pp. 92–117 in P.J.S.
Olney, G.M. Mace & A.T.C. Feistner, eds. Creative Conservation: Interactive
Management of Wild and Captive Animals. Chapman & Hall, London.
WCMC. 1992. Global Biodiversity: Status of the Earth’s Living Resources. Chapman &
Hall, London.
Weber, K.E. 1996. Large genetic change at small ﬁtness cost in large populations of Drosophila melanogaster selected for wind tunnel ﬂight: rethinking
ﬁtness surfaces. Genetics 144, 205–213.
Weber, K.E. & L.T. Diggins. 1990. Increased selection response in larger populations. II. Selection for ethanol vapor resistance in Drosophila melanogaster, at
two population sizes. Genetics 125, 585–597.
Weigensberg, I. & D.A. Roff. 1996. Natural heritabilities: can they be reliably
estimated in the laboratory? Evolution 50, 2149–2157.
Wemmer, C., A. Thau, S.T. Khaing, S. Montfort, T. Allendorf, J. Ballou & S. Ellis.
2000. Thamin Population and Habitat Viability Assessment. Conservation
Breeding Specialist Group (SSC/IUCN), Apple Valley, MN.
Wendel, J.F. & R.G. Percy. 1990. Allozymic diversity and introgression in the
Galapagos Islands endemic Gossypium darwinii and its relationship to continental G. barbadense. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 18, 517–528.
Westemeier, R.L., J.D. Brawn, S.A. Simpson, T.L. Esker, R.W. Jansen, J.W. Walk,
E.L. Kershner, J.L. Bouzat & K.N. Paige. 1998. Tracking the long-term decline
and recovery of an isolated population. Science 282, 1695–1698.
White, M.J.D. 1978. Modes of Speciation. W.H. Freeman, San Francisco, CA.
Whitﬁeld, J. 1998. A saola poses for the camera. Nature 396, 410.
Whitﬁeld, P., P.D. Moore & B. Cox. 1987. The Atlas of the Living World. Weidenfeld
& Nicolson, London.
Whitlock, M.C. & K. Fowler. 1999. The change in genetic and environmental variance with inbreeding in Drosophila melanogaster. Genetics 152, 345–353.
Wilcken, J. 2001. The cost of inbreeding revisited: inbreeding, longevity and
sex-ratio. MSc thesis, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

REFERENCES

Wilcove, D.S. 1994. The Condor’s Shadow: The Loss and Recovery of Wildlife in
America. W.H. Freeman, New York.
Wilcove, D.S., M. McMillan & K.C. Winston. 1993. What exactly is an endangered species: an analysis of the endangered species list, 1985–1991. Conserv.
Biol. 7, 87–93.
Wildt, D.E. 1996. Male reproduction: assessment, management, and control of
fertility. Pp. 429–450 in D.G. Kleiman, M.E. Allen, K.V. Thompson & S.
Lumpkin, eds. Wild Mammals in Captivity: Principles and Techniques. University
of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Wilson, E.O. 1975. Sociobiology: The New Synthesis. Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Wilson, E.O. & W.H. Bossert. 1971. A Primer of Population Biology. Sinauer,
Stamford, CT.
Wilson, M.H., C.B. Kepler, N.F.R. Snyder, S.R. Derrickson, F.J. Dein, J.W. Wiley, J.
M. J. Wunderle, A.E. Lugo, D.L. Graham & W.D. Toone. 1994. Puerto Rican
parrots and potential limitations of the metapopulation approach to species
conservation. Conserv. Biol. 8, 114–123.
Wilson, P.J., S. Grewal, I.D. Lawford, J.N.M. Heal, A.G. Granacki, D. Pennick, M.T.
Theberges, D.R. Voigt, W. Waddell, R.E. Chambers, P.C. Paquet, G. Goulet, D.
Cluff & B.N. White. 2000. DNA proﬁles of the eastern Canadian wolf and the
red wolf provide evidence for a common evolutionary history independent
of the gray wolf. Can. J. Zool. 78, 2156–2166.
Wisdom, M.J. & L.S. Mills. 1997. Sensitivity analysis to guide population recovery: prairie chickens as an example. J. Wildl. Manag. 61, 302–312.
Wolf, C.M., B. Grifﬁth, C. Reed & S.A. Temple. 1996. Avian and mammalian
translocations: update and reanalysis of 1987 survey data. Conserv. Biol. 10,
1142–1154.
Woodford, J. 2000. The Wollemi Pine: The Incredible Discovery of a Living Fossil from
the Age of the Dinosaurs. Text Publishing, Melbourne, Vic, Australia.
Woodworth, L.M. 1996. Population size in captive breeding programs. PhD
thesis, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
Woodworth, L.M., M.E. Montgomery, R.K. Nurthen, D.A. Briscoe & R. Frankham.
1994. Modelling problems in conservation genetics using Drosophila: consequences of ﬂuctuating population sizes. Mol. Ecol. 3, 393–399.
Worthington-Wilmer, J., C. Mortiz, I. Hall & J. Toop. 1994. Extreme population
structuring in the threatened ghost bat, Macroderma gigas: evidence from
mitochondrial DNA. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B. 257, 193–198.
Wright, S. 1931. Evolution in Mendelian populations. Genetics 16, 97–159.
Wright, S. 1940. Breeding structure of populations in relation to speciation.
Am. Natur. 74, 232–248.
Wright, S. 1968. Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, vol. 1, Genetic and
Biometric Foundations. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Wright, S. 1969. Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, vol. 2, The Theory of Gene
Frequencies. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Wright, S. 1977. Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, vol. 3, Experimental Results
and Evolutionary Deductions. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Wright, S. 1978. Evolution and the Genetics of Populations, vol. 4, Variability within
and among Natural Populations. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Xu, X. & U. Arnason. 1996. The mitochondrial DNA molecule of Sumatran
orangutan and a molecular proposal for two (Bornean and Sumatran)
species of orangutan. J. Mol. Evol. 43, 431–437.

605

606

REFERENCES

Young, A.G. & G.M. Clarke. (eds.) 2000. Genetics, Demography and Viability of
Fragmented Populations. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Young, A.G. & B.G. Murray. 2000. Genetic bottlenecks and dysgenic gene ﬂow
into re-established populations of the grassland daisy Rutidosis leptorrynchoides. Aust. J. Bot. 48, 409–416.
Young, A.G., A.H.D. Brown, B.G. Murray, P.H. Thrall & C.H. Miller. 2000. Genetic
erosion, restricted mating and reduced viability in fragmented populations
of the endangered grassland herb Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides. Pp. 335–359 in
A.G. Young & G.M. Clarke, eds. Genetics, Demography and Viability of Fragmented
Populations. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Young, T.P. 1994. Natural die-offs of large mammals: implications for conservation. Conserv. Biol. 8, 410–418.
Zeckhauser, R.J. & W.K. Viscusi. 1990. Risk within reason. Science 248, 559–564.
Zegers, G. 2000. Genetic variability and resistance to infectious disease with
particular emphasis on the major histocompatibility complex in the valley
pocket gopher. PhD thesis, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA.
Zhi, L., W. B. Karesh, D.N. Janczewski, H. Frazier-Taylor, D. Sajuthi, F. Gombek,
M. Andau, J. S. Martenson & S.J. O’Brien. 1996. Genomic differentiation
among natural populations of orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus). Curr. Biol. 6,
1326–1336.
Zhou, K., S. Ellis, S. Leatherwood, M. Bruford & U. Seal. 1994. Baiji Population and
Habitat Viability Assessment. Conservation Breeding Specialist Group
(SSC/IUCN), Apple Valley, MN.

Index

Acionyx lubatus see cheetah
acorn woodpecker 331, 516
Acrocephalis (Bebornis) sechellensis see
Seychelles warbler
adder Vipera berus 36, 286, 300, 306,
401
additive genetic variance 109, 110–11,
533
additivity 533
Aepyceros melampus see impala
African wild dog Lycaon pictus 65
Agrostis tenuis see bent grass
Ailuropoda melanoleuca see giant panda
Aix sponsa see wood duck
Aleutian goose Branta canadensis
leucopareia 464
Algonquin wolf 369
allele frequency 48, 73–4, 139–41
computer simulation 193–4,
195–6
divergence over time, population
fragmentation 319–20
equilibrium 171–2
favourable allele 142
genetic drift 179–87
inbreeding 260
and migration 169–73
and mutation 158–60
recessive allele 62
alleles
deleterious 60–1
directional selection 215
effective number 201
effectively neutral 214–16, 327
lethal 261–2, 275–6, 293–4
mismatch analysis 481
allelic diversity (A) 48, 62, 80–3, 533
Allen’s rule, clines 170
alligator, American Alligator
mississippiensis 65
allopatric speciation 372, 533
allopolyploidy 237–9, 373–4, 533
allotetraploid 89
allozygous 257, 533
allozymes 61–2, 533
diversity 219
electrophoresis 49–50, 52
heterozygosity 246
indicators of hybridization 411

Alouatta seniculus see red howler
monkeys
Alpine ibex Capra ibex 464
Amazon basin, extinction rates, birds
5
Amazona vittata see Puerto Rican parrot
American bison see bison
Ammodramus maritimus nigrescens see
dusky seaside sparrow
amphibians
allozyme diversity 62
genetic distances, means/ranges
69
percentage endangered 3
amphidiploid 533
ampliﬁed fragment length
polymorphism (AFLP) 55–6,
64–6
Amur leopard Panthera pardus orientalis
425
Anas laysanensis see Laysan duck (teal)
angiosperms, polyploidy 29
Anser caerulescens see snow goose
Anser fabalis see bean goose
Anthoxanthum odoratum see bunch
grass
Aotus trivirgatus see owl monkey
Apalachicola rosemary Conradina
glabra 345
Arabian oryx Oryx leucoryx 67, 184, 354,
385, 425, 431, 464
case study 466
Arabidopsis thaliana see thale cress
Argyroxiphium sandwicense var.
sandwicense see Mauna Kea
silversword
artiﬁcial insemination 442
Aruba Island rattlesnake Crotalus
unicolor 345
asexual species 414–16
associative overdominance 219–20,
533
assortative mating 85, 533
Astragalus see sentry milk-vetch
Astrocaryum mexicanum 513, 514
Attwater’s prairie chicken
Tympanuchus cupido attwateri
345, 352
Australian bush rat Rattus fuscipes 217

autopolyploidy 373–4, 533
autotetraploid 88
autozygosity 257, 533
average heterozygosity 48, 533
B allele, blood groups 167–8
backcross 273, 533
Baiji dolphin 345
Baird’s beaked whale Berardius bairdii
472–3
Balaenoptera endeni see Bryde’s whale
Balaenoptera musculus see blue whale
Balaenoptera physalus see ﬁn whale
balancing selection 199, 204, 534
bald eagle Haliaeatus leucocephalus 352,
464
Bali starling Leucopsar rothschildi 345,
496
bandicoot, Eastern barred Perameles
gunnii 61
Banksia brownii see Brown’s banksia
Banksia cuneata see matchstick banksia
barnacle goose Branta leucopsis 117
barred owl Strix varia 15
bat, ghost Macroderma gigas 487
bay checkerspot butterﬂy
Euphydryas editha bayensis 30,
506, 509
bean goose Anser fabalis 464
Bebornis (Acrocephalis) sechellensis see
Seychelles warbler
bee-eater 117
bent grass Agrostis tenuis, tolerance to
heavy metals 129, 148, 170–1,
212
Berardius bairdii see Baird’s beaked
whale
Bergmann’s rule, clines 170
Bidens, Hawaiian 345, 494
bighorn sheep Ovis canadensis 332,
513
small vs. large populations 33
binomial distribution 534
binomial sampling 180
biodiversity
conservation 2–3
deﬁned 2
bioresources 2
biparental inbreeding 494–6, 534

608

INDEX

birds
allozyme diversity 62
avian malaria 498
extinction rates 4
Amazon basin 5
genetic distances, means/ranges 69
heritabilities of ﬁtness, body size,
bill size 117
inbreeding depression 282
percentage endangered 3
sex determination 497
birthweight, humans, stabilizing
selection 149–50
bison
American Bison bison 176
European Bos bonasus 176, 184, 425
Biston betularia see peppered moth
black lion tamarin Leontopithecus
chrysopygus 430
black sea bass 490
black stilt Himantopus novaezelandiae
345
black-footed ferret Mustela nigripes 99,
184, 352, 425, 431, 463
case study 466–7, 517
black-footed rock wallaby Petrogale
lateralis 13, 34–6, 285, 315, 316,
401–3, 408
island and mainland populations
34, 408
loss of genetic diversity 285, 315,
316
reintroductions 13, 401–3
blackcap Sylvia atricapilla 129
blood groups, B allele 167–8
blue whale Balaenoptera musculus
472–3
Bombus terrestris see bumble bee
Bos bonasus see bison
Bos gaurus see gaur
bottlenecks 19, 183–7, 304, 482–5,
533
Branta leucopsis see barnacle goose
Branta canadensis leucopareia see
Aleutian goose
Branta canadensis see Canada goose
Branta sandvicensis see nene (Hawaiian
goose)
Brassica sp. 62
Brazil, Atlantic forest fragmentation
309
bridled nailtail wallaby Onychogalea
fraenata 65
brown bear Ursus arctos 332
Pyrenean race 480, 498

Brown’s banksia Banksia brownii 272,
415
brush-tailed bettong Bettongia
penicillata 354
Bryde’s whale Balaenoptera endeni
472–3
buffalo, African Syncerus caffer 65, 127,
486
bullfrog (American) Rana catesbeiana
354
bumble bee Bombus terrestris 39
bunch grass Anthoxanthum odoratum
465
tolerance to heavy metals 129, 148,
170–1, 212
butterﬂies, Finland, extinctions 31,
313
California condor Gymnogyps
californianus 61, 83, 134–6, 143,
184, 260–1, 352, 431, 444–5, 496
case study 467
chondrodystrophy 83, 134–6, 260–1,
444–5
genetic disease, management 444–5
California spotted owl Strix occidentalis
occidentalis 14–15
Canada goose Branta canadensis 117
canine distemper virus (Morbillivirus)
499, 515, 517
Canis lupus see gray wolf
Canis rufus see red wolf
Canis simiensis see Ethiopian wolf
Capra ibex see ibex
Capricorn silvereye Zosterops lateralis
chlorocephala 509
captive population breeding
programmes 419–47
extent 420–1
founding 423–4
genetic adaptation in captivity
452–9
genetic changes in captivity 452
genetic deterioration 455
genetic goals 352–7
genetic management 427–39
growth 426–7
inbreeding depression 108, 428
avoiding 431–5
management of groups 439–41
maximizing Ne/N 430–1
maximum avoidance of inbreeding
(MAI) 431–41
minimizing kinship 433–9
plant propagation 420–1

preservation following extinction
in wild 420
reintroductions 448–70
shortage of space 337
stages 422–3
zoos 421–2
Caretta caretta see loggerhead turtle
Caribbean ﬂamingo 354
carrier frequency 83–4
Castanea dentata see chestnut,
American
Catalina mahogany Cercocarpus
traskiae 345, 411–12
catastrophes 504, 515, 534
Cerastium ﬁscherianum var. molle 66
Cercocarpus traskiae see Catalina
mahogany
Cercocebus atys see sooty mangabey
chafer beetles Prodontia modesta and P.
bicolorata 367
Chamaecrista fasciculata 387
Chatham Island black robin Petroica
traversi 184, 302, 400
cheetah Acionyx lubatus 61, 159, 300,
431, 485, 517
chestnut, American Castanea dentata
38, 148, 402
chi-square test 77–8
chimpanzee Pan troglodytes 64, 80
eastern Pan t. schweinfurthii 472
Chinook salmon 373, 519
chloroplast DNA (cpDNA) 237, 534
Choeropsis see pygmy hippopotamus
chondrodystrophy, condors 83, 134–6,
260–1, 444–5
chromosomal diversity 59–60
Cichlidae 372, 375
cinereous vulture 431
CITES (Convention on International
Trade in Endangered Species)
503
clade 534
Clarkia pulchella see evening primrose
Clethrionomys glareolus see bank vole
clines 167, 169–73
cloning 442–3
clover
rose Trifolium hirtum 460
white Trifolium repens 129
co-dominance, deﬁned 48, 534
coalescence 475–80, 534
effective population size 485
coalescence times 478
coancestry 433, 534
see also kinship

INDEX

cobra, blacknecked 354
collared ﬂycatcher 117
collared lizard Crotaphytus collaris 381,
462
colonial pocket gopher Geomys colonus
12, 217–18, 378
Columba mayeri see Mauritius pink
pigeon
computer simulation 28–30, 193–4,
195–6, 253, 507–9
allele frequency 193–4, 195–6, 253
PVAs 507–9
condor see Californian condor
Connochaetes see wildebeest
Conolphus subcristatus see Galapagos
iguana
Conradina glabra see Apalachicola
rosemary
conservation biology 9
Conservation Breeding Specialist
Group (CBSG), IUCN 534
conservation genetics
deﬁnition/scope xiii, 1, 9–10
management of endangered species
16–18
structure and content 10
Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species (CITES) 503
convergent evolution 535
Cook’s kok’io Kokia cookei 176, 420
copepod, Tigriopus californicus 387
Copsychus sechellarum see Seychelles
magpie robin
cord grass see Spartina
correlation, deﬁned 102
corridors 404
Corrigan grevillea Grevillea scapigera
345
Corvus corax see raven
Corvus kubaryi see Mariana crow
cotton (cultivated) Gossypium
barbadense and G. hirsutum 411
cotton-top tamarin Saguinus oedipus
112, 119
Coturnix coturnix japonica see Japanese
quail
coyote 65
crane
hooded 431
red-crowned 244, 431
whooping 67, 184, 345
cricket Gryllus ﬁrmus 425
critically endangered species 535
crossing over 93
Crotalus see rattlesnake

Crotaphytus collaris see collared lizard
crow see Mariana crow; raven
Cryan’s buckmoth 391
cryopreservation 442
Cuvier’s gazelle Gazella cuvieri 287
Cynomys spp. see prairie dogs
Daphnia see water ﬂea
Darwin’s cactus ﬁnch Geospiza
scandens 117, 243, 244, 484
Darwin’s fox Dusicyon fulvipes 345
Darwin’s medium ground ﬁnch
Geospiza fortis 115, 117, 129, 244
DDT control 400
deer mouse Peromyscus maniculatus 39,
288, 289
deleterious alleles 60–1
deleterious mutation 162, 198
demographic history, and population
size 480–5
demographic stochasticity 28, 504,
513, 535
Dendrocopus medius see middle spotted
woodpecker
desert topminnow Poeciliopsis monacha
25, 284–5, 401
deterministic factors, endangered
species 503
Diceros bicornis see rhinoceros, black
die-back fungus Phytophthora
cinnamomi 97–8
dik-dik Madoqua sp. 367, 386
directional selection 114, 145, 146–8,
191, 215, 535
disease
inherited diseases 443–4
species boundaries 127
disease resistance 129–30
and genetic diversity 39
and MHC 209
dispersal
evolutionary changes 129–30
and gene ﬂow 330
dispersal distances 331
disruptive selection 145–6
DNA
non-intrusive sampling for genetic
analysis 12, 475–6
sequence variation 62–4
sequencing 57–9
phylogenetic trees 382–4
see also microsatellites;
mitochondrial DNA
DNA ﬁngerprints (minisatellites)
54–6, 64–5, 535, 540

dodo Raphus cucullatus 23
dog, hybridization see Ethiopian wolf
(simian jackal)
dog see African wild dog;
dominance, degrees of 140–1
dominance variance 109, 111, 122, 535
Dorcas gazelle Gazella dorcas 270–1, 301
Drosophila melanogaster see fruit ﬂy
Dusicyon fulvipes see Darwin’s fox
dusky seaside sparrow Ammodramus
maritimus nigrescens 367, 490,
504
Eastern barred bandicoot Perameles
gunnii 61, 244, 345
ecological exchangeability 389–91
ecosystem services 535
value 1–2
ecotypes 129, 535
effective number of alleles (ne ) 201,
535
effective population size (Ne ) 189–90,
228, 239–51, 535
estimating 250
ﬂuctuating populations 247–8
inbreeding 250
unequal sex ratio 241–3
variance 250
variation in family sizes 243–6
effectively neutral alleles 214–16, 535
eider duck Somateria mollissima 73
Elaphurus davidianus see Père David’s
deer
Eld’s deer 513
electrophoresis 51–3
elephant
African Loxodonta africana 391
Asian Elephas maximus 30, 243,
413–14
emperor goose 499
endangered species 2–8
deﬁned 6–7, 8, 535
deterministic factors 503
extent of endangerment 3–4
genetic diversity 65–6, 158–9
IUCN categories 7
microsatellite genetic diversity
65–6
regeneration of genetic diversity
158–9
stochastic factors 504
Endangered Species Acts, legal
protection 7, 371, 421, 526
endemic species 34, 536
Enhydris lutra see sea otter

609

610

INDEX

environmental stochasticity 504, 536
environmental variation 99
partitioning 105–6
epistasis 536
epistatic variance 536
Equus, horse, evolution 148
Equus grevyii see Grevy’s zebra
Equus przewalskii see Przewalski’s horse
ethics, justiﬁcation for preservation of
genetic diversity 1–2
Ethiopian wolf (simian jackal) Canis
simiensis 12, 65, 81, 169, 345, 411
eucalypts, glaucousness 212–13
Eucalyptus coccifera see Tasmanian snow
gum
Eucalyptus gigantea see gigantic
eucalypt
Eucalyptus gunnii see gunni eucalypt
Eucalyptus marginata see jarrah tree
Eucalyptus urnigera see urn gum
Euperipatoides leuckartii see velvet worm
Euphydryas editha bayensis see bay
checkerspot butterﬂy
euro Macropus robustus erubescens 34,
285
evening primrose Clarkia pulchella 31
evolution
adaptive 128
convergent 129
large populations 126–53, 154–74
small populations 175–96
evolutionarily effective population
size 485
evolutionarily signiﬁcant units (ESU)
388–9, 536
evolutionary potential 341–3, 536
and heritability 111–18
impact of population size 347–8
ex situ conservation 441, 536
exons 62, 536
expected heterozygosity (He ) 78, 201,
536
extinction rates
plants 5
projections 5–6
extinction vortex 32, 505, 536
extinctions 23–44
causes
circumstantial evidence 32
human-associated factors 7–8
inbreeding depression 28, 32–3
loss of genetic diversity 36–9
stochastic factors 8
deterministic factors 503

island/mainland/ocean (1660 to
present) 4
population viability analysis 506–28
recorded (1660 to present) 4
sixth extinction 2
stochastic factors 504
F, Wright’s inbreeding coefﬁcient 536
F statistics
FIS 324–7, 537
FIT 324–7, 537
FST 324–7, 537
Falco araea see Seychelles kestrel
Falco peregrinus see peregrine falcon
Falco punctatus see Mauritius kestrel
false poison sumach Rhus michauxii
414
family sizes 243–7
impact on effective population size
243–6
Felis concolor coryi see Florida panther
Festuca ovina, tolerance to heavy
metals 129, 148, 170–1, 212
ﬁn whale Balaenoptera physalus 472–3
Finland, Glanville fritillary butterﬂy
31, 313
ﬁshes
allozyme diversity 62
genetic distances, means/ranges 69
inbreeding depression 282
parasite load 38
percentage endangered 3
ﬁtness see reproductive ﬁtness
ﬁxation 142, 217
selective sweeps 479
ﬁxation index FST 331, 536
Florida panther Felis concolor coryi 11,
345, 367–8, 397–9, 460
case study 518
ﬂour beetle Tribolium castaneum,
T. confusum 32, 303, 179
extinction due to inbreeding 32,
303
genetic drift 179
ﬂuctuating asymmetry 300
ﬂycatchers 117
forensic biology 13, 470–501, 536
founder effect 537
founder relationships 496–7
founders 183
captive populations 423–4
small numbers 424–6
founding events 192
effect on genetic diversity 423–6

fox
Darwin’s Dusicyon fulvipes 345
San Joaquin kit Vulpes macrotis
mutica 481
silver Vulpes vulpes 147–8
Frankel, Sir Otto 9
Franklin tree Franklinia alatamahu 176,
420
frequency-dependent selection 199,
207–11, 537
fruit ﬂy Drosophila melanogaster 63, 67
bottlenecks 185, 304
Buri’s increase in variance in allele
frequencies over time 321
clines 170
directional selection 191
family size 246
genetic drift 324
heritabilities, mean 118
inversion polymorphism 211–12
mutational accumulation 350
speed 148
full-sib mating 261, 537
Furbish’s lousewort Pedicularis
furbishiae 61, 519
G6PD (glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase), deﬁciency 197,
207
Galapagos, see also Darwin’s ﬁnches
Galapagos iguana Conolphus
subcristatus 464
Galapagos Island cotton Gossypium
darwinii 411
Galapagos tortoise Geochelone
elaphantopus 464
Gambusia holbrooki see mosquito-ﬁsh
gaur Bos gaurus 443
Gazella cuvieri see Cuvier’s gazelle
Gazella dorcas see Dorcas gazelle
Gazella spekei see Speke’s gazelle
gene diversity, expected
heterozygosity (He ) 78, 201, 536
gene dropping 537
gene ﬂow 329–31
population structure 485–91
gene trees, and coalescence 475–80,
537
genetic characterization methods 476
genetic distance 48, 379–81, 537
genetic diversity 45–71
changes over time 228
characterization, quantitative
variation 96–125

INDEX

conservation 198
deﬁned 47–50, 537
and disease resistance 39
endangered species 65–6, 158–9
extent 60–7
justiﬁcation for preservation
1–2
in large populations 199–200
loss 225–6
maintenance 197–224
measurement 50–60
origin and regeneration 155–6
partitioning 105–6
reproductive ﬁtness 220–1
single locus 348–9
time for regeneration 158–9
variation in space/time 67–71
genetic drift 178–87, 218, 324
deﬁned 537
and selection 114, 145, 146–8
genetic issues in reserve design
410–11
genetic load 155, 162–7, 537
genetic management 419–47
endangered species 16–18
reintroductions 448–70
genetic markers 375–9
reproductive systems 492
genetic problems, diagnosis 401
genetic stochasticity 505
genetics
and minimization of extinctions
11–15
and population viability analysis
(PVA) 511–12
genome 48
genome resource banks 441–3, 537
genome uniqueness 438, 537
genotype frequency 76–8, 259–61
genotype  environment interaction
106, 537
genotypes 48
Gentiana pneumonanthe 30
Geochelone elaphantopus see Galapagos
tortoise
Geomys colonus see pocket gopher
Geomys pinetus see pocket gopher
ghost bat Macroderma gigas 487
giant panda Ailuropoda melanoleuca
345, 404
gigantic eucalypt Eucalyptus gigantea
213
giraffe Giraffa camelopardis, inbreeding
depression 25–7

Glanville fritillary butterﬂy, Finland
31, 313
glaucous gull Larus hypoboreus 499
global warming 127
Globicephalis melas see long-ﬁnned pilot
whale
Gloger’s rule, clines 170
Glossary 533–45
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
deﬁciency 197, 207
golden hamster Mesocricetus auratus
356
golden lion tamarin Leontopithecus
rosalia 30, 163, 178, 244,
249–50, 283, 345, 351, 354
captive breeding 423–5, 450–2, 461
computer simulation, PVA 508
genetic management 450–2
reintroductions 463
inbreeding depression 454
minimum habitat area 525–6
gopher see pocket gopher
gorilla Gorilla gorilla 427
Gossypium barbadense and G. hirsutum
see cotton (cultivated)
Gossypium darwinii see Galapagos
Island cotton
grasses see species names
grassland daisy Rutidosis
leptorrhynchoides 88, 229–30,
373
gray wolf Canis lupus 65, 163, 332, 369
great tit Parus major 117
greater prairie chicken 25, 36, 231–2,
285, 300, 306, 401, 482, 505–6,
516
Grevillea scapigera see Corrigan
grevillea
Grevy’s zebra 244, 431
grey seal Halichoerus grypus 65
Grus americana see whooping crane
Gryllus ﬁrmus see cricket
Guadalupe Island lupine Lupinus
guadalupensis 465
Guam rail Rallus owstoni 176, 184, 468
gunni eucalypt Eucalyptus gunnii 213
Gymnogyps californianus see California
condor
gymnosperms, polyploidy 29
habitat area, minimum 525
habitat fragmentation 310
haemophilia 166
Haliaeatus leucocephalus see bald eagle

Halichoerus grypus see grey seal
Halocharpus bidwilli 236
Haloragodendron lucasii 414, 493
haplo-diploids 415–16
haploid loci 142
haplotype networks 486, 538
haplotypes 91, 537
Hardy—Weinberg equilibrium 75–89,
538
and carriers 83–4
deviations 84–6, 493
extensions 86–8
and inbreeding 84
recessive allele frequency 62, 82–3
sex-linked loci 88–90
harmonic mean 538
Harris’s hawk Parabuteo unicinctus 464
harvesting, impacts 412–14
Hawaiian Bidens 345, 494
Hawaiian crow 302
Hawaiian duck 411
Hawaiian goose see nene
Hawaiian monk seal 511
heath hen Tympanuchus cupido cupido
33
heavy metals, tolerance to 129, 148,
170–1, 212
Helianthus see sunﬂower
heliconius butterﬂy Heliconius erato 87
hemizygosity 538
heritability
deﬁned 102, 112, 118, 538
estimating 118–20
and evolutionary potential 111–18
magnitudes 116–18
precision 120
realized 542
hermaphrodite 75, 538
Heterocephalus glaber see mole-rat
heterosis 300, 305
heterozygosity (H) 48
allozyme 246
average 48
bottlenecks 185–7
equilibrium 202
expected 78, 201
rates of loss 237–9
loss of 186, 232–5, 321–4
observed 74, 234
and population size 202
heterozygote advantage 204–7, 538,
541
Himantopus novaezelandiae see black
stilt

611

612

INDEX

hitchhiking 538
HIV-1 and HIV-2 499
homozygosity 48, 538
honeycreeper, Hawaiian Vestiaria 45,
130, 375
honeysuckle, roundleaf Lambertia
orbifolia 493–4
Hong Kong lady’s tresses orchid
Spiranthes hongkongensis 373–4
horse, evolution 148
horseshoe crab 381
houseﬂy Musca domestica, inbreeding
depression 285
Howellia aquatilis 61
human population
growth 8
total 8
humpback whale Megaptera
novaeangliae 345, 472–3
hybridization, detecting 12, 168, 369,
411, 476
Hymenoxys acaulis var. glabra see
lakeside daisy
ibex Capra ibex 385–6
idealized population 188, 538
identity by descent 257, 538
illegal hunting/collecting 472–5
impala Aepyceros melampus 486
in situ conservation 538
inbreeding 254–79, 538
and extinction 286
genetic consequences 258–62
and migration 328–31
parentage 494–6
and selection 297
small populations 263–8
see also self-fertilization
inbreeding coefﬁcient F 25, 256–8, 538
average F 26
indirect estimation 267–8
inbreeding depression 24–7, 187, 226,
248–9, 280–308
captive populations 108
characteristics 287–95
computer projections 29–30
deﬁned 538
detection and measurement
299–302
examples 282
minimization of extinction risk 11
purging 295–9
rate, and extinction risk 28
recovering 305–6
and reproductive ﬁtness 18

in species that regularly inbreed
290, 431–41
susceptibility 120–1
variability 288–90
indigo bunting 117
industrial melanism 37, 126, 129,
137–9, 144–5, 171
inherited diseases 443–4
insecticide resistance 130
interaction variance 109, 111, 538
International Species Information
System (ISIS) 422
introgression 16, 168, 411, 538
introns 62, 539
inversion polymorphism 211–12,
539
Ipomopsis aggregata see scarlet gilia
island extinctions, recorded (1660 to
present) 4
island populations 19, 33–6, 313–17
bottleneck to genetic diversity 19
extinction proneness 33–6
Isle Royale gray wolf Canis lupus 183,
267–8, 347–8, 509
isolating factors, origin of species
372–3
isozymes 539
IUCN (World Conservation Union)
aims 2, 420
CAMPs 422
captive breeding policy 422
CBSG 534
classiﬁcation of endangerment 7
PVAs 508
Species Survival Commission 422
Japanese quail Coturnix coturnix
japonica, inbreeding depression
27–8, 288
jarrah tree Eucalyptus marginata 97–8,
103
disease resistance 97–8
kangaroo see euro; red kangaroo
Kemp’s ridley sea turtle Lepidochelys
kempii 366
kestrels 65, 177
king penguin 117, 431, 431
King’s lomatia Lomatia tasmanica 61,
414
kinship (kij )
captive populations 433–9
deﬁned 539
mean 435
minimizing 457

Kirtland’s warbler 345
koala Phascolarctos cinereus 65, 408–10,
482–3, 491
Kokia cookei see Cook’s kok’io
komodo dragon Varanus komodoensis
65, 345
lakeside daisy Hymenoxys acaulis var.
glabra 38, 352, 407
Lambertia orbifolia see honeysuckle,
round-leaf
Lanius lucovicianus mearnsi see San
Clemente Island loggerhead
shrike
Larus hypoboreus see glaucous gull
Laysan duck (teal) Anas laysanensis
491
Laysan ﬁnch Telespiza cantans 65, 74,
79, 86
Leontopithecus chrysopygus see black lion
tamarin
Leontopithecus rosalia see golden lion
tamarin
Lepidochelys kempii see Kemp’s ridley sea
turtle
Lepus americanus see snowshoe hare
lesser snow goose see snow goose
lethal alleles 261–2, 275–6
inbreeding depression 293–4
lethal equivalents (B) 301–4, 539
lethal mutations 158, 162, 192
Leucopsar rothschildi see Bali starling
light-footed clapper rail Rallus
longirostris levipes 66
Limonium duforii 414
lineage sorting 383, 539
linkage (dis)equilibrium 90–3, 219
coefﬁcient of 534, 539
lion
African Panthera leo 49, 499
Asiatic Panthera leo persica 50, 244–5,
345
lizards see collared lizard; sleepy
lizard
loci 48, 539
mutations 157
loggerhead shrike Lanius lucovicianus
65
see also San Clemente Island
loggerhead shrike
loggerhead turtle Caretta caretta 13,
470, 488–9, 495, 517
Lomatia tasmanica see King’s lomatia
long-ﬁnned pilot whale Globicephalis
melas 488

INDEX

long-footed potoroo Potorous longipes
65, 375–6
Lord Howe Island woodhen
Tricholimnas (Gallirallus) sylvestris
176, 345, 352, 400, 425
case study 468–9, 518–19
Loxodonta africana see elephant
Lupinus guadalupensis see Guadalupe
Island lupine
Lycaon pictus see African wild dog
lynx Lynx canadensis 247, 504
Lysimachia minorcicensis 66, 460
Macroderma gigas see ghost bat
Macropus robustus erubescens see euro
Madoqua sp. see dik-dik
mahogany see Catalina mahogany;
royal mahogany
maize Zea mays
inbreeding depression 282, 295
quantitative trait loci (QTL) 100,
123
two-way selection 149
major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) 38, 90, 92, 207–10, 539
drift 218
selection coefﬁcient s 145
Malacothamnus fasciculatus var.
nesioticus see Santa Cruz Island
bush mallow
malaria 196, 204–7
avian 498
malheur wirelettuce Stephanomeria
malheurensis 176, 415
mallee 414
Malurus splendens see splendid fairy
wren
mammals
allozyme diversity 62
extinction rates 4
genetic distances, means/ranges 69
inbreeding depression 282
percentage endangered 3
management of captive populations
439–41
management units, deﬁning 12,
388–92
management of wild populations
394–418
Mariana crow Corvus kubaryi 65
mass extinctions 504
sixth extinction 2
matchstick banksia Banksia cuneata
509, 519–20
mathematical models, role 132–3

Mauna Kea silversword Argyroxiphium
sandwicense var. sandwicense 176,
345, 407
case study 469
Mauritius kestrel Falco punctatus 65,
67, 79, 176–7, 184, 302
Mauritius pink pigeon Columba
(Nesoenas) mayeri 184, 244, 302,
345, 425
maximum avoidance of inbreeding
(MAI) 431–41
mean, deﬁned 101
mean kinship (mk) 435, 539
Megaptera novaeangliae see humpback
whale
melanism, industrial pollution 37,
126, 129, 137–9, 144–5, 171
Meleagris gallopavo see turkey
merino sheep Ovis aries 112
Mesocricetus auratus see golden hamster
meta-analysis 539
mammals, example 18
metapopulations 313, 332–3, 539
Mexican wolf Canis lupus mexicanus 65,
108, 289, 367, 497
microsatellites 53–7, 63–6, 539
genetic characterization methods
476
paternity determination 494–6
middle spotted woodpecker
Dendrocopus medius 33
migration 167–73
detecting immigrants 488–9
and inbreeding 328–31
migration corridors 404
migration–selection equilibrium
frequency 171–2
minimum viable population size
(MVP) 337–9, 506–7, 524–6,
539
minisatellite (VNTR) 54–6, 64–5, 535,
540
Mirounga angustrostris see northern
elephant seal
Mirounga leonina see southern elephant
seal
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 540
analysis 59–60, 378–9, 476
scats 13, 480–1
evolutionarily signiﬁcant units
(ESU) 388–9
mole-rat, naked Heterocephalus glaber,
inbreeding depression 272–3
molecular genetics, forensic biology
13, 470–501, 536

Mongolian wild horse see Przewalski’s
horse
monomorphic 48, 540
monophyletic classiﬁcations 371, 540
Monte Carlo simulations 193–4
Morbillivirus see canine distemper
virus
mosquito-ﬁsh Gambusia holbrooki,
extinction due to inbreeding
32, 303
muntjac deer Muntiacus spp. 59, 370,
376
Musca domestica see houseﬂy
Mustela nigripes see black-footed ferret
mutation 156–67
balancing selection 199
beneﬁcial 199
deleterious 198
human 162
lethal 158, 162, 192
neutral 156, 199, 200–3
reverse 160
small populations 191–2
mutation load 162–7, 540
deﬁned 155
mutation rate
examples 157
from mutation–selection balance
165–6
and stable equilibrium 160
mutation–selection balance 162–7,
275–7, 540
and ﬁtness 166
polyploids 164–5
mutational meltdown 349, 540
myxoma virus, rabbit 129–30
Nasella pulchra 460
natural selection 540
see also selection
Nei’s genetic distance 379–81, 540
Nei’s genetic similarity 540
nene (Hawaiian goose) Branta
sandvicensis 67, 184, 400, 482,
484
neutral mutation 156, 199, 200–3,
540
Nicotiana see tobacco
Ninox novaeseelandiae undulata see
Norfolk Island boobook owl
non-synonymous substitution 540
Norfolk Island boobook owl Ninox
novaeseelandiae undulata 273–4,
367, 382–3, 490, 498
normal distribution 96, 100, 540

613

614

INDEX

northern elephant seal Mirounga
angustrostris 61, 176, 183–4,
241–2, 248, 339, 484–5
inbreeding 266–7
northern right whale Eubalaena
gracialis 345
northern spotted owl see spotted owl
nucleotide substitutions 201
nyala Tragelaphus angasi 354
observed heterozygosity 74, 540
Ochotona princeps see pika
okapi Okapia johnstoni 302–3, 431
old-ﬁeld mouse Peromyscus polionotus
288, 289
Onychogalea fraenata see bridled nailtail
wallaby
orangutan Pongo pygmaeus 367, 371,
377–8
Oryctolagus cuniculus see rabbit
Oryx dammah see scimitar-horned oryx
Oryx leucoryx see Arabian oryx
outbreeding depression 10, 385–8, 541
overdominance 199, 204–7, 296, 541
associative 219–20
Ovis aries see merino sheep
Ovis canadensis see bighorn sheep
owl monkey Aotus trivirgatus 367, 386
owl see barred owl; spotted owl
Paciﬁc ridley turtle Lepidochelys olivacea
366
Paciﬁc yew Taxus brevifolia 249, 326,
494
Palo Verdes blue butterﬂy 345
Pan troglodytes see chimpanzee
panda see giant panda; red panda
panmictic 541
Panthera leo persica see lion, Asiatic
Panthera leo see lion, African
Panthera pardus orientalis see Amur
leopard
Panthera tigris see tiger
Parabuteo unicinctus see Harris’s hawk
parasite load, ﬁshes 38
parentage, paternity determination
494–6
partial dominance 541
Partula taeniata and P. tenuis 101, 103,
113, 354, 420
heritabilities 119
Parus, titmice 117
Pedicularis furbishiae see Furbish’s
lousewort
pedigrees 269–71, 541

penguin 117
peppered moth Biston betularia,
industrial melanism 37, 126,
129, 137–9, 144–5, 171
Perameles gunnii see Eastern barred
bandicoot
percentage of loci polymorphic (P) 541
Père David’s deer Elaphurus davidianus
184, 420
peregrine falcon Falco peregrinus 65,
352, 464
Peripatus see velvet worm
peripheral characters 108, 541
Peromyscus leucops see white-footed
mouse
Peromyscus maniculatus see deer mouse
Peromyscus polionotes see old-ﬁeld
mouse
pesticide resistance 130
Petrogale see wallaby
Petroica traversi see Chatham Island
black robin
Phascolarctos cinereus see koala
phenotypic intermediates 149–50
phenotypic variance 105
Photinia 499
phylogenetic trees 382–4
phylogeography 541
Phytophthora cinnamomi see die-back
fungus
Picoides borealis see red-cockaded
woodpecker
pied ﬂycatcher Ficedula hypoleuca 117
pika Ochotona princeps 488
pink pigeon Columba (Nesoenas) mayeri
184, 244
Pinus torreyana see Torrey pine
plagues 127
plant collections 421
ex situ conservation 441
plant propagation, breeding
programmes 420–1
plants, allozyme diversity 62
Platanus platanoides see sycamore
pleiotropy 541
poaching 413–14
pocket gopher
colonial Geomys colonus 12, 217–18,
378
southeastern Geomys pinetus 12,
217–18, 378
Poeciliops occidentalis see topminnow
ﬁsh
Poeciliopsis monacha see desert
topminnow

Poisson distribution 189, 243, 541
polar bear Thalarctos 65
polyandry 541
polygamy 541
polygyny 541
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 58–9,
541–2
polymorphism
allozyme electrophoresis 49–50
deﬁned 542
inversion 211–12
loci 48
transient 199
polyphyletic classiﬁcations 371, 542
polyploidy 60, 88–90, 373–4
genetic management 416
and inbreeding depression 29,
276–7, 294–5
mutation–selection balance 164–5
rates of loss of heterozygosity 237–9
Pongo pygmaeus see orangutan
population fragmentation 85–6, 226,
309–335, 404–10
degree 318–19
distribution of alleles 317–18
divergence in allele frequencies
over time 319–20
FST 324–7, 537
genetic adaptation in captivity
457–9
genetic management 404–10
population size 176–96
bottlenecks 183–7, 304, 482–5
census (N) 240
demographic history 480–5
effective (Ne ) 189–90, 228, 239–51,
535
estimating 250–1, 339–41
fate <500 344–8
evolutionarily effective 485
genetic viability 336–59
see also population viability
analysis (PVA)
harmonic mean 247
idealized 188
increasing in wild populations
399–401
large, and evolution 126–53,
154–74
loss of genetic diversity 227–53
maximizing Ne/N 430–1
measuring 187–90
reduction effects 225–6
single large or several small (SLOSS)
311, 314, 410

INDEX

small, and evolution 175–96
threatened populations 343–4
population structure, gene ﬂow
485–91
population viability analysis (PVA) 18,
502–28
deﬁned 542
exercises 527–8
extinctions 506–28
and genetics 511–12
limitations 523–4
minimum viable population size
(MVP) 337–9, 506–7, 524–6
predictions 520–3
Potentilla glandulosa see sticky
cinquefoil
potoroo Potorous tridactylus 375–6
Potorous longipes see long-footed
potoroo
prairie chicken see Attwater’s; greater
prairie dogs Cynomys spp. 517
primer, deﬁned 542
probe 542
Problems
allele frequency 94, 153
bottlenecks 500
cloning 447
dominance 153
endangered species 527
evolutionary potential 358
genetic adaptation 470
genetic diversity 70–1, 222
genetic management 417
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium 94
heritability 124
heterozygosity (H) 124, 252
heterozygote advantage 222
inbreeding 279, 308, 417
IUCN catgeories 21–2
kinship 446
lethal equivalents 308
linkage (dis)equilibrium 95
Mendelian inheritance 21
mutation 173–4
population fragmentation 334
population size 252
probability and statistics 21, 124,
195
reintroductions 470
revision 531–2
selection 151–3
selection differential 125
self-incompatibility 223
taxonomy 393
Solutions 546–66

Prodontia modesta and P. bicolorata see
chafer beetles
proteins
neutral mutation rate 202
variation 61–2
see also allozymes
Przewalski’s horse Equus przewalskii 61,
163, 183, 244, 425, 496
case study 467
inbreeding 255–6
pseudogene 542
Pseudoryx nghetinhensi see saola (Vu
Quang bovid)
Puerto Rican parrot Amazona vittata
30, 184, 345, 425, 515–16
Puerto Rican plain pigeon 66
puma see Florida panther
purging 275, 295–9, 542
puritan tiger beetle 392
pygmy hippopotamus Choeropsis 256
Pyrenean brown bear Ursus arctos 480,
498
quail Coturnix coturnix japonica,
inbreeding depression 27–8,
288
quantitative genetic variation 96–125,
542
correlation with molecular
variation 121–2
detecting 103–5
organization 122
partitioning 105–6, 108–11
vs. qualitative genetic variation 99
quantitative trait locus (QTL) 100, 123,
542
range of dominance 123
rabbit Oryctolagus cuniculus 129–30,
463
Rallus longirostris levipes see light-footed
clapper rail
Rallus owstoni see Guam rail
Rana catesbeiana see bullfrog
(American)
random genetic drift 542
random mating, deﬁned 542
randomly ampliﬁed polymorphic
DNA (RAPD) 55, 64–5, 542
RAPD 469
Raphus cucullatus see dodo
rattlesnake Crotalus viridis 100
Aruba Island Crotalus unicolor 345
Rattus fuscipes see Australian bush rat
raven Corvus corax 65

realized heritability 542
recessive allele frequency,
Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium
62, 82–3
recessive lethal selection 134–6
recombination 93
red grouse Lagopus lagopus 117
red kangaroo Macropus rufus 504
red panda Ailurus fulgens 431
Red Queen hypothesis 127
red wolf Canis rufus 289, 369
red-cockaded woodpecker Picoides
borealis 311–12, 345, 352, 379,
395, 509
red-crowned crane 244, 431
red-ruffed lemur 61, 163, 184, 425
red-tailed hawk 302, 356
regression, deﬁned 102
reintroductions 13, 543
genetic management 448–70
individuals, choice 460–3
sites
choice 459–60
identiﬁcation by DNA 12–13
success 463–5
reproductive ﬁtness 97, 213, 536, 543
heritabilities 116–18
and inbreeding depression 18, 281
relation to genetic diversity 220–1
retention 339–41
reproductive isolation, genetic
distance 379–81
reproductive systems, genetic markers
492
reproductive technology 441–3
reptiles
allozyme diversity 62
genetic distances, means/ranges 69
percentage endangered 3
reserves, design 410–11
resistance, evolution of 130
restriction enzyme 543
restriction fragment length
polymorphism (RFLP) 56, 485,
543
Rhagoletis pomonella see hawthorn ﬂy
rhinoceros
black Diceros bicornis 65, 391, 405,
512
Javan Rhinoceros sondaicus 6, 345, 352
one-horned (Indian) Rhinoceros
unicornis 184, 186, 327, 336,
337–8, 400, 425
Rhus michauxii see false poison sumach
Rodriguez fruit bat 431

615

616

INDEX

rose pink Sabatia angularis 288
royal mahogany 65
Rutidosis leptorrhynchoides see grassland
daisy
Sabatia angularis see rose pink
Saguinus oedipus see cotton-top tamarin
salmon
Atlantic 65
chinook 240, 373, 519
coho 12
sockeye 373
San Clemente Island loggerhead
shrike Lanius lucovicianus
mearnsi 65
San Joaquin kit fox Vulpes macrotis
mutica 481
Santa Cruz Island bush mallow
Malacothamnus fasciculatus var.
nesioticus 414–15, 493
saola (Vu Quang bovid) Pseudoryx
nghetinhensi 377
scarlet gilia Ipomopsis aggregata 288,
401
scats, mtDNA analysis 13, 480–1
Schiedea haleakalensis 345
scimitar-horned oryx Oryx dammah
176, 244, 431
sea otter Enhydris lutra, target
population size 352
selection 133–50
adaptation 136–9
long-term 148
balancing 199, 204
directional selection 114, 145,
146–8
disruptive selection 145–6
frequency-dependent 207–11
natural selection 128
on mutations 160–7
quantitative characters 145–6
recessive lethal 134–6
small populations 190–1
stabilizing selection 145–6,
149–50
selection coefﬁcient (s) 137, 139,
143–5, 543
major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) 145
selection differential (S) 114, 543
selection response, prediction
115–16
selective sweep 543
selectively neutral alleles 214–16, 327,
543

self-fertilization 84–5, 248–9, 281, 415,
543
self-incompatibility 543
alleles 37–8, 210–11, 217, 229–30
sensitivity analysis 516–17, 543
sentry milk-vetch Astragalus 67
sex determination 497
sex ratio 241–3
sex-linked loci 543
Hardy–Weinberg equation 88–90
sexing, molecular 497–8
Seychelles kestrel Falco araea 65, 177
Seychelles magpie robin Copsychus
sechellarum 302, 345
Seychelles warbler Acrocephalis
sechellensis 99, 283, 345, 400
sheep
bighorn 33, 332, 513
merino 112
Soay 38, 288, 521–3
sibling species 381, 543
sickle cell anaemia 204–7
silent substitution 62, 156, 543
silver fox Vulpes vulpes 147–8
simian jackal see Ethiopian wolf
single large or several small (SLOSS)
310, 311, 314, 410, 544
single locus genetic diversity 348–9
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
56, 544
single strand conformational
polymorphism (SSCP) 56
sixth extinction 2
sleepy lizard Tiliqua rugosa 65
small scabious Scabiosa columbaria
405
snow goose, lesser Anser caerulescens
117, 119, 120, 489–90, 495
snow leopard Panthera pardus orientalis
425
snowshoe hare Lepus americanus 247
Soay sheep 38, 288, 521–3
Socorro dove Zenaida graysonii 176
Socorro Island red-tailed hawk 302,
356
Somateria mollissima see eider duck
song sparrow 117
sooty mangabey Cercocebus atys 499
Soulé, Michael 9
source–sink 333, 544
southeastern pocket gopher Geomys
pinetus 12, 217–18, 378
Southern blot 544
southern elephant seal Mirounga
leonina 241–2

sparrow see dusky seaside sparrow;
song sparrow
Spartina, polyploidy 89
speciation 544
allopatric 372
instantaneous 373–4
sympatric 372
species
deﬁned 370–1, 544
delineating using genetic markers
375–9
lifespan 5
management units, deﬁning 12
origin
allopatric/sympatric 372
instant speciation 373–4
isolating factors 372–3
slow speciation 374–5
sibling 381
species survival plans (SSPs) 421
spectacled eider duck Sommateria
ﬁscheri 499
Speke’s gazelle Gazella spekei 425
Sphenodon guntheri, S. punctatus see
tuatara
Spiranthes hongkongensis 373–4
Spiranthes sinensis 373–4
Spiranthes spiralis 373–4
spix macaw 431
splendid fairy wren Malurus splendens
283, 496
spotted owl Strix occidentalis
Californian Strix o. occidentalis
14–15
northern Strix o. caurina 14–15, 61,
509
SSCP see single strand conformational
polymorphism
SSPs see species survival plans 421
stabilizing selection 145, 149–50,
544
stable equilibrium 160, 544
standard deviation, deﬁned 102
starling
Bali Leucopsar rothschildi 345, 496
European Sturnus vulgaris 100, 117
Stephanomeria malheurensis see malheur
wirelettuce
stickleback, three-spined 373
sticky cinquefoil Potentilla glandulosa
107
stochastic evolution 177
stochastic factors
endangered species 504
interactions 505–6

INDEX

stochasticity
deﬁned 544
demographic 28, 504, 513
Strix occidentalis see spotted owl
Strix varia see barred owl
Sturnus vulgaris see starling
Styrax texana see Texas snowbell
subspecies, deﬁned 371
sunﬂower
Californian Helianthus exilis 366
Texan Helianthus paradoxus 367
supportive breeding 465–6, 544
sycamore Platanus platanoides 374
Sylvia atricapilla see blackcap
sympatric species 372, 544
Syncerus caffer see buffalo
synonymous substitution 544
Taita thrush Turdus helleri 498
Take-home messages 529–30
tandem repeats 54–6, 64–5, 535,
544
Tasmanian snow gum Eucalyptus
coccifera 213
taxon 544
taxonomic status 365–94
ﬂowchart of questions 17
management units 399
and minimization of extinction risk
11–12
susceptibility to inbreeding
depression 29
Taxus brevifolia see Paciﬁc yew
Telespiza cantans see Laysan ﬁnch
Texan sunﬂower Helianthus paradoxus
367
Texas snowbell Styrax texana 346
Thalarctos see polar bear
thalassaemia 197, 207
thale cress Arabidopsis thaliana 100
Thomomys see pocket gophers
threatened populations
deﬁned 544
recovering 516–17
size 343–4
threatened species, deﬁned 6, 544
tiger beetle 392, 490
tiger Panthera tigris
Bengal 386
Siberian 184, 354, 386, 425
Sumatran 244

Tigriopus californicus 387
Tiliqua rugosa see sleepy lizard
titmice Parus 117
tobacco Nicotiana 103, 104–5
topminnow ﬁsh Poeciliops occidentalis
300
Torrey pine Pinus torreyana 61
toxoplasmosis Toxoplasma gondii 127
trans-species polymorphism 545
transient polymorphisms 199, 544
translocations 404–7, 545
transposons 156, 545
tree swallow 117
Tribolium see ﬂour beetle
Tricholimnas sylvestris see Lord Howe
Island woodhen
Trifolium see clover
tuatara Sphenodon punctatus and S.
guntheri 367
Turdus helleri see Taita thrush
turkey, wild Meleagris gallopavo 288
Tympanuchus see Attwater’s prairie
chicken; heath hen
urn gum Eucalyptus urnigera 213
Ursus arctos see brown bear
Varanus komodoensis see komodo
dragon
variable number tandem repeats
(VNTR, minisatellite) 54–6,
64–5, 535, 540
variance
deﬁned 101, 545
dominance variance 109, 111, 122
effective sizes 250
partitioning 109–11
velvet worm
Euperipatoides leuckartii 72, 86
Peripatus 72, 86, 366, 385
Vestiaria see honeycreeper, Hawaiian
vicariance 545
vinegar ﬂy see fruit ﬂy Drosophila
melanogaster
Vipera berus see adder
Vu Quang bovid (saola) Pseudoryx
nghetinhensi 377
vulnerable, deﬁned 545
Vulpes macrotis mutica see fox, San
Joaquin kit
vulture, cinereous 431

Wahlund effect 322, 545
wallaby
allied 65
Petrogale brachyotis 365, 375
Petrogale godmani 365
Petrogale lateralis see black-footed
rock wallaby
warbler see Kirtland’s; Seychelles
warbler
water ﬂea Daphnia 129–30
whale meat, forensic biology 472–4
white-footed mouse Peromyscus leucopes
354
white-naped crane Grus vipio 354
white-winged wood duck Aix sponsa
431, 464
whooping crane Grus americana 67,
184, 345
wild populations, management
394–418
wildebeest Connochaetes 127
wolf see Algonquin wolf; Ethiopian
wolf; gray wolf; Isle Royale
wolf; Mexican wolf; red wolf
Wollemi pine Wollemia nobilis 1, 11, 66,
102, 346, 403
wombat
northern hairy-nosed Lasiorhinus
krefftii 65, 176, 227, 236, 237,
250–1, 345, 400, 475
reintroduction sites 12–13
southern hairy-nosed Lasiorhinus
latifrons 65, 227
wood duck Aix sponsa 431, 464
woodpecker
acorn 331, 516
middle spotted 33
red-cockaded 311–12, 345, 352, 379,
395, 509
World Conservation Union see IUCN
Y-speciﬁc probes 488
yellow-bellied marmot 271
Zea mays see maize
zebra, Grevy’s Equus grevyi 244, 431
Zenaida graysonii see Socorro dove
Zieria prostrata 491
zoos 421–2
Zosterops lateralis chlorocephala see
Capricorn silvereye

617

